























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21011

Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional 
Financing (P154238)

Parent Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Moldova
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, 

marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154238
Parent Project ID P118518
Borrower(s) Government of Moldova
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 04-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

30-Mar-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Economic growth and poverty reduction gains achieved over the last decade in Moldova have been 
fueled by strong remittance flows that triggered increased, import-served consumption. The decade-
long growth has not been accompanied by an increase in employment. On the contrary, total 
employment in Moldova declined by 27 percent over the period 2000-2010. Agriculture released 
most of the labor that found jobs through internal and external outward migration. Another 
macroeconomic negative resulting from a consumption-led growth model was the buildup of an 
alarming trade deficit. With the value of imports more than triple to that of exports, the trade gap 
has reached over 50 percent of GDP in 2008. The fallout from the global crisis of 2008, as well as 
the lingering crisis in Europe and the Russian Federation in 2014 (key migration labor destinations), 
exposed the fragility of this growth model. As remittances declined, domestic demand fell by 10 % 
and the real economy contracted by 6% in 2009. Moldova’s quick recovery from the crisis in 2010 
and 2011 has been again largely based on the restored supply of remitances, but also on increased 

agricultural prices and growing exports. Remittance flows have not grown much in 2014, and are 
expected to stall in 2015 primarily due to the marked depreciation of the Russian Ruble, tighter 
labor migration controls and a slowing economy in the Russian Federation.  
 
The lessons from Moldova’s development pattern over the past decade, have underlined the critical 
need for a second engine of growth – the revival of exports. As Moldova’s working population 
declines, export-led growth needs to come from investment and improvements in productivity and 
competitiveness. The Government of Moldova recognizes the need for an investment- and export-
led engine of the growth based on on increased capital investments, innovation and 
competitiveness.  The National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020”, reinforces the 
Government's commitment to a development paradigm based on a dynamic model driven by 
domestic and foreign investment and export-oriented sectors. In addition, the Government's reforms 
in 2011-2014 focused on achieving closer trade integration with the European Union, which 
culminated in the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and 
the European Union, complemented by a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement which 
came into effect on August 1, 2014. The latter, has brought about new and exciting opportunities 
for market diversification of the country's agro-food exports.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Recently, the country's shift to an export-led growth model has suffered a number of setbacks due 
to uncertainties with supply to the Russian market. Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the 
Russian Federation have been subject to various trade restrictions through 2013 and 2014 - starting 
with a ban on wines, followed by ban on meat and a nearly complete ban on fruits and vegetables, 
and canned goods. The most affected export items were wine, apples and plums. In 2013, prior to 
the bans, approximately thirty percent of the country's wine exports (valued at US$350 million), 
ninety three percent of apple exports (valued at US$43.7 million) and eighty percent of plum 
exports (valued at US$21.1) went to Russia.  The loss of the Russian Federation market represented 
a significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food 
produce, especially for apples and plums. There is very limited potential for meaningful import 
substitution. Moldovan imports of apples were only about 1,500 tons in 2013 (valued at US$1.34 
million) and imports of plums are negligible. Un-utilized processing capacity for apples and plums 
in the country is limited and has only absorbed additionally approximately 60,000 tons of apples 
and 40,000 tons of plums in 2014 (15% and 35% of output respectively). The resulting supply glut 
of apples and plums, compounded by an existing large stock of processed products has led to a 50% 
drop in the domestic market price for apples and plums. Similarly, as a result of the wine ban, and 
accumulating stocks in 2014, grapes are traded at 40% of the 2013 price.   
 
In recent years there have been significant productivity gains in the Moldovan horticulture sector 
due to significant investments and, these gains could easily be lost because of the impact of the 
Russian embargoes.  Productivity gains have contributed to a steady  increase in output and are 
likely to have come from stricter application of growing technologies, and/or replacement of old 
orchard/vineyards, more intensive production and use of modern technologies. This is a result of 
increased investment in the sector, which is a very positive development given Moldova’s 
comparative advantage in high value agriculture.  This transformation has been the result of a fairly 
long-drawn struggle, which is finally showing results. The embargos have the potential to have a 
major negative impact on fruit growers’ competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, 
modernization, as a result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.   


 
The majority of fruit growers is represented by small peasant farmers (66% for apples, 69% for 
plums, 70% for vineyards) and provides significant rural employment and incomes, for an 
estimated 350,000 people. A large share of these jobs now are either at risk or are yielding 
significantly lower pay due to the impact of the embargo. The resulting social consequences could 
be severe, as the highest poverty rates are already registered among the agriculture-related 
population: 21.7 percent of farmers and 31.3 percent of agricultural workers have been found poor 
in 2013, these two categories accounting for 31 percent of country's poor.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by 
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access for 
farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Compensatory Sales Support Grants
Comments (optional)
The new component will finance targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 
hectares, who sold apple, plums and grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will 
compensate the difference between the potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, 
with an aim of avoiding possible de-capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving 
it a much needed respite for reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 12.00 Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 12.00
Total 12.00

V. Implementation
The parent - Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) was approved by the Board on May 1, 
2012. It is financed by (i) an IDA credit in the amount of US$18.0 million; (ii) a fully-blended GEF 
grant of US$4.4 million; and (iii) a SIDA grant of US$3.0 million. The PDO is: to enhance the 
competitiveness of the country's agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety 
management system, facilitating market access for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental 
and sustainable land management practices. The ACP has the following components: Component 1: 
Enhancing Food Safety Management; Component 2: Enhancing market access potential; 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. The project 


became effective on September 24, 2012. The closing date for the ACP is June 30, 2017. 
 
The project was designed to contribute to the realization of the economic growth model described in 
the 2011-2014 Government Program aimed at enhancing export competitiveness, attracting 
investment and achieving closer trade integration with the EU. More specifically, the ACP is 
supporting the Government's ambitious efforts in reforming the food safety management system, 
efforts to improve farmers’ market opportunities through investment support (to bring about 
upgrades in post-harvesting infrastructure) and institutional development support (creation and 
strengthening of productive partnerships), and efforts to mainstream the use of good agricultural 
practices and sustainable land management.  
 
Project performance is currently rated “moderately satisfactory” for Implementation Progress (IP), 
“satisfactory” for the PDO, and “satisfactory” for procurement and financial management . Current 
commitments for the IDA credit stand at 70% , and generally progress continues to be solid across 
the project's three components at this phase of implementation.  Currently, disbursement under the 
IDA Credit is at US$3.6 million (20%), under the GEF grant at US$2.1 million (48%), and the 
SIDA grant at US$0.25 (8%). Disbursement rates under the IDA Credit are expected to reach 45% 
by the end of FY15. Procurement of goods, works and consulting services has considerably picked 
up in pace in 2014; calls for proposals for matching investment grants supporting the emergence of 
productive partnerships have been carried out and awards were made; capacity building activities 
have been increasing in scope and complexity. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing food safety management. There is solid progress in the implementation of 
this component. The country's Food Safety Agency, is a relatively new institution (established in 
2012) which has largely become functional due to the support of the project. Two major civil works 
activities are under way - the rehabilitation of the Food Safety Agency (FSA) building and the 
construction of the Border Inspection Point in Tudora on the country's Southern-Eastern border with 
Ukraine. Procurement of civil works for another three border inspection points - Leuseni (West), 
Giurgiulesti (South) and Criva (North) has been completed and works are expected to commence in 
the spring of 2015. Procurement of works for the construction of the country's national reference 
laboratory for safety of products of vegetable origin (Balti) has been completed. Capacity 
strengthening activities at the national reference laboratory for safety of products of animal origin 
and animal health aimed at future international accreditation are in full swing. Additionally, the FSA 
continues to receive support for legislative and regulatory improvements, capacity building 
activities, training and knowledge sharing with various European food safety institutions. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing market access potential. Progress in the implementation of this component 
has been very strong. One call for proposals for matching investment grants from emerging 
productive partnerships has been completed in the summer of 2014, and 8 producer groups received 
matching investment grant awards in an amount of US$2.1 million for a variety of investments in 
post-harvest processing of apples, table grapes and berries. A second call for proposals is currently 
under way until January 30, 2015. In parallel, outreach activities are under way to raise awareness 
about the project's opportunities for fruit and vegetable growers especially in light of on-going 
difficulties Moldovan agro-food exports have on the traditional Russian market, and a stringent need 
for reorientation of trade flows to different, more stable markets. 
 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management.  
Implementation of this component is progressing well. All activities related to the rehabilitation of 



protective shelter-belts are on schedule, and the equipment which was procured for these purposes is 
being utilized efficiently by two mobile mechanized agro-forestry squads. The component's 
sustainable land managed grant scheme has been launched and a first call for proposals yielded 
more than 80 applications that are currently under review. It is expected that about 30 awards will be 
made in the next few weeks, for an amount of approximately US$0.6 million.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21463

Project Name LVEMP APL-1 Additional Financing (P153466)
Parent Project Name Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 

(P100406)
Region AFRICA
Country Africa
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (70%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (30%), Other rural development 

(30%), Other environment and natural resources management 
(20%), Biodiversi ty (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
support (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153466
Parent Project ID P100406
Borrower(s) East Africa Community, MINISTRY OF FINANCE, The National 

Treasury
Implementing Agency Lake Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC), Ministry of Water, 

Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

23-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lake Victoria, with a surface area of about 68,800 km2, is the second largest freshwater body in the 
world. It is a transboundary resource shared by Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Rwanda and Burundi 
are a part of the upper watershed that drains into Lake Victoria through the Kagera river. Its 
catchment area of 194,000 km2 is shared by five countries: Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 
percent), Rwanda (11 percent), Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda (16 percent). The Lake is also 
part of the Nile River basin system, shared by ten countries: Burundi, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. The population of 

the Lake Victoria Basin (LVB) is about 35 million people, and it represents approximately 30 
percent of the total inhabitants of the East African Community (EAC) Partner States – Burundi, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya. 
 
Lake Victoria is a major population and poverty center in AFR, and a trans-boundary natural asset 
of global importance. The Basin is home to around a third of those below the poverty line in the 
East African Community, living on around a ninth of its land surface.  The Lake supports the 
world’s largest freshwater fishery, with a total annual landed catch value estimated at around US
$0.5 billion, supporting the livelihoods of 3 million people, providing roughly 0.5 million tons of 
fish to local markets and generating US$0.25 billion in export revenues. The establishment of the 
Nile Perch fishery in the 1980s and 1990s provided a resource boom that drew in poor and 
disadvantaged people from the neighboring countries. Large rural poor populations are also 
dependent on the degraded lands in the upper basin, particularly in Burundi, Rwanda and the Kenya 
highlands. In addition, the waters of the Lake and its catchment provide 90% of Uganda’s hydro 
power, most of the hydro power for Rwanda and Burundi, and the water supply to major urban 
centers including Kampala and Entebbe.  Protected areas cover 25% of the Basin’s land area and 
include some of the most renowned wildlife attractions in Africa – Serengeti and Volcanoes 
National Parks. 
 
The Lake Victoria Basin has also become a global example of environmental degradation. 
Historically, the introduction of the Nile Perch was associated with a mass extinction of native fish 
species, but Perch stocks have now themselves declined to probably less than half of their peak 
levels due to increased fishing efforts and other environmental stresses. Environmental degradation 
within the Basin increasingly poses broader threats to livelihoods and welfare. Erosion of soils has 
chronic impacts on agricultural productivity as well as acute impacts where gullies destroy land, 
property and even lives. The flow of sediments and other pollutants into the Basin’s rivers and 
ultimately the Lake reduces the supply of potable water, and causes algal blooms that are 
unpleasant for lakeshore communities and limit the tourism potential of the region. One of the most 
striking indicators of poor ecological health is the rapid colonization of the Lake by water hyacinth. 
Infestations of this invasive floating plant periodically block access to kilometers of lakeshore, 
preventing use of the Lake for transport and fishing, as well as posing serious health and safety 
risks to local inhabitants.  
 
LVEMP aims to tackle the environmental challenges of the Lake Victoria Basin over the long-term 
and basin-wide, to improve the welfare of its inhabitants. It was designed as a regional Series of 
Projects (formerly APL) with three envisioned phases and informed by the studies and lessons 
generated from the original Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP I), 
financed by the GEF and implemented from 1996 to 2005. APL-1 (now SOP-1), covering the three 
riparian states (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda) as well as a regional coordination and policy 
component (through the EAC’s Lake Victoria Basin Commission, LVBC), is due to close at the end 
of FY15, having already received a 2-year extension. APL-2 (SOP-2), covering Rwanda and 
Burundi, started later and is due to close at the end of FY17. APL-3 (SOP-3) was envisaged to 
extend the program beyond the end of the first project of the series. 
 
The Additional Financing of the LVEMP is for implementation of additional or expanded activities 
that scale up the project’s impact, i.e. additional watershed management subprojects in existing 
focal areas, construction of sanitation and sewerage facilities that were designed but not 
implemented under the original project due to funding constraints, and expansion and deepening of 



Page 3 of 6

cleaner production programs. The additional Additional financing Financing represents roughly 
20% of the original project financing, but is expected to increase most of the key quantitative 
results by around 30-40%. Under the Additional Financing Kenya and Tanzania will each receive 
US$10 million IDA credits, and a US$2 million IDA grant for regional activities under LVBC: 
Credit Nos 4530-TZ, 4531-UG, 4532-KE; GEF grant TF-94205, SIDA grant TF-95196). Pending 
donor approval, an additional grant of US$ 0.5 million from the Cooperation in International 
Waters in Africa trust fund is anticipated, of a total Additional Financing amount of US$ 22.5 
million.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The Lake Victoria and its ecosystems support a number of sectors important for economic and 
livelihood development in the Lake Victoria Basin: Fisheries - the Lake fishery contributes to the 
GDP of the riparian countries and provides employment for about 197,000 fishers and 
approximately 600,000 fish traders; Transport - the marine transport provided by the Lake is very 
important for supporting the trade and economic development of the LVB countries; Energy - the 
Lake is the source of hydropower in Uganda generating power exceeding a value of US$350 
million per annum; Water - Approximately five million people living in the major cities and towns 
around the Lake, depend on Lake Victoria for their domestic and industrial water supply.  
 
Governance of the Lake occurs at the regional scale through the East African Community and Lake 
Victoria Basin Commission (LVBC) under the auspices of the Protocol on Sustainable 
Development of the Lake Victoria Basin, and at the national scale by the country governments of 
the LVB through implementation of respective national strategies. Accordingly, the project 
implementation arrangements are based on a two-prong institutional set up provided in the Protocol 
on the Sustainable Development of the LVB, i.e. at the EAC/regional and at national levels. 
 
The Regional Policy Steering Committee (RPSC) - comprising permanent secretaries of various 
line ministries - serves as the EAC coordination committee for LVEMP II (and other regional 
projects in the Basin), and the LVBC serves as the secretariat for the RPSC. National Policy 
Steering Committees (NPSCs) are responsible for the sectoral coordination at the national level and 
for providing operational policy guidance in each country. National Focal Point Ministries 
(NFPMs) in each of the LVB countries serve as the secretariat for the NPSCs. NFPMs are 
accountable for the overall project implementation, which is carried out by National Project 
Coordination Teams in partnership with multiple key ministries and local government authorities.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The objectives of the Project are to contribute to: (i) the improvement of the collaborative 
management of the trans-boundarynatural resources of the LVB among the Partner States; and (ii) 
the improvement of environmental management of targeted pollutionhotspots and selected degraded 
sub-catchments for the benefit of communities who depend on the natural resources of LVB.

III. Project Description
Component Name



Page 4 of 6

Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and fisheries resources
Comments (optional)
Activities under this component will focus on strengthening the existing institutions to improve the 
cooperative management of shared transboundary natural resources of the LVB. Its objectives are 
to: (i) improve the effectiveness of key regional and national institutions through harmonization of 
national policies, legislation, and standards; (ii) develop options for sustainable financing of the 
natural resources management interventions; and (iii) develop regional frameworks for the 
management of key transboundary natural resources – water and fisheries. The focus here is on 
capacity building of the regional, national, and local institutions responsible for coordination, 
research, management of resources, and enforcement of environmental standards.

Component Name
Point source pollution control and prevention
Comments (optional)
The main objective of this component is to reduce environmental stresses within the Lake and 
littoral zone, through the implementation of mitigation and prevention measures. It will finance 
investments aimed at reducing point sources of pollution in priority hotspots, identified during 
LVEMP I. These investments will complement on-going activities supported by other Bank-funded 
projects in water and sanitation. Major activities include (i) rehabilitation and improvement of 
wastewater treatment facilities; (ii) promotion of cleaner production technologies; and (iii) pollution 
risk management and safety of navigation.

Component Name
Watershed management
Comments (optional)
This component seeks to reduce environmental stresses from the Lake basin, through the 
implementation of non-point sources pollution mitigation and prevention measures. The reduction of 
the non-point sources of pollution (sediment loads, nutrients, and agro-chemicals) by scaling up 
successful models of watershed management practices piloted under LVEMP I and other related 
national projects will improve water-use efficiency, and generate positive downstream externalities. 
Watershed management is being implemented through community-driven investments as a means of 
scaling up management efforts, and also building capacity and ownership at the local level for 
watershed management.

Component Name
Project coordination and management
Comments (optional)
This component will provide resources necessary for the effective coordination and communication, 
and monitoring and evaluation of the project activities. At the regional level, these tasks will be 
carried out by the RPCT mainstreamed in the LVBC, while at the national level they will be the 
responsibility of the National Project Coordination Teams (NPCTs). Activities under this 
component are divided into (i) project coordination and communication; and (ii) monitoring and 
evaluation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 22.50 Total Bank Financing: 22.00
Financing Gap: 0.00



Page 5 of 6

For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 20.00
IDA Grant 2.00
Cooperation in International Waters in Africa 0.50
Total 22.50

V. Implementation
The implementation arrangements for the project will remain as they are, with National Project 
Coordinator Teams under the guidance of their respective ministries in each country, a Regional 
Project Coordination Team under LVBC, and the Regional Policy Steering Committee providing 
overall guidance to the program.     
 
As the scope of investment activities will be the same, there will be no changes in environmental 
category of the project or additional safeguard policies triggered.  The existing safeguards 
documents have been reviewed and remain fully relevant (see Social and Environment Analysis 
below).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC12805

Project Name Burundi Coffee Sector Competitiveness Support Project (P151869)
Region AFRICA
Country Burundi
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%), Agricultural 

extension and research (20%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing 
and forestry (10%), General finance sector (5%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Export development and 
competitiveness (30%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Other 
environment and natural resources management (15%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151869
Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
Implementing Agency INTERCAFE
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-Aug-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

31-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

29-May-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. Burundi is a post-conflict, landlocked, small country with an estimated population in 2013 
of nearly 10.20 million increasing at a rate of 3 percent annually. After more than 13 years of 
conflict, Burundi is now showing positive signs of economic recovery. Over the last 5 years, the 
annual GDP growth in Burundi has consistently remained around 4%. Despite these positive signs, 
the country is unlikely to meet the Millennium Development Goals 2015: (a) the human capital base 
is weak due to limited access to social services; (b) a large majority of youths are under-employed 
because of lack of opportunities; (c) less than 3 percent of the population has access to electricity; 
(d) 52 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished; and (e) 67 percent of 
Burundians are living below the poverty line. Poverty is overwhelmingly rural and most of the 

country’s poor are small-scale farmers. These data explain why Burundi finds itself at the bottom of 
the list of countries for most development indicators. According to the Human Development Index, 
Burundi is ranked 178 out of 186 countries . 
 
2. Following substantial improvement in security and peace consolidation, the Government 
focused its resources to expand basic social services in the country and initiated the modernization 
of existing economic infrastructure and institutions. The Government launched also key reforms 
addressing improved governance, public finance management system, business environment and 
investment climate, etc., which led to the country achieving considerable progress towards macro-
economic stabilization. These efforts have been recognized by the World Bank which in its reports 
“Ease of Doing Business”, ranked Burundi as one of the world’s top economic reformers for 
streamlining business and attracting foreign investment. Nonetheless, Burundi has still to address 
major challenges in terms of good governance, vulnerability to external shocks, diversifying the 
economy, and generating productive employment for its largely young population. 
 
3. The Government of Burundi’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 
2012-2015) and the joint International Finance Corporation (IFC)-World Bank Business Plan have 
identified potential growth sectors. The focus is rightly put on modernizing the agricultural sector 
since it accounts for nearly 41 percent of the GDP and about 90 percent of current labor force. 
Burundi’s main traditional export crop - coffee has been identified as a key sub-sector with high 
growth potential which can contribute to achieving the results of the PRSP - Pillar II “Transforming 
Burundi’s economy to generate sustainable, job-creating growth”. Other sub-sectors with potential 
growth identified are tea, cotton and cinchona. Furthermore, as part of it PRSP, the Government 
plans to support corps diversification by promoting nontraditional agricultural exports, including 
horticultural products, essential oils, medicinal plants, avocados, and macadamia nuts.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. Burundi has all of the factors which make agricultural investment essential. The sector 
plays a key role in economic growth, poverty reduction, food security and employment. It 
contributes most to gross domestic product, using 90 per cent of Burundi’s labor force and earning 
90 percent of export revenues - primarily from coffee production, which constitutes the key source 
of income for more than 600,000 rural households (about 30 percent of the population).  Despite the 
country's dependence on the primary sector, agriculture has not been modernized and continues to 
depend essentially on subsistence agriculture (1.2 million rural households) using unreliable and 
inefficient technology. Over the past decade the growth rate of agricultural production (2 percent) 
has been less than the growth rate of the population (3.0 percent); which aggravates the country’s 
food security situation. 
 
5. The farms in Burundi are highly fragmented with an average size of less than 0.5 hectare 
and the pressure on the land is increasing due to demographic pressure . The farming systems are 
determined by weather cycles and organized around multiple crops to reduce risk. A comparison of 
crop yields in the country with those in neighboring regions shows that Burundi’s agriculture faces 
major productivity challenges. For example, over the period last years the growth rate in cereal 
productivity in the East African Community (EAC region) increased by 3.13 percent while it 
declined by 0.08 in Burundi. Various interlinked factors contribute to the low agriculture 
productivity in Burundi, for instance: degradation of natural ecosystems and declining soil fertility, 
low use of improved inputs (quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc.), low use of modern 
technologies, inadequate access to agriculture extension services, poor physical infrastructure 

affecting market access and access to improved inputs, limited access to credit, marketing 
constraints and post-harvest losses among others. With the continued fragmentation and scarcity of 
agricultural land, future growth in agricultural production can only be generated from intensification 
and productivity gains. In addition, only market-oriented agriculture will allow rural households an 
adequate livelihood from their small plots, abundant labor, and relatively ample water resources. 
 
6. Burundi’s agricultural sector policy is articulated in its national agricultural strategy 
document adopted in 2008. The latter is based on the priorities identified in the country’s basic 
strategic documents, primarily Outlook 2025 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). 
Furthermore, with the support of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP), the Government of Burundi put forward a National Agricultural Investment Plan 
(NAIP), covering the period 2012-2017, which was fully integrated with the PRSP II. A top priority 
sub-sector identified within the NAIP for investment is coffee which plays a strategic role in the 
national economy as a source of foreign exchange earnings and incomes for a large number of rural 
households. The Burundi coffee value chain presents considerable potential for growth. Its impact 
extends to several other sectors through backward and forward linkages (inputs, processing, 
transport, financial services, and taxes) and therefore plays a key role in the country for jobs 
creation, food security and poverty reduction. 
 
7. The NAIP main focus are on: (a) the increase in crop and livestock production by raising 
productivity and ensuring optimal management of soil and water resources; and (b) the 
strengthening of human resources capacities of national institutions and farmers organizations. 
Other important elements of the NAIP address common issues such as land tenure and natural 
resources preservation, the development of infrastructure and measures related to agribusiness 
promotion and market access, including an improved investment climate and access to rural finance. 
For the coffee sub-sector, the focus is on increasing productivity associated with actions to promote 
quality, such as rejuvenating orchards, periodic field maintenance, farmers’ organization and 
restructuring and/or modernizing washing facilities through privatization and a niche marketing 
strategy. 
 
8. The NAIP is structured around four major programs as follows: (a) Sustainable growth in 
production and food security; (b) Professional training of farmers and promotion of innovation; (c) 
Development of value chains and agribusiness; and (d) Institution-building for public bodies. The 
NAIP is also promoting partnership between the public and private sectors in implementing its 
programs and achieving its objectives. This proposed project is particularly the type of financing 
which would be shared between the state and private operators, producers and investors. While the 
private sector is encouraged to increase investment in productive, industrial and marketing 
activities, the state needs to establish an environment favorable to the development of the sector. 
Efforts are being undertaken in this direction, for the coffee value chain – private operators are 
encouraged to be involved at several levels, notably at those of export, curing and de-pulping 
stations and roasting. Such initiative should be further promoted and expanded to establish 
sustainable public-private partnerships.  
 
9. The coffee sector: Coffee production is mostly a smallholder based activity with around 122 
million coffee trees and a production area of 70,000 hectares . The species grown is mainly the 
Arabica, though some Robusta is also planted. The average production of coffee cherries is 
estimated at about 164,800 tons and around 20,000 tons of green coffee  - of which about 70-80 
percent are fully washed. Average coffee cherries production per tree is about 1kg which is far 


below the yields of 2.5 to 3.0kg observed in other coffee growing areas; for instance in Asia and 
Latin America. Registered production of green coffee  in Burundi in 1990/91 was 33,912 tons while 
observed figure in 2011/12 was about 15,000 tons. The highest pick was registered in 1994/95 with 
40,985 tons. The cyclical swing of seasons sometimes leaves the country with very limited 
quantities to export (5,673 tons in 2003/4).  
 
10. Despite the current low and declining productivity level of the coffee sector in Burundi, it 
continues to play a vital role in the country’s economy and represents the main industry and export 
product – accounting for up to 80 percent of the foreign currency earnings. During the harvest of 
raw and green coffee, the sector plays also a key role in stimulating the rural economy. The 
associated industry (de-pulping and washing stations) and traders inject an important sum of cash 
into rural areas which increases spending in purchase of goods for rural households, manufactured 
products, payment of social expenses, and reimbursement of credit. Furthermore, the construction of 
washing stations in rural areas led to a modest first stage of industrialization, off-farm jobs for local 
labor during the coffee campaign and, most importantly, the development of rural access roads to 
the washing stations which are also used for other purposes.  
 
11. The coffee industry was one of the priority sectors targeted for deregulation reforms and 
privatization in the structural adjustment program (initiated in 1986) that aimed to limit the state’s 
involvement in the productive sector. Due to the civil war and subsequent recovery challenges, this 
process (sector reform and privatization of state entities: OCIBU, SODECO and washing stations) 
experienced some delays. But it subsequently led to positive developments, among others: (a) the 
establishment of a new regulatory body (ARFIC) and an inter-professional association 
(INTERCAFE); and (b) an effective deregulation of de-pulping and export through the construction 
of new washing stations by private investors and SOGESTALs . 
 
12. Today, the government is eager to complete the process of privatization which consists of a 
3rd phase (some 77 washing stations and a mill firm) – although different actors of the value chain 
have different ideas about how this should be carried out. For instance, coffee farmer associations 
are determined to take part in the privatization and the emergence of these associations adds a 
politico-socio-economic dimension to the on-going reform process. Even if some of the competing 
interest groups are small, their diverse political, regional and even ethnic backgrounds prompt the 
coffee reform to be a central peace-building focus for Burundi. Important to note that a recent 
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) concluded that the earlier privatization (Phases I and 
II) had mostly a positive impact on the incomes and welfare of affected coffee producers. 
 
13. While several steps have been taken toward improving the performance of the Burundi 
coffee sector, it is currently experiencing serious instability and decline which cannot be explained 
by chance or climatic conditions alone. Some of the causes behind this situation: (a) Persistence of 
structural deficiencies, such as inefficiencies in the governance of the value chain. The institutions 
and the actors involved in the value chain are facing several constraints (incomplete reform and 
privatization process, lack of technical and managerial capacity for emerging farmers’ association, 
non-transparent pricing mechanisms, etc.) that hamper their operations and, consequently, limit the 
development of the coffee sector in Burundi; (b) Low productivity due to insufficient technical and 
financial support to farmers. Lack of investments in productivity enhancing technologies following 
the liberalization of the market resulted in low and highly fluctuating productions, poor maintenance 
and degradation of the orchards, low input application as well as pest and disease problems, etc.; (c) 
Limited competitiveness with a decrease in quantity and quality caused by the aging of orchards at 



the farm level (28 percent are more than 30 years old and 62 percent are between 9 and 30 years), 
limited technical know-how moving downstream the chain to support quality improvements 
(milling, tasting, etc.); and inefficient marketing structures for promoting the Burundi brand; and (d) 
Primary production has also not kept pace with the expansion of processing capacity, leading to a 
situation in which all raw materials are competitively sought with little price differentiation. Many 
washing stations have experienced low profitability due to high operational costs (partly related to 
capacity underutilization) and management limitations.  
 
14. Under such circumstances it will be extremely difficult for Burundian coffee producers to 
be able to compete with the world coffee industry (or even maintain their competitiveness at the 
regional level). The resulting economic and social consequences are severe for Burundi. Despite 
these weaknesses, the coffee value chain in Burundi is not entirely without its strengths and 
therefore presents  some advantages which justify transformative investments in reversing current 
trends: (a) climate and altitude to produce specialty Arabica coffee that attracts premium world 
market prices; (b) opening of the sector to private investors; (c) local producers interested and 
experienced in growing coffee; (d) emerging farmer associations and private-led governance 
structures; (e) well-established processing infrastructure - washing stations and dry milling capacity 
to support increased production of high quality coffee; (f) increasing worldwide consumption with 
an average annual growth rate of 1.9 percent during the last 50 years and a high demand for 
specialty coffee in developed markets ; and (g) in term of the macro-economic situation of the 
country, Burundi is heavily depending on  coffee export proceeds that failure is not an option. Also, 
since coffee is a perennial and the land is already tied to it for the lifecycle of the tree, it is not 
readily easy to convert and diversify the production base. 
 
15. Against this background, the proposed World Bank project is supporting the Burundi 
Government in implementing its PRSP II and NAIP’s programs - enhancing the productivity and 
competitiveness of the coffee value chain. The proposed project is aligned with the ECCAC 
regional strategy for the development of the coffee sector.  It builds on ongoing operations by the 
World Bank in the country such as PRODEMA (Agriculture and Livestock Modernization Project) 
and PAZDOC (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project) . It benefits from the coffee sector reforms 
and privatization supported by the World Bank and other development partners (AfD, EU, USAID, 
etc.). It is also complementing on-going operations by IFAD focusing on food security, namely the 
Agricultural Intensification and Value Enhancing Support Project (development of marshlands, 
increase the productivity and yields of rice and other food crops, access to quality inputs and seed, 
etc.), and the Value Chain Development Program (promotion of rice and milk and six other 
secondary value chains).

Relationship to CAS
16. The proposed support project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
Burundi for FY13-16 that aims to support Burundi’s development as an “increasingly stable, 
competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for productive employment and 
improved standards of living”. Within the CAS framework, the proposed project supports the first 
strategic objective of increasing competitiveness to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
17. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase sustainable coffee production and 


enhance coffee quality, for the benefit of smallholders. This will contribute to: (a) improving the 
sector productivity and competitiveness; and (b) the country’s strategic goals of poverty reduction 
and enhanced exports revenues.

Key Results (From PCN)
18. At PDO level, the key results expected from this project are as follow: (a) Increased coffee 
production at the country level at project-end through the combined effect of application of good 
agricultural practices and rejuvenated/renewed plantations; (b) Higher coffee quality demonstrated 
by an increase in the share of coffee sold with price premiums on export; and (c) Enhanced farmers’ 
share of the net FOB price on coffee exports. 
 
19. It is estimated that approximately 200,000 small-scale farmers (from a total of roughly 
600,000 coffee growers at the national level) will directly benefit from the project planned 
activities. These are mostly composed of hillside farmers with less than 1 hectare of land, who 
cultivate an average of 150-250 coffee trees as an integral part of their livelihoods.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
20. Burundi is a small player in international coffee markets and is operating in an environment 
of aggressive competitors. The area where the best results may be realized in terms of the sector 
productivity and competitiveness is not only limited to production increase, but most importantly, 
quality improvement along the value chain and a focus on the lucrative specialty coffee markets. 
Such efforts would certainly allow differentiating the country’s products and also provide a better 
buffer for the inevitable periods of low prices. However, the business principle driving 
improvements needs to be that quality starts at the farm level and can be maintained only through 
proper processing and storage. 
 
21. In this respect, the proposed project will operate through multiple interventions, along 
different segments of the coffee value chain, to address productivity and quality bottlenecks and to 
open new market opportunities to Burundi– the specialty coffee markets.  The proposed project 
would reinforce the private sector role in leading and structuring the sector, namely the coffee 
producers and the industry. More specifically, the following key areas of the value chain will be 
addressed: (a) Governing structure of the value chain and institutional strengthening; (b) increasing 
production and productivity; (c) improving quality and market access. A particular focus would be 
put on greater organization and integration of smallholders into the chain and on more equitable 
sharing of the benefits from improved quality and market access.   
 
22. Component 1 – Institutional strengthening and value chain governance: An essential 
property of the chain is its governance structure, which determines to a considerable extent how 
resources and gains are allocated and flow within the chain. In the case of Burundi, this structure is 
developing but constrained by lack of capacity to implement concerted specific sector policies; 
weak coordination; limited information exchange and non-transparent price mechanisms. The 
project will support streamlining the governance structure of the sector by: (a) reviewing and 
adapting the current intuitional framework to improve its level of effectiveness and efficiency with a 
particular focus on transparency in the decision-making process and on quality and pricing 
mechanism; (b) upgrading the capacities of existing institutions/organizations overseeing the sector; 
and (c) improving the dialogue among the key public and private actors of the chain to arrive at a 


consensus on solving value chain bottlenecks. 
 
23. More specifically, the institutional architecture for coffee sector management that the 
project would support strengthening comprises: (a) INTERCAFE -- a stakeholder-driven 
coordinating body that has the mandate for most sector management decisions; (b) ARFIC-- a 
public regulatory authority that ensures that the basic “rules of the game” for managing the sector 
are adequately defined, transparently implemented, and where necessary, enforced by Government 
authority. This intervention will aim also at upgrading the capacities of ARFIC to provide quality, 
inspection and certification services to the coffee industry. The project will support both the 
modernization of existing labs in line with international standards (and possibly their expansion 
within the producing regions) and developing ARFIC human resources capacities for managing 
regulatory areas and for coffee testing; (c) CNAC-- a coffee grower organization largely represented 
in all coffee growing region; and (d) other stakeholder organizations for each of the main sector 
constituencies, to provide representation into the INTERCAFE’s collective decision making on 
sector management. This architecture is broadly similar to successful agriculture value chain 
management elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa and many other producing countries as well, with 
strong public-private sector participation. 
 
24. The project will also support increased consultations among the chain stakeholders; for 
instance, through regular forums to: (a) discuss the various problems and constraints of the sector 
within a “value chain approach”; (b) elaborate (or update) a comprehensive strategy for the coffee 
sector aiming at the general interest of the sector; (c) find harmonized and shared solutions to the 
various challenges facing the sector; (d) eliminate or minimize potential conflicts among the various 
actors in view of the general and common interest; and eventually (e) coordinating donors, 
government and private sector investments to avoid overlap, scale-up impacts, etc. 
 
25. Furthermore, under this component the project will support the development of a Data Base 
on the sector which would provide reliable data on the number of producers, number of trees, 
production, quality, washing stations performance and other ecological and socio-economic factors. 
This Data Base to be initially placed within ARFIC and linked to INTERCAFE, can be further 
expanded to include a formal GI S module that can capture more of the agro-ecological variables 
such as soil types, water sources and other variables that affect coffee quality. This investment will 
constitute an important tool for the value chain actors in terms of planning, monitoring and 
evaluation of their activities and return on investments. It can also be used as an export promotion 
tool (see component 3 below).  
 
26. Component 2 – Support to increased production and productivity: Under this component the 
project will support investments aimed at increasing production and productivity with a focus on: 
(a) the adoption of good agricultural practices - sustainable land management, planting trees, 
nutrition and fertilizer management, pests and diseases control, pruning, rejuvenation (25 percent of 
existing trees), harvesting, quality assessment and improvement, etc.; (b) improving production 
technology and soil fertility; (c) the dissemination of improved varieties to renew old plantations 
(20 percent of existing trees); (d) supporting specific research topics (coffee under shade, variety 
improvement and germplasm enhancement, etc.); and (e) a support fund to facilitate access to 
inputs. 
 
27. In addition special emphasis will be on: (a) linking coffee growers to national agricultural 
research bodies and extension services (public and private) and promoting a two-way flow of 

information between these entities; (b) expanding the tested models for productivity enhancement 
implemented as part of the PRODEMA project (community based mechanisms); (c) disseminating 
sustainable water and land management (SWLM) best practices and more diversified plantations, 
with fruit trees, inter-cropping with food crops, etc.; and (d) encouraging south-south exchange for 
coffee production, for instance, with coffee growing countries including Rwanda, Ethiopia and 
Colombia. This exchange will aim at various learning programs: production techniques, extension 
methodologies, coffee under shade, etc., and will build on cooperation already established between 
the PAZDOC project (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project – GEF) and Columbia coffee growers. 
 
28. For the implementation of the productivity investments, the proposed project will make use 
of INTERCAFE’s current contractual system provision for extension services and supply of inputs, 
and extend these to a larger share of coffee farmers as well as to coffee-specific agronomic and 
processing research. INTERCAFE has a cess revenue mechanism  already in place to finance such 
activities but, at current levels of national coffee production, the cess revenues only permit activities 
at a modest scale. 
 
29. Component 3 – Support to improved quality and market access: The management of quality 
in the coffee value chain is the most immediate instrument growers can use to improve their 
upgrading opportunities and it is a critical element of the current trend toward coffee differentiation. 
Furthermore, it is specifically vital in Burundi where the existence of “potato taste”, a strong off-
flavor resulting from the interaction between agro-climatic conditions and antestia bug infiltration, 
is endemic . Currently, cherries washing stations have only limited capacity to evaluate their coffee 
and do not have the experience or the cupping infrastructure to evaluate their production. In this 
respect, the project will promote quality enhancement activities along the value chain which would 
require changes in the field, at the washing station and at the dry mill. Applying good agricultural 
practices, flotation of cherries at the washing stations reception, meticulous hand sorting during pre-
drying and several other technical improvements are needed before Burundi can be recognized as a 
reliable supplier of coffee specialty markets. Under this component, the project will build on 
successes of recently closed USAID project in the country  and will in particular support the 
following investments: 
 
Sub-component 3.1- Improving quality: 
 
30. Developing cupping capacity: A main focus of this activity will be on educating all value 
chains actors on quality and cupping and establishing cupping labs in main producing areas.  This 
will be achieved by: (a) selecting a number of “leader” coffee washing stations to serve as an initial 
focus for specialty coffee value chain development and as models for other stations to learn from; 
and (b) the selection of a set of second tier washing stations to serve as “training hubs” aimed at 
maximizing the dissemination of production, processing and marketing best practices that will help 
in improving the quality and market access throughout all coffee producing regions in Burundi. 
 
31. Improving washing stations technical, operational and managerial capacities: Under this 
sub-component, assistance will be provided to the managerial staff of the washing stations to 
develop and implement customized Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs), including infrastructure 
improvement, best practices and Quality Control (QC) systems. The production and processing of 
high quality coffees requires sound technical and business management skills and systems. 
Currently the management (and governance) capacity of most private and cooperatively owned 
washing stations needs improvement. This element is critical to obtaining the highest returns, 

continued access to financing and sustainability. Furthermore, selected strategic supplier 
certification programs offer substantial price premiums to growers but require the implementation 
of detailed and transparent financial reporting systems. In the particular cases of cooperatives where 
the governance can be problematic, it is also important to maintain a fully transparent financial 
management system to ensure cooperative cohesion. 
 
32. For highly performing washing stations, traceability systems from the plantations to the 
destination market may be introduced. Such systems will enable buyers and sellers to track each lot 
from the time it enters the washing station (or even the field) until it is delivered to its final 
destination. This feature is also an essential element that distinguishes specialty coffee production 
from the production of standard grade coffee. The ITC component described below (parag. 34) will 
be integral to the development of the coffee traceability system and to using this system to its full 
potential. 
 
33. Improving existing processing infrastructure to meet environmental concerns: As pulping 
coffee can be the source of significant environmental problems (pollution of water table and the soil 
surrounding the washing stations, etc.), the project proposes integrating environmental mitigation 
measures in existing (and new) washing stations. These investments (water treatment and recycling) 
can lead to substantial cost reduction of production (reduction of water quantities used for de-
pulping) and, most importantly, responsible environmental stewardship is not only a best practice, 
but is an obligation for certification to several preferred supplier programs such as the Neumann 
Kaffee Gruppe (NKG) and the Starbucks’ C.A.F.E. Practices Program. 
 
34. Developing an information technology and communication system specific to the sector: 
Wireless internet access is now available in much of Burundi, presenting an exciting opportunity for 
washing stations to broaden their horizon in terms of technology access, learning opportunities and 
direct communications with buyers. The Data Base described in parag. 25 above can also be 
expanded to track and report on key performance characteristics of all washing stations for purposes 
of monitoring and planning and assessing the impacts of investments in quality improvement. 
Similarly, the Data Base can serve as an important tool for export promotion, accessible to buyers 
interested in visiting and buying Burundi’s coffee. Hot-links to individual washing stations sites will 
allow buyers to download fact sheets, learn about the coffee characteristics, and communicate 
directly with the stations that interest them most. From a basic training point of view, access to the 
internet by washing stations staff will be a powerful tool for the dissemination of training materials 
across the country. Other countries, particularly in Latin America and more recently in Rwanda 
have benefited greatly from the development of information and communications technologies. 
Burundi will be no different in this regard.  
 
Sub-component 3.2- Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand:  
 
35. Burundi must learn to market its coffee to the new consumers and also minimize the risk 
and uncertainties associated with coffee production, processing and marketing. In addition to the 
investments made on increasing production and productivity, profiling of coffee quality for more 
focused marketing, upgrading t he processing infrastructure, etc., this component of the project will 
support investments in: (a) building a recognizable image for Burundi’s coffee, including, a country 
logo, brochures, standardized washing station fact sheets, coffee maps and other information that 
may be useful to coffee markets; (b) developing a reliable coffee industry intelligence and 
forecasting system; (c) establishing direct sales relationships with roasters and buyers; and (d) 


introducing other innovative promotional activities such as buyer tours, certifications strategies, 
competitions such as the “cup of excellence”, and many other features that will place Burundi’s 
coffees in some of the very best markets in the world. These activities will focus on cultivating 
appropriate contacts and potential coffee relationships in North America, Europe, Japan and other 
emerging markets such as China and Russia. 
 
36. This component of the program will require the full coordination of investments and 
activities at multiple levels, including growers, washing stations, mills and other supporting 
institutions. A key player in this process will be INTERCAFE which would be reinforced to take a 
lead role in coordinating these activities and promoting the Burundi coffee brand. 
 
37. International Finance Corporation (IFC): The IFC Advisory Services Department has been 
supporting the 3rd phase of the coffee sector privatization. A main focus of IFC assistance was to 
advice on financing options for the coffee growers to buy shares of washing stations and to develop 
a target list of experienced international investors in the coffee sector who may be interested in the 
opportunity offered by the privatization. Further support will be sought from IFC, in particular for 
developing industry partnership and linkages with potential international specialty coffee buyers. 
 
38. Component 4 – Program coordination, monitoring and knowledge management: This 
component will facilitate: (a) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; 
(b) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient flow of information and support 
to all value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (c) effective contractual 
arrangements with key implementing partners (INTERCAFE, CNAC, ARFIC, etc.) and other 
private sector operators; (d) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial, 
environmental, and social impact of the program; and (e) development of communication activities 
to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories.  
 
39. Inclusion of youth and women: This population already active in the coffee value chain 
(trees maintenance, harvesting, grading, etc.) will be systematically considered in all project’s 
interventions. In line with the PRSP-2 and the National Gender Policy, a special focus will be given 
to promoting increased youth employment (both women and men) in all segments of the value chain 
by involving them in technical and entrepreneurial training programs and other planned 
developments actions. The project will aim at a target of 50 percent of youth and women directly 
benefiting from the project supported activities. 
 
40. Project costs: The indicative cost for the Coffee Competitiveness Support Project is US
$50.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed support would cost about US$45.00 million. It is 
expected that the beneficiaries (INTERCAFE, ARFIC and CNAC) will contribute up to US$5.00 
million. Furthermore, a GEF project is being considered for potential co-financing of selected 
productivity enhancement activities (PAZDOC: Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project - US$ 4.2 
million). Finally, USAID and the French Development Agency (AfD) are preparing parallel 
financing for the sector with a focus on productivity and trade issues. The exact amount for this 
financing is not yet defined, but is expected to be made available in the 2015 fiscal year. 
Coordination with these projects is foreseen to ensure complementarities and cost effectiveness. 
 
41. Categories of expenditures: For all project’s components, there will be various categories of 
expenditures including: (a) civil and rural works – case of upgrading the processing infrastructure 




(CWSs); (b) materials and equipment; (c) technical assistance and studies; (d) training and 
information; (e) support fund; (f) provision of services; and (i) operation and maintenance.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 72.25 Total Bank Financing: 55.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 IDA Grant 55.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 17.25
 Total 72.25


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA21451

Project Name Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Lebanon
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (10%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (90%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147854
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Council for Development and Reconstruction
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

22-Jul-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lebanon is an upper-middle-income country, with a population of 4.5 million people and a gross 
domestic product (GDP) of US$9,930 per capita in 2013.  The country is highly urbanized, with 
more than 85 percent of its population living in cities.  It has an open economy in which services 
and trade account for 60 percent of GDP and 73 percent of jobs.  The economy is driven by a 
dynamic private sector and is dependent on financial flows from Arab Gulf countries. The country 
is well-known for the high quality of its education system, ranking 13th out of 122 countries.   
 
The Lebanese economy expanded at a moderate pace (3.6 percent annually) during the past five 
decades. However, political instability, terrorism activities and the spillovers from regional conflicts 
made this growth erratic and unstable. Moreover, the ongoing conflict in Syria has resulted in a 
large inflow of refugees (estimated at 1.4 million  in January 2015), accounting for 30 percent of 
the country’s population. This complex political, social, and security environment put additional 
strain on the economy and public services. In fact, the GDP growth decreased from 8 percent in 
2010 to just 0.9 percent in 2013.   
 
Poverty affects nearly 28 percent of the Lebanese population (living on US$4 per day) and extreme 
poverty touches 8 percent (living on US$2.4 per day).  The highest concentration of poor is found 
in the North, followed by the South and the Beqaa. In addition, most refugees are concentrated in 
the already impoverished area of the Beqaa (35 percent) and North Lebanon (35 percent). The 
Syrian crisis is expected to have increased poverty among 170,000 Lebanese by 2014, with the 
existing poor becoming even poorer.  In light of these challenges, job creation and social protection 
are among the main development priorities in the country.  
 
Lebanon made considerable progress in shaping the legal and institutional framework and restoring 
infrastructure after the civil war (1975-89) and the more recent war with Israel (2006). However, 
the country is still at an early stage of transition to environmental sustainability. The cost of 
environmental degradation in Lebanon has been estimated at 3.2 percent of the country’s GDP in 
2005.  Water pollution stands out as the country’s major environmental problem, costing more than 
1 percent of the GDP per year. This accounts for the damages caused by the discharge of untreated 
sewage, industrial effluent, and agricultural runoff into valleys, rivers, and the Mediterranean Sea.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
THE LITANI RIVER AND LAKE QARAOUN 
 
The Litani River is the principal artery of Lebanon. Rising from the Olleiq springs close to the city 
of Baalbeck, it flows 170 km through the Beqaa valley and the Qaraoun Lake, before it reaches the 
Mediterranean Sea. The upper Litani River catchment extends over an area of 1,500 km2 (10 
percent of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99 towns distributed into 4 administrative districts: 
Baalbeck, Zahlé, West Beqaa, and Rachayya. The major water structure along the Litani River is 
the Qaraoun Dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or resevoir).  
 
POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
Large stretches of the Litani River and of the Qaraoun Lake are polluted due to four sources of 
pollution.   
• Municipal wastewater. In 2013, the volume of wastewater generated in the Beqaa was 
estimated at 63 million m3 with an annual load of 21,300 tons of Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD). Most wastewater is currently discharged untreated into the Litani River.  
• Industrial wastewater. This is estimated at about 4 million m3 in the Beqaa. There are 
factories producing effluents that are conveyed to surface water through nearby tributaries. Out of 
294 industrial establishments in the region, 120 are large-scale industries located within 400 m of 
the Litani River, its tributaries, or the Qaraoun Lake. 
• Municipal solid waste. Waste generated in the upper catchment of the Qaraoun Lake is 
estimated at 650 tons per day. Because of the lack of sanitary landfills, most garbage is dumped in 
open dumps and in the Litani River along the Qaraoun catchment. Water pollution comes from 
littering and surface water runoff of solid waste. This is acute when the waste site is close to surface 
water streams. The main dump sites exerting pressure on the Litani River are Temnin El Tahta, 
Saadnayel old dump, Qabb Elias, Barr Elias, Hawch El Harimi, El Khiyara, Ghazzé, and Jeb 
Jennine.  
• Agriculture. The largest use of land in the Litani River basin is for agriculture. In 2010, 
irrigated agriculture in the Beqaa covered about 54,000 ha, primarily concentrated in three districts: 
Baalbeck (24,000 ha); Zahlé (16,000 ha); and West Beqaa (10,000 ha). Vegetables, fruit trees, and 
industrial crops are the main irrigated crops in these areas.  Agricultural water pollution originates 



mainly from irrigation overflows and seepage. A field survey conducted in 2010  concluded that 
farmers in Beqaa are over-fertilizing their crops and many pesticides are being applied at almost 
twice the recommended rates. As a result, agricultural chemicals and non-degradable pesticides end 
up in waterways with irrigation overflows.  
 
BUSINESS PLAN TO COMBAT POLLUTION IN LAKE QARAOUN   
 
The Ministry of Environment (MoE) commissioned in 2010 a Business Plan to help the government 
of Lebanon (GoL) identify the major sources of pollution in the Qaraoun Lake and to recommend 
appropriate solutions to mitigate them (detailed information is provided in annex 2). The Business 
Plan was completed in 2011 and endorsed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers in 2012. 
The plan includes detailed prioritized investments for each polluting sector, with a financing 
requirement estimated at about US$255 million. In February 2013, the GoL requested World Bank 
assistance to fund priority activities of the Business Plan. 
 
The Business Plan identifies the largest two pressures as agriculture and municipal wastewater. 
Action on agriculture sources of pollution is needed to improve the overall surface water while 
continuing to contribute to the agriculture sector, a key sector, in the Bekaa. On municipal 
wastewater priority actions identified relate to continue to increase the volume of wastewater 
treated in Zahle, Iaat, Temninm El Tahta, Anjar, Jeb Jannine where the population and economic 
activity are most dense. 
 
INSITUTIONAL CONTEXT  
 
The Ministry of Environment. The MoE is empowered to study, propose, and implement national 
environmental policies. It is considered the only regulatory environmental agency in the country. 
The MoE is primarily responsible for environmental policy planning; setting laws, regulations, and 
environmental standards; imposing the application of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
on development projects; monitoring environmental quality; and identifying permitting conditions 
for new industry, agriculture, quarrying, and mining. In relation to the proposed project, the MoE is 
responsible for regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
 
The Ministry of Energy and Water (MoEW) is responsible for the strategic planning and 
management of water resources. Prior to 2000, there were 21 regional water utilities. Water Law 
221 of year 2000 and its amendments merged them into four Water and Wastewater Establishments 
and one pre-existing river authority: North Lebanon, Beirut/Mount Lebanon, Beqaa, South 
Lebanon, and the Litani River Authority (LRA). This was a major step towards consolidating the 
responsibility of these establishmen ts and clarifying their mandate as public agencies empowering 
them to better manage water and wastewater services. The ultimate role of the water establishment 
is to have full administrative and financial autonomy over the service provision of water and 
wastewater services and irrigation. The Beqaa Water and Wastewater Establishment (BWE) is the 
one responsible for the project area. The BWE inherited distribution networks in poor conditions, 
with very high levels of illegal connections and very low collection rates from those legally 
connected. LRA is a public establishment under the MoEW is primarily responsible to (a) exploit 
hydro electrical power plants; (b) construct irrigation scheme, (c) conduct preliminary studies and 
construct dams, and (d) monitor the quality of the Litani River. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The MoA has overall responsibility for the development of the 



agriculture sector. While the MoEW has the overall mandate for water resources, including 
irrigation, the MoA has the prime responsibility for irrigation at the farm level. Sustainable 
management and conservation of natural resources is considered an important pillar of the MoA’s 
strategy for 2010�2014. The strategy gives high priority to enhancing the efficient use of irrigation, 
expanding the use of treated wastewater for irrigation, and reducing water pollution from 
agricultural chemicals. The MoA is also responsible for the regulation of pesticide and fertilizer 
imports, marketing, and use, and it has launched a series of measures to enhance enforcement of 
these regulations and promote awareness about the proper use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
 
The Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR). The CDR, established through Decree 
no.5 of 1977 is responsible for preparing national development plans, implementing infrastructure 
project, and mobilizing external financing to lead the reconstruction and development of the 
country. The CDR is accountable to the Council of Ministers.  
 
The Qaraoun Committee. In June 2012, a committee was established  to study the pollution 
problems of the Litani River and Qaraoun Lake and to propose remedial measures. The committee 
included representation of all key stakeholders and was active in the preparation and review of the 
Business Plan for Combating Pollution of the Qaraoun Lake. Once the Business Plan and 
subsequent roadmap were agreed upon, the study committee was dissolved. In May 2014, the 
Qaraoun Committee was established  to follow up on the implementation of the roadmap to combat 
pollution in Lake Qaraoun. The committee includes 16 members representing key stakeholders and 
has assigned the secretariat responsibility to the Litani River Authority.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The development objectives of the project are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage 
discharged into the Litani river and to improve pollution management around Qaraoun Lake.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improve the collection of municipal sewage
Comments (optional)
This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where wastewater 
treatment plants have been constructed (or planned to be constructed), to maximize the use of these 
investments. The criteria used for the selection of the investments on the expansion of the network 
are the following: (i) network for a currently underserved WWTP; and (ii) network for WWTP 
completed or expected to be completed within the project implementation period.

Component Name
Component 2. Promotion of good agricultural practices including integrated pest management to 
reduce agrochemical pollution in upper Litani basin
Comments (optional)
This component will promote adoption of sustainable production systems among farmers in the 
upper Litani basin, by introducing selected IPM (for example, reduced pesticides application) and 
GAP (for example, reduced fertilizer application and other conservation practices). These practices 
are expected to provide increased quality of agricultural products (without reducing yields); farmers’ 
savings (through decreased cost of production); and reduced pollution of the Litani River.

Component Name



Component 3. Technical Studies in Solid Waste, Water Quality Monitoring, Capacity Building and 
Project ManagementComments (optional)
This component will fund technical, environmental and social studies in solid waste. It will 
strengthen LRA capacity in water quality and water resources modeling and fund awareness /clean 
up campaign around the Litan river. It will improve BWE capacity in the supervision of wastewater 
infrastructure, the improvement in water fee collection and financial administration.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 50.00 Total Bank Financing: 50.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 50.00
Total 50.00

V. Implementation
The Qaraoun Committee -formally established by COM decision 32 of May 2014—already includes 
a representative from each institution involved in pollution management along the Qaraoun.  The 
committee will have an oversight role in the implementation of the proposedproject. Its main role is 
to ensure coherence and consistency between the proposed project and all other ongoing and 
planned investment in the upper Litani watershed area.  
 
Given the multisectoral aspects of the project, the CDR will be the implementing agency. CDR has 
wide experience with Bank operations, and is familiar with fiduciary and safeguards aspects. A 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by a project coordinator under the CDR’s 
responsibility. The PMU will be responsible for contract management, fiduciary and safeguards 
oversight, auditing, monitoring and reporting, coordination, and so on. Line ministries will be 
associated in the preparation and implementation of the project from the onset. As such, technical 
experts will be recruited by the CDR as part of the PMU but will be assigned to the line ministries/
agencies and will report to the PMU project coordinator at the CDR and their respective sectors. 
This arrangement will facilitate and bridge the gap between the CDR and the line ministries. It will 
also contribute to raising capacity in the different sectors involved.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖


Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA20918

Project Name Forests and Communities (P132846)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Argentina
Sector(s) Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 

(20%)
Theme(s) Gender (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Rural non-farm income 

generation (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other 
envir onment and natural resources management (20%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P132846
Borrower(s) Argentine Government
Implementing Agency SAyDS
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 03-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 10-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

20-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

07-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
After rebounding from the economic crisis of 2002, Argentina has been one of the top two 
performers in the Latin America and Caribbean region in reducing poverty and sharing the gains of 
rising prosperity by expanding the middle class.  Total poverty (measured at US$4 per day) 
declined from 31.0 percent in 2004 to 10.8 percent in 2013, while extreme poverty (measured at US
$2.50 per day) fell from 17.0 percent to 4.7 percent.  Income inequality, measured by the Gini 
coefficient, fell from 50.2 in 2004 to 42.5 in 2012. Argentina’s poverty rate and Gini coefficient are 
among the lowest in the region. At the same time, the middle class in Argentina grew by 68 percent 
between 2004 and 2012, reaching 53.7 percent of the population.  
 
However, significant regional disparities persist with respect to poverty and access to basic 
services. The gap between regions has grown since the 2002 crisis, with Patagonia far outpacing 
Northeast and Northwest regions. The Northern provinces have poverty rates two to three times 
higher than the national average and lag behind the rest of the country in social services and basic 
infrastructure. In addition, disparities exist among and within provinces in terms of levels of 


economic and social development and access to high-quality basic services (see figure 1), such as 
education, health, roads, and water, which in turns limit the ability of the poor to participate in 
economic activities, particularly in rural areas. Improving basic services in impoverished rural 
communities is critical for human capital formation and building pathways out of poverty. 
 
Indigenous people are one of the largest and most vulnerable groups of rural poor in Argentina. 
Indigenous people (2.5 percent of the population) are present in all provinces of Argentina but more 
so in the northern provinces of Salta, Jujuy, Chaco, Formosa, Santa Fe, and Tucuman. In access to 
services, 23.5 percent of indigenous households have unsatisfied basic needs, compared to 13.8 for 
the rest of the population. 
 
Today, more than 40 percent of the Argentine population remains at risk of falling into poverty.  
Three challenges stand out for the poor and vulnerable population. First, the greatest vulnerability 
to poverty arises in periods of economic crises or prolonged sluggish growth, which reduce 
employment and earnings and limit the ability of the Government to finance social programs that 
directly support the poor. Second, although Argentina is a broadly inclusive society, endowments 
and opportunities continue to vary for different groups in society and across regions. Poverty risks 
are highest among those with limited access to, and command of, human and basic infrastructure 
assets. Third, Argentina’s economy depends on natural capital, and environmental degradation 
represents a significant cost to the economy, threatening livelihoods, especially for the poorest rural 
households that are the most dependent on these resources. 
 
Strong economic growth over the last decade was accompanied by rising macro-imbalances. Key 
macroeconomic challenges include the existence of inflationary pressures, deficits in fiscal and 
current accounts and falling international reserves. Argentina has relatively modest fiscal and 
current account deficits as well as low public sector debt to GDP. Nonetheless, given the limited 
access to international capital markets, they create pressures on the economy. These imbalances 
need to be resolved in order to avoid unwanted effects on the medium-term sustainability of the 
gains in equity and development achieved during the last decade. In this regard, the Government of 
Argentina (GoA) has recently implemented various public policy interventions aimed at resolving 
key macroeconomic imbalances. It must be noted, however, that continued and consolidated efforts 
are required for achieving the desired results.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
A third of Argentina’s continental territory is covered with natural grasslands, and another third 
with crops and forest plantations. Only around 11% of its territory is covered with natural forest 
totaling approximately 31.4 million hectares. Two thirds of this area is situated in the Chaco Eco-
Region (21.7 million ha), which also has around 13.4 million ha of forest and shrub land in various 
stages of degradation due to overgrazing and unregulated timber and fuel-wood extraction.  The 
Chaco Forest Biome occurs in  12 Argentinean provinces, four of which, Chaco, Salta, Santiago del 
Estero and Formosa account for 87 % of the total area (19.1 million ha) and produce 98 % of 
registered round wood, firewood and poles of the whole Chaco Eco-Region. 
  
The Chaco Eco-Region produces around 90% of all natural forest products in Argentina (mainly 
poles, tannin, firewood and charcoal), or around 6.3 million tons per year. Although the population 
of the 12 Provinces that make up the Chaco Eco-Region amounts to only 18% of the national total, 
they consume more than 50% of the total fuel wood in the country. Eight out of ten rural 


households in the most critical areas  of the Chaco Eco-Region use wood or charcoal to cook their 
food. The illiteracy rate there is three times higher than the national average and more than a third 
of its population lives with unsatisfied basic needs. 
  
Most deforestation in Argentina takes place in the fragile Chaco Eco-Region where a combination 
of limited development options, poverty and weak institutions combine to make the area extremely 
vulnerable both economically and environmentally. Between 2006 and 2011 more than 1.5 million 
ha of natural forest were destroyed, with conversion to agriculture and uncontrolled (often illegal) 
forest exploitation causing deforestation at a rate of 1.2% per year biodiversity has been lost, soil 
and water resources have been degraded, and carbon emissions have increased.  
 
Rationale for the World Bank’s Involvement. The Bank has maintained a partnership with the GoA 
by supporting work on sustainable natural resources management since at least 1995. Previous 
Bank supported forestry operations, have demonstrated that SAyDS and the provinces are 
committed to sustainable forest management. However institutional capacity and collaboration 
among the national, provincial and local levels are still modest compared to the magnitude and 
complexity of the task. Developing an effective working relationship with local communities and 
indigenous peoples in the area is still a work in progress. The Bank and the FAO, through its 
Cooperative Program (FAO/WB-CP), are uniquely placed to assist the GoA in this effort because of 
their twenty-year working relationship in forestry conservation, agriculture and demand-driven 
sustainable development in the country.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The PDO is to improve forest management and increased access to markets and basic services by 
forest dependent communities and small producers – indigenous and criollos – in Northern 
Argentina.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Sustainable Livelihoods
Comments (optional)
Financing for preparation and implementation of management plans for land and forests in 
approximately 250 Communities. Integrated Community Plans (Planes Integrales Comunitarios) 
will be designed to raise incomes and increase resilience to drought through demand-driven 
investments including both service delivery (among other, improving forest management planning, 
increasing dry season water availability, strengthening tenure, improving efficiency of wood energy 
systems) and locally-managed subprojects (among other, increasing production, processing and 
marketing of timber and non-timber products and installation/monitoring of improved cook stoves 
and charcoal kilns). Forest management plans prepared under this component will be considered for 
certification and for financing.

Component Name
Natural Forest Management and Civil Society
Comments (optional)
Financing for (a) a national forest and climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support 
for implementation of the Forest Law and (b) the establishment or expansion of existing community 
radio stations in a total of 25 locations to distribute informationlocally and in native languages. The 
campaign would highlight, among other things, the importance of the conservation of natural forest 

for agriculture (and agro-exports) due to their ecological functions (regulating hydrologic cycles, 
contributing to soil fertility and biodiversity conservation), and emphasize the important role that 
forests play in supporting rural livelihoods and maintaining the cultural values of the indigenous and 
criollo populations.

Component Name
Skills and Technology Transfer
Comments (optional)
Financing strengthening the technical and managerial skills of (a) indigenous and criollo community 
members, (b) small private forest owners, and (c) technical service providers and extension agents 
working in the project area. The training delivered under this component will cover project related 
topics; such as, sustainable forest management, improved production, climate resilient agricultural 
and livestock production, value addition and tenure security. Short training courses will be delivered 
through both classroom and community level instruction. Classroom instruction will be delivered to 
both community members and Rural Development Agencies (RDA) staff and others involved in 
project related service delivery.

Component Name
Forest Information and Monitoring Systems
Comments (optional)
Financing the expansion of SAyDS technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information 
and monitor changes in forest cover. The component would finance (a) expanding coverage of the 
Forest Administration, Control and Verification System (SACVEFOR) to 10 Provinces in Northern 
Argentina, (b) establishment of a national Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning 
System, and (c) the planning and establishment of a National Grid of Permanent Sample Plots. The 
component would finance consultant and non-consultant services, training, and equipment.

Component Name
Project Management and Impact Monitoring
Comments (optional)
Financing (a) the technical and administrative coordination of the project, (b) hiring consultants to 
staff the National Project Executing Unit (NEU) and (c) operational costs, training and equipment. 
This component also would support the development of an impact evaluation to identify changes in 
outcomes directly attributable to project activities. The impact evaluation is expected to help 
identify strengths and weaknesses in the design and implementation of existing policies and 
regulations related to forest management and forest tenure in Argentina and inform future decisions 
and regulatory revisions including during project implementation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 62.80 Total Bank Financing: 58.90
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 3.90
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 58.90
Local Communities 0.00
Total 62.80




V. Implementation
A.  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
Implementing Agency. The project will be implemented under the Ministry of Environment by the 
Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS). During implementation of the 
preparatory activity (BIRF-7520-AR) SAyDS established a National Executing Unit (NEU) in 
Buenos Aires integrated into its line functions.  
 
Project Management. The existing NEU includes an Executive Coordinator responsible for 
oversight of the Project and its operations, and the NEU will recruit individual thematic specialists 
acting as managers for each of the four technical components. By utilizing the NEU’s established 
administration and management capacity, systems and procedures initial costs and time frame for 
launching the project should be greatly reduced. The NEU led the development of the technical and 
institutional design of the proposed Project. The team of the NEU will be completed by M&E, 
safeguards, accounting, and procurement specialists and administrative assistants. Consultants will 
be recruited to fill knowledge gaps as they arise. 
 
Technical Implementation. Local Executing Units (LEU) located in the eight selected departments 
will include one specialist in charge of each of the following technical areas; (a) Community Forest 
Management, (b) Participatory Land Use Planning (PICs), (c) Land Tenure and Rights 
Strengthening, and (d) Marketing of Forest and NTFP. One of the specialists will act as coordinator 
in each LEU. LEU’s will also include administrative and M&E support officers (see Organogram 
Annex 3, Figures 2 and 3). Component 1 will be implemented in close collaboration with national, 
provincial and local Rural Development Agencies (RDA) that already work with targeted 
indigenous and criollo communities in the Project area. Selected RDAs will include public agencies, 
non-governmental organizations, and academic institutions. 
  
Consultation Committees. Each LEU will work closely with provincial institutions responsible for 
forest, tenure, social development, and indigenous peoples’ issues. To facilitate information 
exchange and coordination a Local Project Consultation Committee (LPCC) will be set up in each 
Department with representatives from local agencies, NGOs, and communities Project Consultation 
Committee should include IP and Criollos organization representatives.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
The results framework (Annex 1) details performance indicators by component and sub-component. 
Monitoring and evaluation efforts will include (a) biannual progress reports with performance 
indicator updates and (b) a project-specific impact evaluation designed in consultation with the 
Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME) . SAyDS has gained experience reporting on 
progress during the ongoing operation (LN 7520) however with a greater number of field activities 
and a larger number of implementation partners, SAyDS will need to rely more on Local Executing 
Units (LEU) and ensure that they follow established methodologies for reporting progress. An M&E 
strategy will be included in the operational manual and a M&E specialist will be providing support 
and capacity development at all levels (See Organogram Annex 3, Figure 3) The implementing 
agency was involved in the development of the results framework and plans to collect disaggregated 
data on gender and ethnicity. 
 
M&E reports, including environmental and social monitoring results, will be produced quarterly at 



the LEU level, and every six months at the NEU level. The data collected at the field level would be 
consolidated and analyzed at the LEU level and consolidated by the NEU for reporting and 
feedback. Annual evaluation and impact monitoring reports will facilitate adaptive management, 
allowing for the identification of issues and lessons that could help adjusting the operational 
strategy. The format and content of the annual monitoring report will be defined in the Project 
Operational Manual. The mid-term review of the Project would occur no later than 30 months after 
effectiveness. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
The proposed project design will increase the availability of key technical and managerial skills at 
both departmental and community levels and address shared prosperity by improving small-
producers’ access to financial resources for sustainable forest management (through links to the 
Forest Fund under the Forest Law). Adoption of a community driven approach ensures that 
beneficiary communities will acquire skills needed to advocate for improved natural resources 
management and access forest management funding through provincial authorities on an ongoing 
basis, after project completion, though the Forest Fund. Engaging a number of RDAs will contribute 
to inter-agency coordination and cooperation and spread the implementation burden across 
participating institutions allowing selected provinces and departments to meet a wide range of 
beneficiary needs (land tenure, water, and resilient agriculture). Investments in forest monitoring, 
early warning systems, publicity campaigns and community radio are expected to increase public 
awareness and cooperation with indigenous people and criollo communities’ efforts to manage 
natural resources sustainably.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC21271

Project Name Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project 
(P154447)

Region AFRICA
Country Angola
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Public 

administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (14%), Irrigation a nd 
drainage (9%), Agricultural extension and research (9%), General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (8%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural markets (45%), Rural 
policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154447
Borrower(s) Republic of Angola
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

23-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

29-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Jul-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

03-Dec-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Republic of Angola, with a total population of 24.3 million inhabitants, covers an area of about 
1.25 million km2 and is located on the Atlantic coast of south-western Africa. According to the 
2014 population census, 52 percent of the total population are women and about 38 percent live in 
rural areas.  
 
Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975. This was followed by a civil war that lasted for 
almost 25 years from 1975 to 2002 and ended with a peace agreement in 2002. Angola is one of 
Africa’s resource-rich countries, with a large potential for economic growth based on many mineral 

resources (particularly oil and diamonds) as well as agriculture. 
 
Agriculture contributes to approximately 10 percent of GDP, the industry sector accounts for  60 
percent of GDP and the services to about 30 percent. However, the economy of Angola is 
predominantly oil based.  The oil sector accounts for almost 45 percent of the GDP, 95 percent of 
total export value and 80 percent of government revenues. Oil prices are at a four years low and 
have declined by about 40 percent since June 2014. Currently oil prices are below US$50 per barrel. 
With the declining international oil prices, the government would like to reduce this dependence on 
the oil sector and promote diversification of the economy, including expanding the role of 
agriculture. 
 
Projections for GDP growth made by the government are: 9.7 percent in 2015; 5.9 percent in 2016 
and 5.1 percent in 2017. Growth is mainly driven by the recovery of the oil sector and an increase in 
public investments in the non-oil sectors. This includes, among others, rehabilitation of roads, 
increase in energy production, and development of new irrigation systems to enhance agricultural 
productivity. The average inflation rate is projected to be about 7 percent by end of 2015. While 
macroeconomic prospects in the medium-term are challenging due to declining oil prices, 
macroeconomic performance and commitment to reforms have been favorable. 
 
While reasonable progress has been made toward achievement of the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs), Angola is not likely to meet the MDGs by 2015. Angola ranks low in both the 
human development indicators and business environment indicators. Overall, institutional capacity 
remains weak. There are bureaucratic hurdles and governance challenges that inhibit growth of the 
private sector. 
 
The performance related to social indicators has been mixed. Good progress has been made in 
poverty reduction, primary education and gender equality since 2002. Despite these achievements, 
however, social indicators remain very poor. For example, life expectancy at birth is about 51 years. 
Maternal mortality is 450 out of 100,000 births which is the highest in sub-Sahara Africa. 
Malnutrition is also acute with 30 percent of children less than five years of age suffering from 
stunting and 16 percent are under-weight. 
 
The overall poverty rate has declined from 62 percent in 2001 to about 37 percent in 2009 (about 
nine million people). This is a major achievement. However, there are major regional disparities in 
the poverty rate across provinces as well as between rural and urban sectors. In the rural areas the 
poverty rate is almost 58 percent. On the other hand, the poverty rate in Luanda (the largest city in 
the country) is only about 9 percent. Clearly there is a great need to reduce poverty rates in the rural 
areas. 
 
Angola is estimated to have about 57 million hectares of arable land of which less than 4 million 
hectares are currently under cultivation. Despite enormous potential to increase cropped area and 
crop yields, and diverse agro-climate regions in the country for increasing food production, national 
and household food security continues to depend on imports of various food commodities and this 
cannot be sustained. Angola continues to import a significant share of food consumption, except for 
roots and tubers. For example, the overall output of cereals is currently estimated at 1.9 million MT 
against a total consumption need of 3 million MT. The difference (1.1 million MT or 36 percent of 
the needs) is met through imports. In other words, national food security remains a major 
development issue. 

Global experience suggests that growth in agriculture has much higher potential than in other 
sectors (such as industry) to reduce rural poverty. Inclusive growth in the agricultural sector can 
make a major contribution to diversify the economy, accelerate economic growth, increase food 
security, reduce rural poverty, improve social indicators in the rural areas, and help achieve MDGs. 
The proposed agricultural project envisages a major impulse to the agricultural sector that will not 
only increase productivity and production but will also improve the lives of rural population at 
large, thus providing for structural change and transformation of the agricultural sector in the project 
areas.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
While agriculture accounts for only about 10 percent of the GDP, almost two-thirds of the 
population depend directly or indirectly on agriculture for their income, employment and livelihood. 
About 37 percent of the population is below the poverty line and about 85 percent of the poor are in 
the rural areas and depend on agriculture.  The cropping pattern varies across the agro-climatic 
conditions in the country. However, Central Highlands (Huambo, Bie and Malanje Provinces) 
appear to have a high density of population and a high potential for agricultural production, 
including cassava, maize, beans, potato and horticulture. 
 
Prior to independence, Angola had a long history of exporting agricultural commodities, having 
been once the third largest exporter of coffee in the world. Exportable surpluses, such as coffee and 
maize, were for the most part produced using traditional technologies and few modern inputs. 
During the colonial period (up to 1975), agriculture had a dual structure with a commercial sector of 
about 800,000 ha managed by Portuguese settlers using modern technologies, and a traditional 
sector primarily composed of smallholder family farms cultivating about 3.4 million ha.  
 
After independence, most of the Portuguese settlers left the country and many of the former 
commercial farms and plantations were converted into state farms, which have now been privatized. 
The civil war (1975 to 2002) resulted in a virtual collapse of commercial production as large 
numbers of rural inhabitants either fled or reverted to subsistence agricultural production. 
Infrastructure suffered a great deal with widespread destruction of roads, bridges, irrigation systems 
and warehouses, compounded by the presence of thousands of land mines in the rural areas. 
Although the situation has improved since the end of the civil war with the rehabilitation of main 
roads and bridges, and clearance of mines, agricultural exports are currently negligible. The 
agricultural sector has not yet fully recovered from the de-capitalization experienced during the civil 
war. 
 
With recent developments in the rehabilitation of infrastructure that includes main roads and 
bridges, agricultural production gradually started to increase since 2002.  However, crop yields 
remain very low as compared to other countries in sub-Sahara Africa. According to FAO statistics, 
the average yield in Angola of beans is 0.34 tons/ha compared to 0.6t/ha in the region; groundnuts 
0.38 t/ha compared to 0.88 t/ha in the region and millet 0.24 t/ha compared to 0.7 t/ha in region.  
This implies that there is substantial scope for increasing crop yields and production through 
agricultural modernization and technical change as well as through an increase in cultivated area. 
However, this will require the use of animal traction power, adoption of improved agronomic 
practices, improvements in soil fertility, use of modern agricultural inputs, bringing cropped area 
under irrigation, and disseminating agricultural knowledge to farmers. In addition, there is a 
substantial scope and need to strengthen market linkages, improve commercialization and build 


agro-business facilities through local entrepreneurs.  
 
At present, almost 80 percent of the farmers are smallholders, with weak capacity and limited 
knowledge of improved agricultural practices. Human capital in agricultural education, research and 
extension institutions suffered a great deal during the civil war and have not yet been fully 
strengthened or replaced. The institutional capacity in the agricultural sector, including irrigation 
and agricultural statistics, is extremely weak. The agricultural programs are designed and 
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture at the national level and by the Departments of 
Agriculture at the provincial levels. The capacity of these agencies needs to be strengthened as well. 
 
The Bank-supported Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), approved 
by the Board in July 2008 and implemented over the past years, was designed to increase 
agricultural production through the provision of improved agricultural services and investment 
support to rural smallholder farmers. Activities implemented under the project include: (a) training 
of over 44,000 smallholder farmers in the use of improved agricultural technologies to boost 
production of the major crops targeted by the project (the training was provided by service providers 
recruited under the Project as well as training provided by FAO to over 14,000 producers on family 
farms through Farmers’ Field Schools ); (b) training of more than 60 technicians; and (c) provision 
of financial support to over 14,000 smallholder beneficiaries through financing of around 280 sub-
projects ; and (d) capacity building for staff from the Agrarian Development Institute (ADI) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture at targeted municipalities. 
 
In addition to the provision of capacity building, MOSAP contributed to: (i) an increase in 
agricultural production; and (ii) the adoption of improved technologies in the project areas.  The 
crop index during the 2013/14 season was 64 percent against an overall project target of 10 percent.  
The major crops supported under MOSAP were: maize, beans, cassava, and Irish potatoes. About 
66 percent of smallholder famers have adopted an improved technology promoted by the project 
against a project target of 30 percent. 
 
As indicated earlier, with the exception of cassava, the average yield of major crops cultivated in 
Angola, including maize, beans, Irish potatoes, is still extremely low, even compared to yields in 
other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. There is a large potential for increasing crop yields and 
agricultural production in the country. There are (at least) three major reasons justifying increasing 
public and private investments in the agriculture sector:  
 
(i) To ensure institutional continuity and scaling up of the on-going but limited support to 
smallholder farmers in Angola. As indicated, MOSAP has been critical in promoting agriculture 
recovery following the end of the civil war, strengthening institutions, and bringing formerly 
displaced agricultural producers back to agriculture in the project areas. 
(ii) To improve economic diversification. Angola possesses large and well-endowed natural 
resources including land and water. Almost two-thirds of the Angolans earn their livelihood from 
agriculture, a sector that could become one of the engines of economic growth and source of 
productive rural employment, provided capacity building and investments in public infrastructure 
and private assets take place. Unless investments are made to lay the foundations for future 
agricultural growth, national economic growth and diversification (which are critical in light of 
declining international oil prices), income, employment and foreign exchange earnings/savings will 
be seriously constrained.  
 


(iii) To ensure sustainable use of natural resources.  Despite the low levels of economic activity, 
the country already faces various pressures on its natural resources, such as wastage of water and 
overuse of pastures and subsequent soil erosion (largely attributable to population pressures; 
desertification); and deforestation of tropical rain forest in response to both international demand for 
tropical timber and to domestic fuel use. Investments in an efficient use of water for irrigation and 
promotion of soil conservation techniques, including erosion control and enhancement of soil 
fertility, and natural resource management, will ensure a sustainable use of soil and water and will, 
over time, contribute towards mainstreaming climate smart agricultural practices.  
 
The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP) 
intends to scale-up activities being implemented under MOSAP and will also finance critical  new 
activities, as per government’s medium and long-term agriculture programs. MOSAP is scheduled 
to close on December 31, 2015, i.e. in eleven months.  The implementation of the new project is 
expected to start on January 1, 2016.  Given the popularity of MOSAP in the project areas as well as 
with agencies dealing with agriculture, government indicated preference for keeping the name of 
MOSAP and calls this project MOSAP-2.

Relationship to CAS
The Bank CPS for FY13-16 aims at (i) deepening diversification for inclusive growth; (ii) 
enhancing the quality of decentralization for services delivery; and (iii) building human resources 
capacity. The CPS recognizes the role of agriculture and the need to increase agriculture 
productivity and competitiveness to reduce rural poverty and promote growth. The proposed 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project is a critical instrument to 
contribute to achieving the CPS objectives

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project Development Objective is to increase smallholder agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
21. The proposed project is expected to provide assistance to about 200,000 smallholder 
farmers in three provinces. The key results expected from the proposed project are: (i) to increase 
yields of selected crops, including cassava, maize, beans and Irish potatoes to the average yield 
levels prevailing in sub-Saharan Africa; (ii) to increase production of selected crops; and (iii) to 
increase the share of crop production that is marketed. In addition to these key results indicators, the 
results framework will also measure intermediate performance indicators for each of the 
components that will be developed during project preparation. These indicators will include the 
percentage of farmers who benefit from training and apply their knowledge; the average yields of 
major crops supported by the project; the percentage of the agriculture produce marketed by the 
smallholder farmers in addition to other indicators that will be discussed and agreed upon during 
project preparation. 
  
22. The strategy to achieve key results under the proposed project is to build upon the outcomes 
achieved under the on-going MOSAP and support smallholder farmers to increase agricultural 
productivity, production and market linkages that generate self-sustaining agricultural growth over a 
larger project area, as compared to MOSAP.  This will be achieved by: (a) building on potential 
synergies with on-going agricultural programs; (b) maximizing opportunities for quick-win results 



by focusing on farmers that received training under MOSAP or other programs and have applied 
their knowledge); (c) strengthening the knowledge and skills of smallholder farmers and their 
associations as well as of agricultural extension staff and agricultural services providers;  (d) re-
capitalizing productive agricultural systems and infrastructures, including irrigated agriculture; (e) 
providing access to demand-driven agricultural services and agricultural markets; and (f) promoting 
rural entrepreneurship in agri-business development. As far as possible, investments will be based 
on a flexible, participatory and demand-driven approach that promotes enhancement in productivity, 
commercialization and sustainability of agricultural activities.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project is designed to be climate smart, gender and jobs responsive and nutrition 
sensitive. The project is consistent with the main agriculture development programs in the country. 
Angola tends to experience seasonal rain variability and sometimes even long periods of drought 
that affect agricultural production. The proposed project will promote appropriate adaptation 
practices, including irrigated agriculture, to reduce such production losses. The project will support 
the participation of women in different project components, including farmers associations, 
production, marketing and training. The project will have a positive impact on employment and job 
creation in the rural areas by contributing to increased agricultural production, marketing, agri-
business and value addition as well as increased demand for agricultural inputs and services.  
Finally, since the project will promote the production of beans and vegetables, it is likely to have a 
positive impact on the food security and nutrition of rural households.  
 
The proposed project is a follow up project to the on-going MOSAP.  While broadly similar to the 
original MOSAP project, the new project differs in the following important aspects. First, it is larger 
in scope in terms of absolute funding and number of beneficiaries. Second, it includes a sub-
component to support the development of small-scale irrigated agriculture. Third, in addition to 
food crops (maize, cassava, beans and Irish potatoes), it will emphasize the production of high value 
crops, particularly horticulture. Fourth, it will further strengthen commercialization of agriculture, 
including market linkages, contract farming and agri-business development.  
 
The SADCP project area would cover the whole country for capacity building and institutional 
development activities. However, investment would be limited to the same provinces of Bie, 
Huambo and Malanje but with more coverage to municipalities. MOSAP was limited to three 
provinces covering 12 municipalities and only 50,000 beneficiaries. The proposed project would 
significantly expand the number of municipalities and communes covered under MOSAP and cover 
about 200,000 smallholder beneficiaries.  Besides the high potential for agricultural production, the 
selected provinces also meet the following criteria: 
 
• Well-endowed with resources, in particular land and water. Smallholder farming systems 
are already sustainable and profitable. Smallholder activities in these areas, before the civil war, 
included producing a wide range of crops, including most cereals and high value products such as 
vegetables (notably potatoes and onions). These areas appear to have high agricultural potential. 
 
• High concentration of rural population. The three provinces have around 52 percent of the 
population that is considered rural, as compared to 38 percent nationally. Overall, the three 
provinces account for about 24 percent of the rural population in Angola (2014 Population Census). 

• Proximity to potential markets and possibility of benefiting from the rehabilitated road 
network and railways. Hopefully, this will facilitate the strengthening of market linkages and 
commercialization. 
 
The target groups of the project will be smallholders in the selected provinces with a potential to 
increase agricultural production and commercialization. The potential project beneficiaries will be d 
ivided into the following three categories: (i) Group 1 of 1,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to 
benefit from irrigated agriculture, production and marketing activities (primarily horticulture) with a 
possibility for contract farming; (ii) Group 2 of 49,000 beneficiaries that are  likely to benefit from 
production and marketing activities related to food crops and horticulture; and (iii) Group 3 of 
150,000 beneficiaries that are likely to benefit from capacity building, production and marketing 
related to key food crops. Specialized capacity development training may also be provided to 
beneficiaries in Groups 1 and 2 that may have also benefitted from capacity development under 
MOSAP. 
 
The proposed project will have three components: Component 1 - Capacity Building and 
Institutional Development; Component 2- Support for Agricultural Investment; and Component 3- 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The proposed project is expected to be 
implemented over a period of five years from January 2016 through December 2020. The total cost 
will be US$125 million, of which US$20 million will be contribution by the Government of Angola 
and US$5 million equivalent will be in-kind contribution by the beneficiaries. A 100 million IBRD 
loan will constitute the remainder of the total cost. Overall, the project is expected to support about 
200,000 beneficiaries (members of about 6,500 farmer associations) with approximately 300,000 ha 
cropped land (on an average, 1.5 ha per beneficiary and with a range of about 0.50 ha to 2.5 ha per 
beneficiary). 
 
 
Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development (US$30 million) 
 
As under MOSAP, this component would focus on strengthening national, provincial and municipal 
institutions, develop technical capacity and introduce participatory processes to accelerate the 
decentralized agricultural development.  This component will also aim to strengthen the technical 
and managerial skills of participants and institutions involved in agricultural production and 
marketing in the project areas. This component entails the following four  sub-components:  
 
a. Formation and strengthening of Farmers’ associations, which would include organizational 
and managerial capacities, and technical skills related to modern agricultural technologies and 
agronomic practices, agricultural production, marketing, investment and entrepreneurship. Training 
of vulnerable groups (e.g. female-headed households) will be given special attention. This will also 
include training of farmers through farmers’ field schools (FFSs), as is being done under MOSAP. 
 
b. Institutional strengthening of local, provincial and national units of the Ministry of 
agriculture (MINAG) to ensure that these institutions can better play their respective roles in the 
sector.  This sub-component would include support for strengthening institutional capacity in 
agricultural extension services (including linkage with research), agricultural research service, small 
scale irrigation, agricultural marketing and agricultural statistics. In addition, the capacity of 
MINAG staff will be enhanced to prepare and implement appropriate agricultural programs and 


policies. There will also be support for strengthening market information systems, linked to farmers’ 
and traders associations. Finally, the project will also support linkages with research programs 
relevant to agriculture that are being undertaken by the Ministry of Science and Technology.  
 
c. To strengthen agricultural research capacity and global knowledge about the latest 
technologies related to selected crops relevant to Angola, support to specific agricultural research 
will also be provided. Possible collaboration with both the International Institute for Tropical 
Agriculture (IITA) and the Brazilian Corporation of Agricultural Research (EMBRAPA) will be 
developed/further strengthened to address agricultural research and disease management issues that 
are critical for existing (cassava, maize and beans) and emerging crops (soybean) in Angola. As part 
of the CGIAR, IITA is responsible for carrying out research related to cassava, maize and beans in 
Africa. EMBRAPA has been working closely with Angola in building agricultural research 
capacity, including breeding for disease and pest resistance, in the context of integrated disease and 
pest management. 
 
d. Strengthening capacities of private and NGO agricultural service providers, especially those 
working closely with the smallholder farmers. Among other activities, this would include support 
for smallholder farmer groups or associations to prepare investment proposals for various sub-
projects for funding under the project as well as support for managerial and business capacities of 
new and existing agri-business entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 2. Support for Agricultural Investment  (US$55 million) 
 
This component supports investments in agriculture assets, both of a public as well as a private 
goods nature, with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, competiveness and market linkages 
of farmer beneficiaries (groups and individuals). The smallholder farmer beneficiaries will be re 
quired to make a small in-kind contribution (of at least 10 percent) to the investments that they 
receive based on criteria to be established during preparation. The investment component will, in 
the first year, consider farmer associations that received training under MOSAP. This component 
consists of the following sub-components:  
 
(a) Support for the Development of Small Scale Irrigation 
 
This sub-component will deal with the rehabilitation of existing and the development of new small 
scale irrigation systems. The Central Highlands, particularly comprising large parts of the provinces 
of Malanje, Huambo and Bie, have excellent conditions and water resources for development of 
small scale irrigated agriculture. Productive soils and water resources are abundant. Topographical 
conditions make it possible to develop irrigation by gravity. Gravity irrigation is particularly 
favorable for the development of small scale irrigated agriculture for smallholders. Some 
smallholder communities have already created and managed gravity irrigation schemes.  With their 
own resources (mainly labor and local materials) they derive water from small streams by 
(temporary) weirs to a network of unlined earthen canals for irrigation. The management and 
operation of these systems requires limited financial resources (the scarcest resources of 
smallholders). However, the efficiency and productivity of these systems will be improved by 
simple and cost-effective measures such as the construction of permanent weirs, the tubing and 
lining of canal stretches with infiltration losses, construction of culverts to cross roads and (natural) 
drainage streams etc.  
 

(b) Support for Agricultural Production Investments 
 
This sub-component will support investments in farm assets. In order to access matching grants for 
investment sub-projects, farmer associations have to submit project proposals. This sub-component 
will assist eligible participants in the preparation of detailed proposals that will allow an informed 
decision about their feasibility from technical, economic, financial, social and environmental 
perspectives. The potential funding proposals (list will be finalized during preparation) will consider 
dealing with any activity that will increase crop productivity and production. Few examples are 
draft animals, simple tools and agricultural equipment, soil fertility/quality improvement, soil 
conservation, seeds of improved crop varieties, fertilizers and integrated pest and disease 
management. In addition, matching grants will also be provided to individual enterprises in the rural 
areas that will provide critical agricultural services to smallholders in the project areas.  
 
A review and evaluation of exist ing schemes will be carried out as part of the project preparation to 
help determine what kind of support might be needed and appropriate.  This assessment will also 
include on-going experiences and scope for the provision of rural financial services in Angola that 
are currently being provided by local and international NGOs. The main goal of this component is 
sustainable increase in agricultural production for the smallholders. 
 
(c) Support for Value Addition and Marketing Infrastructure  
 
This sub-component will support investments related to market linkages and commercialization, 
including value addition, post-harvest management and marketing activities for key crops and 
horticulture. The critical issues that need to be addressed are packaging, storage, small-scale 
processing, and marketing infrastructure and even contract farming. The main focus will be on 
value addition, reduction of post-harvest losses and market linkages. All sub-projects requesting 
financing under this sub-component will prepare a project proposal and a business plan that will go 
through a complete appraisal process to determine the economic feasibility and sustainability. 
Specific list of sub-projects that will be supported under this sub-component will be identified 
during preparation of the proposed project. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million) 
 
This component deals with coordination and monitoring and implementation of the project and 
consists of two sub-components: 
 
a. Project Management: 
The purpose of this sub-component is to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, on time 
and in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project 
Coordinator and a small team of ex perts located at the national, and provincial or municipal levels. 
The final arrangements for project management will incorporate the lessons learned under MOSAP. 
  
b. Project Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established that will be responsible for 
collecting and processing appropriate information to verify the output, effect and eventually the 
impact of project activities over time. Baseline information will also be collected at the beginning of 
the project.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 20.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 70.00
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.00
 Total 95.00


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC13820

Project Name Ecuador - Sustainable Family Farming Modernization Project (P151963)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Ecuador
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (56%), Irrigation and 

drainage (37%), Agricultural extension and research (4%), Agr o-industry, 
marketing, and trade (3%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management 
(20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151963
Borrower(s) REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

30-Oct-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

03-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

18-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

02-Jul-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. During the last decade, Ecuador has seen a period of relative political stability. The 
Government of Ecuador (GoE) has invested heavily in infrastructure and social sectors in an effort 
to stimulate growth, reduce inequality and promote inclusion for a total population of slightly more 
than 15.7 million inhabitants.  
 
2. The Ecuadorian economy relies largely on the extraction and export of oil, and on the 
export of natural resource-based products and services. The agricultural sector accounted for 7.8 
percent of the GDP in 2013. With more than 60 percent of its agricultural production destined for 
export, Ecuador could benefit significantly from stimulating productivity through integrated rural 
development approaches. 
 
3. Growth combined with falling inequality has led to important gains in reducing poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Over the last decade (2003-13), GDP per capita growth in Ecuador 
was above regional average levels (2.7 percent vs. 2.5 percent), while progress in reducing 
inequality has exceeded regional trends. Income distribution was significantly improved, as 
expressed by the Gini coefficient, declining from 0.54 in December 2006 to 0.49 in June 2014. 
Likewise, between 2006 and 2014, income poverty at the national poverty line fell from 37.6 
percent to 24.5 percent, while extreme poverty fell from 16.9 percent to 8 percent.  
 
4. Despite the significant reduction in poverty and growth of the middle class, more than half 
of the population in Ecuador remains poor or vulnerable to falling back into poverty, particularly in  
rural areas. In 2014, 4.2 percent of the urban population lived in extreme poverty compared to the 
16 percent for the rural population. The difference was less pronounced at the moderate poverty 
line, but even in this case the rural headcount was more than twice the urban headcount (41.7 
percent versus 16.3 percent).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. The proposed project is fully aligned to the National Development Plan for 2013-2017, the 
National Strategy for Diversification of the Productive Matrix, the institutional objectives of 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) and with the Irrigation 
National 2012-2027 Plan, which are: (i) to improve the lives of farmers and rural communities 
through the strategies: social inclusion of small and medium producers; (ii) to promote the 
modernization of agriculture; and (iii) to strengthen capacity of the Autonomous Decentralized 
Provincial Governments (GADPs) to assume the transferred competencies of constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and promoting agricultural activity. 
 
6.  Ecuador has 1.1 million agricultural households with land size between 1 ha and 20 ha, 
regarded as small and medium producers, who own about 1.6 million hectares (25% of total area at 
national level). This segment of farmers is crucial for many value chains such as rice (49% of 
national production), potatoes (64%), maize (76%) and onions (80%). Nevertheless, the 
development of this segment of farmers and its capacity to contribute to the diversification of 
productive matrix at national level are limited by the size of land, the access to market, and by the 
poor access to efficient water management in agriculture. Out of the 304,000ha irrigated by small 
and medium producers, 284,000ha are still under traditional irrigation methods with very low water 
efficiency and limited water storage capacity. The proposed project aims at supporting MAGAP’s 
initiative to strengthen this category of farmers in their effort for intensification and modernization 
of agriculture. 
 
7. The 2008 Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador defined the decentralization framework 
recognizing the political, administrative, and financial autonomy of the Decentralized Provincial 
Autonomous Governments (GADPs) at their different levels (canton, province, and parish). This 
decentralization grants each province jurisdiction to plan, build, and maintain the infrastructure 
(transportation, water, and sanitation) under its competencies and to promote the development of the 
productive sector within its territory. 
 
8. Within the competences of Provincial Governments under the current Constitution are: (i) 
planning, building and maintaining the road system at provincial level; (ii) planning, constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and; (iii) promoting agricultural activity. Therefore, 

the implementation of new development projects and the sustainable operation of existing irrigation 
projects are limited by the level of capacity for project preparation, implementation and financing 
by the Provincial Governments.

Relationship to CAS
9. The World Bank Group's Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for Ecuador approved on April 9, 
2013, identified agriculture and rural development as key priorities for the Government and the 
Bank to contribute to the country's goal for inclusive and sustainable growth. 
 
10. The proposed Project is fully consistent with the World Bank’s ISN for Ecuador for the 
period 2014-2015, which focuses on investment project financing in three strategic areas: (i) Pillar I 
-  Sustainable and Inclusive Growth; (ii) Pillar II - Access to Social Protection and Quality Services 
for All, and (iii) with the country’s Plan Nacional para el Buen Vivir, where five out of twelve key 
objectives outline the importance of enhancing the productive water access in a sustainable manner 
as key intermediate priorities to ensure quality of life and social cohesion for its farmers and rural 
communities. 
 
11. It is expected that the proposed Project will contribute to the reduction of extreme poverty, 
to the increase of shared prosperity and equality of access to opportunities in targeted provinces 
across the country by increasing agricultural revenues and resilience of Ecuador's family farming 
sector, promoting diversification and increase of agricultural production, and improving access to 
markets for smallholders and their organizations.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
12. The project development objective is to enhance the profitability and sustainable production 
of small and medium farmers in targeted areas by improving productivity and by supporting more 
efficient and climate-smart uses for land and water. 
 
13. To reach its objective, the project will support technical assistance, capacity-building 
activities, on-farm and complementary off-farm investments geared toward a more efficient use of 
natural resources, especially water, an increased adaptation to climate change, improvement in 
productivity and market access. On-farm investments are made within the farmer's plot. Off-farm 
investments are referring to interventions on irrigation and drainage networks upstream of the intake 
of the farmer’s plot. 
 
14. Project beneficiaries. The project beneficiaries are small and medium-sized family farmers, 
including indigenous communities. Small and Medium farmers are established by MAGAP 
according agroclimatological regions:  
• Sierra: 0 - 5 ha. (small farmers) – 5 to 20 ha. (medium farmers)  
• Costa: 0-20 ha. (small farmers) - 20 to 40 ha (medium farmers)  
 
15. Project areas. While the project is national in scope, the Sierra Central and the Coastal 
regions are the main target areas for investment subprojects where climatological conditions justify 
investments in water storage and irrigation to foster diversification and intensification of agriculture.

Key Results (From PCN)
16. The key indicators at the beneficiary level would measure changes in: (i) profitability of 

agricultural activities and; (ii) climate-resilience and sustainability of the improved production 
systems.  
 
17. Intermediate outcome indicators would include: (i) Profitability (margin) by unit of land 
(hectare), by unit of water (cubic meters) and by household (family); (ii) Reduced volatility of yield 
from year to year for main crops; (iii) Hectares of areas and number of beneficiaries with new/
improved irrigation and drainage services like drip or sprinkler (core indicator); (iv) Number of 
clients who have adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project (core 
indicator); (v) Number of Operational Water User Associations created and/or strengthened (core 
indicator); (vi) Sub-projects for which arrangements for community engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/or operation and maintenance are established (core indicator) and; (vii) Hectares 
of area with change in land use (increase of cropping intensity and diversification of crops).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
18. The Project supports a framework program to strengthen sustainable modernization and 
intensification of agriculture systems with an emphasis on beneficiary and community participation. 
The Project will support: (i) demand-based investment subprojects; (ii) capacity-building activities 
that strengthen national and local institutions (MAGAP, GADP, mainly) and farmers’ organizations; 
(ii) climate-smart project planning; (iii) training and technical assistance to enhance productivity, 
increase value-added and improve market access; and, (iv) small investments to protect natural 
resources linked to the subprojects (see details of Project Concept in Annex 3). 
 
19. In order to maximize the positive impact and sustainability of activities, the project will 
seek to coordinate its actions with existing government programs aimed at agricultural development 
such as the MAGAP’s Hombro a Hombro Program (national extension program for family farming) 
and the agricultural component of the Plan Nacional Buen Vivir 2013-2107; as well as programs 
developed by Provincial Governments in thematic support agricultural production and marketing. 
The project should also ensure that rural credit programs and/or micro-credit (Cooperative Savings) 
will be accessible to project beneficiaries. 
 
20. The proposed Project will build on the successful model of the PIDD (see details of project 
description and main lessons learned in Annex 3). The PIDD or Proyecto de Inversiones de 
Desarrollo Productivo (P094784), which closed in June 2014, financed subprojects of 
modernization works for 55 small and medium scale collective irrigation systems, benefiting 4,685 
ha and 7,900 families. The most important lessons learned from the PIDD, taken into account in the 
proposed project’s design are the following (details in Annex 4): 
a) Combining physical investments with capacity building. The PIDD followed an integrated 
approach with rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and strengthening of the 
capacity of Water Users Association and improving farmers’ irrigation and agricultural practices 
and the commercialization of agricultural produce.  
b) Frontloading technical assistance and training to the institutional stakeholders. This capacity 
building needs to be done in technical screening, design, supervision of sub-projects), and fiduciary 
aspects (procurement, in financial management and safeguards). 
c) Increasing ownership and sustainability. Irrigation component follows a demand-driven and 
participatory approach in which WUAs/farmers’ groups participate in subproject design, financing, 
execution and supervision and are fully responsible for Operation & Maintenance. This approach, 

by ensuring subproject ownership, increases subproject sustainability and effective use and will be 
used for the new operation.  
d) Thinking scalability. The project cycle developed by the PIDD, especially the effective 
participation of beneficiaries from the design to the construction, has been adopted by the Provincial 
Government of Chimborazo as a public policy to develop any investment intervention in the future.  
e) Building Partnerships. Several partnerships between different organizations and institutions 
at local, national and international level have been developed during the preparation and 
implementation of the PIDD, and will be replicated in the new operation.  
 
21. The proposed project will also be designed taking into account some lessons learned from 
other similar operations in the region such as, for example, the PSI Sierra in Peru (P104760), which 
has very similar scope, activities and target group, or the PROSAP (P106684) in Argentina, which 
can bring experie nce on the construction of the project framework and the progressive process of 
delegating responsibilities to the sub-national level (Provinces). 
 
22. The proposed project (US$60 million in IBRD financing) will be implemented over a 
period of five years and comprises four components: (1) Investments for productive sub-projects; 
(2) Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ organizations; (3) Natural 
Resources Management Enhancement and; (4) Project Management. 
 
23. Component 1: Investments for productive sub-projects (estimated amount US$ 50M.). This 
component will finance subprojects aligned with the project objective and provincial priorities 
related to the following investments: (i) individual and/or collective small water storages (ponds); 
(ii) collective and/or individual on-farm investments for modernization of irrigation techniques 
(drip, sprinkler or modern gravity techniques) and; (iii) complementary works aiming at improving 
off-farm irrigation and drainage networks.  
 
24. Subproject proposals will be reviewed against a set of objective criteria in order to be 
eligible for financing, including consistency with project objectives and scope. To ensure the 
balanced and equitable allocation of public funding, subproject preparation will include specific 
selection criteria to be applied early on in the selection and approval process, which will include: (i) 
demand expressed by the potential beneficiaries, which should have sufficient organizational 
capacity to manage sustainable infrastructure; (ii) formal prioritization by the relevant Provincial 
Government preferentially in their Provincial Irrigation Plan; (iii) compliance with the requirements 
of beneficiaries’ profile (small and medium farmers); (iv) valid water use concession granted by 
SENAGUA; (v) financial profitability presented in the project profile and validated by the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Project; (vi) social and environmental sustainability justified in 
the project profile and validated by the PIU; (viii) compliance with investment criteria (e.g. - 
investment ceiling per beneficiary family, per hectare, per sub-project, etc.); (ix) financial 
contribution of beneficiaries to investment costs and; (x) subproject activities that may affect 
International Waterways will not be eligible. Details will be elaborated in the implementation 
manual. 
 
25. Component 1 will finance works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment. Retroactive Financing may be provided for this Component 
under BP 10.00 for a selection of subprojects. The selection will be done during appraisal stage 
within the current MAGAP’s pipeline of subprojects and will be subject to the criteria identified in 
the operation manual.  



 
26. Component 2: Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ 
organizations (estimated amount US$ 5 M.). This component will support a range of services that 
provide support for: (i) agricultural modernization and intensification to the beneficiaries and their 
organizations (Water Users Organizations and Farmers Organizations) and; (ii) institutional 
strengthening to the main institutional stakeholders (MAGAP central and regional offices, 
Provincial Governments / GADPs). 
 
27. Component 2 will finance consulting and non-consulting services, training and workshops 
and goods and equipment. Activities will include: (i) Extension services, training and Technical 
Assistance and; (ii) Institutional and organizational capacity building (see details in Annex 3). This 
training will be focused on improving and supporting the outcomes r elated with the subproject 
investments. 
 
28. Component 3: Natural Resources Management Enhancement (estimated amount US$ 1.5 
M.). This component aims at laying the foundations for conservation and sustainable management 
of watersheds and natural resources, in areas where investments on irrigation sub-projects will be 
developed. 
 
29. Component 3 will finance small investment and management subprojects of natural 
resources protection (reflorestation, protection of páramos, and conservation of watersheds) linked 
to the subprojects of Component 1. The component will adopt an integrated and participatory 
approach to watershed management intended to make rural populations more accountable and 
encourage them to manage their land and natural resources in a more sustainable manner. Thus, the 
component would contribute to: (i) protect watersheds by reducing or preventing erosion and 
sedimentation; (ii) increase the productivity and sustainability of agricultural production based on 
agroecological and agroforestry technologies; and (iii) strengthen the management of natural 
resources to improve the environment and living conditions.  
 
30. Component 3 will finance small works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment (see details in Annex 3). This component will be placed under 
the responsibility of the regional offices of MAGAP who, depending on the local capacities and the 
existence of services, will enter into agreements with the GADPs, consulting firms, local ONGs or 
community organizations for the preparation and implementation of subprojects. The procedures 
will be detailed in the operation manual. 
 
31. Component 4: Project Management (estimated amount US$ 3.5 M.). This component will 
support the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be installed within the Sub-
Secretary of Irrigation and Drainage in the MAGAP in Quito and some eligible costs related to the 
Project on the regional offices of MAGAP and Provincial Governments/GADPs. The component 
will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation, impact evaluations, progress reports, and audits.  
 
32. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the overall administration of 
the Project, within the MAGAP in Quito. Component 4 will finance: consulting and non-consulting 
services, training and workshops, small works, goods and equipment and operating costs.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 77.30 Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 6.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 60.00
 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 6.15
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.15
 Total 77.30


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC10068

Project Name National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
Region SOUTH ASIA
Country India
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- 
Education (5%), Information technology (5%)

Theme(s) Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development 
results (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor 
markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151072
Borrower(s) Republic of India
Implementing Agency Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

17-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

17-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

07-Aug-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

27-Oct-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
India is a lower middle-income country with per-capita GDP of US$ 1,499 (2013).  From 2001 to 
2011, India’s economy performed well, with sustained annual GDP growth of 8%.  High rates of 
investment and savings contributed to this growth, as did strong exports. Yet more than 400 million 
people in India still subsist on less than US$ 1.25/day.  India faces challenges in reducing extreme 
poverty, curbing high malnutrition and achieving shared prosperity.  The Government of India has 
emphasized increased farm productivity as fundamental to India’s poverty reduction and growth 
strategy. Building relevant skills sets has been a persistent challenge across the economy.  
Educational institutions, particularly at the tertiary level, are critical to accelerate India’s emergence 

in global markets, yet teaching is poorly linked with labor market demand, research and 
development, thereby producing graduates with limited problem-solving skills.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture in India employs 52% of the labor force and is the main source of livelihood for 80% of 
the rural poor, but contributes only 14% to GDP and 10% to total exports. Women constitute about 
60% of the economically active population in agriculture and livestock. The Green Revolution in 
the late 1960s and 1970s, with investment in new seeds, production technologies, cultivation 
methods and irrigation practices, improved agricultural productivity and made India food-secure.  
Where the Green Revolution flourished – Haryana and Punjab – are today among the higher income 
states in the country.  However, agricultural productivity growth declined in the 1990s, rebounded 
in the 2000s, and today still remains low. Moreover, this growth has been largely price driven and 
heavily reliant on inputs rather than efficiency gains.  
 
At current Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, India’s domestic agricultural output will meet 
59% of the country’s 2030 projected food demand (GAP Report 2014).  Agricultural higher 
education can be the engine for increasing productivity through better skilled technicians, 
innovative research and extension linked to technologies and practices, common under the Land 
Grant model.  A 2014 Bank agricultural sector study argues that while India doubled investment in 
agricultural research and extension (0.4% of AgGDP in 1981 to 0.96% in 2011), the quality of 
innovation has suffered along with institutional capacity to adapt and remain relevant.  
Reawakening the “research-education-extension nexus” intrinsic to the Land Grant model can 
propel India’s agricultural innovation, farmers’ technology adoption and agriculture’s overall 
transformation.  In Brazil, for example, the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education 
Personnel (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) have worked together to build and maintain high-quality faculty in universities nationwide. 
 
The National Agricultural Education System comprises 56 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 
one Central Agricultural University, and four Research Institutes with deemed-to-be university 
status.    The first SAU – G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantanagar – was 
established in 1960 based on the US Land Grant model emphasizing the integration of research, 
education and extension.  Under the Indian Constitution, statutory control of agriculture (including 
agricultural education) lies with the respective State Governments while the Union Government 
coordinates and sets educational standards. In 1996, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) began voluntary SAU accreditation to establish norms and quality standards for agricultural 
higher education.  ICAR continues its financial support to SAUs for accreditation; to date, ICAR 
has accredited 43 SAUs.   
 
The face of Indian agriculture has changed.  Women producers must participate in and benefit from 
agricultural research, education, and extension. There is also growing private sector demand for 
skilled labor in all aspects of agriculture, particularly high-value agro-industry, food processing, and 
specialized knowledge-intensive areas such as water efficiency, food safety, and trade.  A 2014 
assessment of human resource requirements shows an annual deficit of 14,000 in satisfying the 
demand for degree holders in agricultural and allied sciences.   A 2010 National Academy of 
Agriculture Research Management study found a jobs deficit of 50% in agriculture and allied 
sciences relative to the anticipated demand in 2020.   SAUs must adapt to the rapidly changing 
agricultural sector and its increasing knowledge intensity, and prepare the high-quality human 
resources essential for any technology and innovation system to succeed.   



 
Yet the once-impressive SAUs established during the Green Revolution have become less effective 
and less relevant in stimulating transformative change in Indian agriculture. The research-education-
extension synergy — strong in earlier years — has waned substantially and academic inbreeding 
has stunted teaching curricula, eroded faculty quality and weakened research and extension 
outcomes.  As a result, the SAU system is not attracting high-quality students to equip the next 
generation of talent to lead India’s agricultural growth, principally in the private sector. 
ICAR has taken the lead in analyzing the challenges facing agricultural higher education in India.  
This has led to an ambitious reform agenda for SAUs, spelled out in the 2013 Bhubaneshwar 
Declaration, emphasizing: (a) transparent governance; (b) financial and academic autonomy; (c) 
adequate and consistent funding; (d) standards and accreditation; (e) public-private partnerships; (f) 
revamped teaching curricula and methodologies; and (g) international cooperation.   Several 
challenges confront SAUs, among these: 
 
• Poor governance: Vice-chancellors tend to be political appointees and often have little role 
in setting budget priorities or allocations.  Overall accountability is weak and not linked to desired 
academic outcomes. 
• High faculty vacancy rates and pervasive academic inbreeding: Some 56% of SAU faculty 
positions are vacant, with minimal recent recruitment, leading to heavy workloads, poor teaching 
performance and scarce time available for research or extension. Limited contacts with national or 
international centers of excellence and weak linkages with industry, farms and the private sector 
have led to academic stagnation, at a time when competitiveness requires more such interaction. 
There are few incentives to spur faculty productivity in teaching, research or extension. 
• Disconnect between agricultural education and employment: The private sector generates 
nearly one-half of agricultural employment, yet curricula remain focused on the shrinking 
opportunities in the public sector. Importantly, curricula lack a problem-solving orientation. SAUs 
must strengthen job-driven programs, including entrepreneurship-focused courses, to build avenues 
for off-farm work and facilitate technology transfer from lab-to-land.  
• Capital development and financial management:   Salaries comprise up to 90% of SAUs’ 
budgets, funding is almost entirely sourced from the public sector and has not kept pace with 
increasing student admissions.  In contrast, Michigan State University, a model for Indian SAUs, 
sources 10% of its annual budget from public funds. SAUs must begin to raise their own resources 
through fee-based/market-oriented programs, sales of proprietary seed/planting material, 
consultancies and capital development initiatives. 
• Meeting globalization: Greater infusion of frontier science subjects (e.g., biotechnology, 
nanotechnology, precision and climate-resilient agriculture, information and communication 
technology), good trade practices, ethics of intellectual property rights and genetically modified 
crops, and market intelligence have become critical to promote efficiency, awareness, equity, and 
competitiveness in agriculture as India strives to cement its role as a global player in agriculture. 
• Forging service market development: Staffing of Agricultural Technology Management 
Agencies (ATMAs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras-KVKs (Agriculture Science Centers) and other 
professional private and public agricultural service providers will require business and technical 
skills to meet the knowledge demanded by farmers, particularly women.  
 
The World Bank and ICAR have a long and fruitful collaboration, most recently through the 
National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP), National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) 
and sector work.  The current ICAR reform priorities require further refinement and focus, and 
ICAR has requested World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed project. 

The challenges faced by SAUs mirror those faced in general by higher education in India.  The 
needs of the agricultural sector resonate with other sectors, i.e., highly trained workforce and 
relevant cutting-edge research.  The Bank’s Agriculture and Education Global Practices are 
collaborating on the proposed project to ensure that the SAU reform process benefits from 
innovations in both sectors across India and internationally.  Through strategic priority interventions 
at the Central and State levels, the proposed project would have far-reaching and long-term impacts 
on agricultural higher education in India.  The project would also incorporate disbursement-linked 
Indicators (DLIs) to build time-bound financial incentives for SAUs and ICAR in pursuit of the 
proposed reform agenda.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project supports the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013-17 and addresses the 
three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion. These engagement areas 
foresee increased agricultural productivity and also support quality improvements of higher 
education to create a more skilled workforce that continuously improves the productivity of key 
sectors, including agriculture.   Further, by working with SAUs in low-income states, the proposed 
project supports the CPS strategy of improving their economic performance.  
 
The proposed project is a multi-Global Practice collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is 
expected to support activities and results directly related to cross-cutting strategic areas of climate 
change, jobs, gender and public-private partnerships.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to increase educational relevance and quality in selected State 
Agricultural Universities. 
 
Equity, especially gender and caste-based equity, is a cross-cutting theme of the proposed project 
and would be tracked through the key performance indicators.

Key Results (From PCN)
The following key performance indicators are proposed: 
 
1. Percentage change in SAU faculty scientific effectiveness as measured by h-index [quality]; 
2. Percentage change in level and source(s) of SAU revenue [quality]; 
3. Increased awareness and uptake of locally-relevant agricultural research [relevance];  
4. Increased student retention rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST [quality, relevance 
and equity]; and  
5. Increased satisfaction rates of students, farmers and agribusinesses with SAU curricula and 
service provision [quality and relevance].

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project addresses strategic reforms in agricultural higher education at the state level 
(targeting SAUs) and the central level (focused on ICAR).  Selected SAUs would pilot a range of 
innovations in education, research and extension under diverse settings.   In so doing, these SAUs 


will test options to create 21st century educational institutions to successfully meet the current and 
future challenges facing India’s agricultural sector. These institutions will attract a diverse cadre of 
high-quality students, train them with labor-market relevant skills, nurture research talent and 
ensure knowledge flows between lab and land. The second set of reforms will empower ICAR by 
strengthening its capacity to provide strategic support to SAUs nationwide.     
 
The project would likely consist of three components: 
 
Component 1 – Support to State Agricultural Universities – addresses the need to raise educational 
quality and relevance in SAUs and create knowledge and technology hubs for priority themes in 
support of agricultural transformation.  The component, which would absorb most of project 
finance, would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 1a – Investments toward 21st Century State Agricultural Universities – would 
target reform-ready SAUs and States (applying verifiable criteria) and support Institutional 
Development Plans (IDPs), developed through multi-stakeholder processes, that undertake key 
governance reforms, finance new and refurbished research and teaching facilities, curricula and 
faculty development, training for administrators, strengthening locally relevant research, student 
placement and technical assistance. Supported IDPs would also emphasize universities’ exploring of 
alternative income streams, such as: tuition; alumni contributions; competitively-selected research 
projects; patents; joint ventures; extension services; consultancy services; and special courses for 
mid-career professionals. These diverse activities would not only generate own financial resources 
for SAUs, but also link them to the national and global knowledge economy, thereby further 
enhancing their relevance.  By focusing on income-earning capacity, SAUs would also create 
openings for sustained private sector participation.  Suitable twinning arrangements with foreign 
universities would also be explored, as would innovative pilots for research dissemination and 
mechanisms for internal revenue generation.  
 
Sub-component 1b – Investments in Centers for Advanced Agricultural Science and Technology – 
would support SAUs in establishing interdisciplinary centers for teaching, research and extension on 
critical agriculture and rural development topics (e.g., agricultural adaptation to climate change; 
land and water use efficiency, scalable technology and mechanization, agro-industry, agro-
entrepreneurship).  Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform the selection of geographic 
locations and core themes under the sub-component.  The sub-component would finance research 
and teaching equipment, faculty and scientist development fellowships, scholarships, and costs 
associated with twinning arrangements with similar centers outside and within India. 
 
Component 2 – Investments in ICAR for Leadership in Agricultural Higher Education – would: (a)  
empower ICAR by financing its own internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness in coordinating, 
guiding and managing agricultural research and education nationwide; and (b) support ICAR in its 
interactions with SAUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that increase the 
quality and relevance of agricultural education.   The component would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2a – Investments in ICAR to support excellence in SAUs – would leverage ICAR’s 
comparative advantage in assessing systemic challenges ac ross all SAUs and incubating solutions.  
Among the interventions financed would be: (a) digital information systems for SAU data collection 
and analysis to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher education; (b) an improved curricula 
review process to tighten its relevance in today’s dynamic job market; (c) enhanced methods to 



consolidate and disseminate global best-practices (e.g., benchmarking) in agricultural higher 
education; and (d) institutionalization of stakeholder and advisory inputs to better inform research, 
education and extension across the SAU system.          
Subcomponent 2b – ICAR innovation grants to SAUs – would be open to all SAUs nationwide and  
support interventions that would include: (a) quality assurance (e.g., accreditation); (b) next-
generation management information and financial management systems to increase transparency 
and administrative efficiency; (c) campus student placement offices to facilitate stronger linkages 
between academics and future employment opportunities; (d) theme-based competitive grants to 
students, faculty and academic departments to promote inter-state and international collaboration, 
including matching funds from the private sector; and (e) needs-based equipment, training and 
technical assistance.  
 
Component 3 – Project Management and Learning – would support ICAR’s project management, 
primarily through its Education Division, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall 
project implementation.  The component would also support the formation of an external advisory 
board to guide ICAR throughout project implementation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 165.00 Total Bank Financing: 82.50
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 82.50
 International Development Association (IDA) 82.50
 T

























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC27800

Project Name Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s) Other rural development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), 

Rural markets (40%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153892
Borrower(s) PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Implementing Agency Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

29-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

30-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

30-Jun-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

15-Dec-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track I - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Background. China's success in reducing extreme poverty during the economic reform period 
(1978?2014) is widely recognized. Over the last three decades, China has lifted over 750 million 
people out of poverty, which represents 89 percent of global poverty reduction during that period. 
World Bank estimates show that the number of absolute poor (that is, those people consuming less 
than $1.25 per day in PPP terms) in China declined from 84 percent in 1981 to 6.3 percent in 2011. 
Based on different poverty lines, official government estimates confirm a similar sharp decline in 
poverty over these years, and the number of the people who lived on less than US$2 per day was 
approximately 367 million or 27.2 percent of the total population. Using China's rural poverty line 
of annual per capital net income below CNY 2,300 (2010 constant process and which is slightly 
above the 1.25US$/day in PPP terms), the number of poor people living in rural areas declined to 
70.2 million in 2014. This represents continued decline of rural poverty from 17.2 percent in 2010 
to 8.5 percent in 2013. 

 
Economic growth has been a key driver for poverty reduction in China. From 1981 to 2011, real 
GDP per capita grew at average annual rate of 9.1 percent. The relationship between annualized 
GDP growth and poverty reduction during this period suggests that poverty headcount index 
(measured by US$ 1.25 per capita PPP line) fell annually by 0.99 percentage points for each 
percentage point increase of the GDP per capita. Improvements in access to public services, such as 
education and health, has been another driver of poverty reduction. All levels of education, 
employment in non-agricultural activities, and migration have been identified as critical forces 
driving poverty reduction. 
 
Geographically, the remaining pockets of poverty, including chronic poverty, are largely 
concentrated in rural areas, especially in mountainous and remote areas in western provinces of 
China with ethnic minorities. These areas are usually characterized by challenging natural 
environment with water scarcity, low soil fertility and poor endowment with natural resources. The 
Government has classified 14 zones (crossing provincial boundaries) as the focus for its poverty 
alleviation efforts. The 14 zones contain 680 nationally designated poverty counties which benefit 
from special financial support under the government??s rural poverty alleviation programs. Majority 
of these poverty counties are concentrated in mountainous areas of central and western China and 
among ethnic minority and other disadvantaged groups, including people with disabilities and 
elderly.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Guangxi ranks the fifth province in the nation in terms of the absolute poor numbers.  Out of its 
total population of 52.4 million in 2013 there were 6.3 million poor people Guangxi which gives 
poverty incidence rate of 14.9 percent.  Majority of these poor live in rural areas and over 80 
percent of the poor people are from ethnic minority groups. Some 17.1 million people belong to 
various ethnic minority groups, making it a largest ethnic minority population in China. The 
province has 28 national level designated poverty counties and it is a recipient of a significant 
portion of national poverty reduction funds from the central government. In 2013, the net income 
per capita in these counties remained 59.6 percent of the national average.  The main causes of the 
poverty are low levels of human capital (poor education attainment levels and lack of skills needed 
to participate in modern economy) in particular in mountainous rural areas; poor natural resources 
base and limited infrastructure (roads, water and electricity). 
 
China has seen a rapid growth in the number of farmer cooperatives since the Law on Specialized 
Farmer Cooperatives promulgated in 2006. In March 2015 there were about 1.3 million specialized 
cooperatives in China. In some of the proposed project counties, formally registered cooperatives 
were almost non-existent before 2009. Their numbers are now growing rapidly and cooperatives are 
allowing both enhanced presence of the agribusiness sector and small entrepreneur initiatives. 
However, while most cooperatives are now recognized as economic entities, they are often small-
scale and lack management skills. The project is expected to benefit from the national legal 
framework for farmer cooperatives, which is expected to be updated in 2015.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), approved in 2012.  
The project would support the CPS's strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 


enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China's Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed PDO is to increase income opportunities for rural households in selected poverty 
counties of Guangxi.

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by: (a) the number of project beneficiaries joining 
a new organizational arrangement decomposed by poverty levels and gender; and (b) the number of 
project supported cooperatives making profit.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Area: The proposed project areas are located in the rural areas of the Dian Gui Mountain 
Degraded Area. Within this area 10project counties under the two cities of Baise and Hechi are 
proposed. These include: Tiandong, Tianlin, Leye, Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, and Pingguo 
County, and Yizhou City. All of the selected counties/city are characterized by a particular high 
level of poverty combined with poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water management, 
limited availability of farm land,low levels of technology and a high percentage of ethnic minorities. 
 
Proposed Project Components: The proposed project would consist of the following four 
components with a preliminary cost estimate of US$182 million including a Bank loan of US$100 
million and counterpart funding of about US$82 million equivalent implemented over five years: 
 
a) Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. The component aims to address 
market failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key 
industries with a particular focus on linking poor rural households with higher value markets. The 
component would finance the Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), which would provide grant 
financing to newly or existing cooperatives. It would also aim to establish Competitive Grant Fund 
for Enterprises which would provide matching grants to finance enterprise investments in order to 
demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor farmers/households.  
 
b) Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services. The component would support 
the establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value 
chain/key industry development under the Component 1. It would provide financing for rural 
infrastructure such as rural roads, small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure, small water 
storage facilities, land levelling, IT infrastructure, public market facilities, etc. The component 
would also support public services, such as product certification, developing and registration of 
local/regional brands, branding and protection of ethnic minority product features, market and 
production risk management as well as strategic product marketing and promotion.  
 
c) Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. The component would improve and 
facilitate investments in poor areas by existing and new entrepreneurs and business entities such as 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives through establishing 



business incubation centers and risk management instruments.  
 
d) Component 4: Project Management and M&E. The component would strengthen and 
develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices. It 
would aim to establish a monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 182.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 82.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
 Total 182.00

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Contact: Licheng Yao (Mr.)
Title: Director, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 86-10-68552064
Email: yaolicheng@sina.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center






























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA15898

Project Name Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Myanmar
Sector(s) Irrigation and drainage (40%), Agricultural extension and research 

(30%), Crops (30%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development 

(20%), Climate change (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147629
Borrower(s) Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 22-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

24-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

23-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Myanmar is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia with a land area of about 654,000 
square km. It is located between Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, and Thailand, with more than 
2,800 miles of coastline. It is also one of the poorest countries in East Asia, with an estimated 
poverty headcount between 26 and 37 percent, depending on the methodology used, among its 
population of around 52 million. The new government which took in office in March 2011 has 
introduced sweeping political and economic reforms. Myanmar is now embarking on a triple 
transition: from an authoritarian military system to democratic governance; from a centrally 
directed economy to a market-based economy; and from 60 years of conflict to peace in the border 
areas. From a strategic point of view, agriculture is of central importance for achieving the twin 
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The sector accounts 
for about 36 percent of the GDP, which is largest share of GDP among ASEAN members. Rice 
production constitutes about 30 percent of agricultural GDP and covers 70 percent of cultivated 
land. The sector generates about 53 percent of total employment and is source of livelihoods for 
about 70 percent of population who live in rural areas. The poverty headcount, which ranges from 
26 to 37 percent depending on methodologies, is highest in upland areas, but in absolute terms most 

rural poor live in the Dry Zone (34 percent), followed by the Delta region (25 percent), according to 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic carried out by the World Bank Group in 2014. In the lowland 
areas of the Delta and the Dry Zones where population densities are highest, poverty is associated 
with landlessness or limited farmland holdings. The rural poor in these areas depend primarily on 
farm income generation and on-farm seasonal and other informal labor opportunities. Among the 
rural households who own land persistent poverty stems from a combination of low productivity of 
farming systems and high vulnerability of these systems to adverse weather events, especially 
drought in areas featuring limited or unreliable access to irrigation services. The government places 
high priority on the development of the agriculture sector and sees it as the basis for food security, 
poverty reduction, job creation, and export promotion.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Myanmar has a favorable agricultural potential. It has abundant water resources -- 20,870 m3 per 
person compared to the Asia-wide average of 3,948 m3 per person -- and relatively abundant 
agricultural land, which translates into the highest agricultural land per worker in the East Asia and 
Pacific (EAP) region of about 1.1 ha/worker, compared to 0.8 ha/worker in Thailand and Cambodia 
and less than half of Myanmar figure in Vietnam and Indonesia). According to the Myanmar 
Census of Agriculture (2010), the average farm area is 2.6 hectares, which is the second largest in 
EAP after Thailand (3.1 ha) (and about five times of that prevailing in Vietnam’s Mekong Delta 
region). Finally, it has diverse agro-ecological conditions which would allow it to produce a wide 
range of temperate, sub-tropical and tropical crops. The current agricultural productivity is 
constrained by under-supply of public services (extension, basic education), low levels of 
technology adaption and farm mechanization, insecure irrigation water supply, limited access to 
affordable credit suitable for agricultural production cycles, and rising labor costs that have trapped 
farmers in poverty even within double cropping systems in irrigated areas. There is a lack of an 
overarching and clear agricultural sector strategy in Myanmar to guide public sector and donor 
spending programs. The effectiveness of current public spending programs is also affected by the 
nature of agricultural services provided to smallholders. Too often, public goods and services 
provided to farmers, such as irrigation and extension, are supply driven with little consideration of 
farmer interests.  For example, farmers’ crop choices could be sometimes restricted by local 
authorities at regional and district level who make decisions on water allocations. The limited 
extension services are often focused on the promotion a single crop rather than helping farmers to 
overcome problems they are facing in their farming systems, such as soil infertility and fertilizer 
use, pest management, increasing labor cost, etc. At the same time, farmers’ incentives to invest in 
better water, soil and crop management technologies may be constrained by their lack of security on 
water and land use rights, as well as issues related to the underdeveloped marketing systems and 
high volatility of agricultural prices. Many irrigation schemes function below their potential 
because of inappropriate operation of reservoirs and a lack of responsive irrigation system 
management.  For example, while about 2 million hectares are equipped with irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure, a second crop is being grown on only about 28 percent of this area 
(2011/12). This may reflect both technical deficiencies as well as uncertainties farmers are facing in 
marketing their crops. While primary irrigation structures (dams, canals) seem in general in good 
shape there are problems in getting water to farmer fields. With improved management and a 
change in cropping patterns, including to non-rice crops, it is possible to expand the cropping areas 
and cropping intensity. This may necessitate minor structural alterations to the irrigation schemes to 
improve drainage and, for some fields, to which improves in-field drainage through land leveling. 
However, improving irrigation management is not sufficient to increase farm incomes. This is 

because farmers often do not possess the necessary agronomic technologies and skills to take 
advantage of an improved access to irrigation. The current public extension system is under-
resourced and extension personnel rarely visit farmers to provide advice on the correct fertilizers 
rates to use improved technologies such as improved seeds. There is also some reluctance by 
farmers to change from growing rice to more water efficient crops, such as legumes and sesame. 
This may be partly caused by the rigidity of irrigation systems which does not offer enough 
flexibility in on-field water delivery and thus result in a lack of control over water levels on 
individual farm plots. The general under-capitalization of smallholder farming systems in Myanmar 
caused by decades of public under-investment and policy inefficiency fuels the risk of a vicious 
cycle of declining terms of trade. The development of smallholder agriculture in Myanmar thus 
requires significant public investments in institutional development, technology generation and 
dissemination, rural infrastructure, and human capital for years to come.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) has made significant investments in irrigation infrastructure bet 
ween the 1980s and 2000s which can serve as platform for development of smallholder farming 
systems. Many of these schemes host large numbers of smallholders who have the potential to 
respond to public investments under a supportive environment. These schemes would offer good 
opportunities for landscape-based rural development approaches that address agricultural, natural 
resource management, and social development goals.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the selected 
existing irrigation sites in Bago East, Nay Pyi Taw, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions.

III. Project Description
Component Name
1. Irrigation and Drainage Management
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance more responsive and reliable provision of irrigation and drainage 
services in the project areas to enable an increase in irrigation area coverage, a resulting better farm 
productivity and better distribution of benefits between upstream and downstream users. It will 
initiate institutional change required for the provision of farmer-responsive irrigation services and 
finance the improvement and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure covering about 
35,000 ha within up to 8 selected schemes in the project regions and will pilot 2-3 small land 
improvement sites in these schemes. The component would support also inclusive land 
administration activities in the selected project irrigation sites.

Component Name
2. Farm Advisory and Technical Services
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance MOAI technology development and farm advisory services at 
target townships which host selected irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase 
farm productivity. It will support quality seed production, soil nutrition management, integrated pest 
management, agricultural extension services, and farm mechanization.

Component Name
3. Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)


This component seeks to support the project coordination, technical support, communication 
activities, monitoring, and evaluation.

Component Name
4. Contingent Emergency Response
Comments (optional)
This component allows a rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components to provide 
emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an eligible crisis or emergency.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 100.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 100.00

V. Implementation
The MOAI will be the implementing agency of the project. The Project will be governed at the 
Union level by the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and at the township level by the 
Township Agricultural Coordination Committees (ACC). The project will be managed by the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be integrated within the existing structures of 
Department of Irrigation (ID). The PMU will be located in Nay Pyi Taw in MOAI headquarters. 
PMU would be responsible for day-to-day management and coordination of the project. It will be 
responsible for the project financial management and procurement functions.  It will ensure that 
annual work plans are prepared, budgeted and implemented in a timely manner, and that 
management of project funds is in line with the provisions of the project’s eligibility guidelines. The 
PMU will be responsible for management of the Designated Accounts; disbursement of project 
funds and replenishment of the project bank accounts and preparing and submitting withdrawal 
applications; and consolidation of annual work plans, budget planning, arrange for project annual 
audit, project reporting and M&E.  
 
Implementation of the project activities will be carried out by five technical departments 
(Department of Irrigation/ID, Department of Agriculture/DOA, Department of Agricultural 
Research/DAR, Agricultural Mechanization Department/AMD, and Settlements and Land Records 
Department/SLRD) through their central, regional, district and township level structures. ID will be 
the lead agency for the implementation of the Component 1, with technical inputs from SLRD and 
AMD, and DOA would be the lead agency for Component 2, with technical inputs from DAR and 
AMD. The implementation of filed activities will be done by respective township level staff with the 
supervision and technical backstopping from the team of central/regional/district level Subject 
Matter Specialists (SMS). The implementing departments are responsible for the initiation of the 
procurement activities as per work plan, provision of technical specifications and TORs to PMU and 
serve as members of the evaluation committee; accounting for funds on their respective Operating 
Accounts and at district level accounts and provision of financial information to PMU for the 
compilation of the financial documents; and preparation of the annual work plans of their respective 
sub-components and activities, and provision of information and indicators for the PMU for the 


consolidated project reporting. The ACCs are township level structural coordination bodies, which 
are responsible for the coordination of crop planning and extension activities, and makes irrigation 
water allocation and distribution decisions. The main function of the ACC under the project would 
be to provide a platform for joint (MOAI-farmer) planning and monitoring of project activities in 
targeted irrigation schemes. Implementation of the project activities at the township level will be 
done by the Project Implementation Committees, which is a sub-committee under ACC, and it 
includes township level staff of the implementing MOAI departments.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

Comments (optional)

VII. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Contact: U Maung Maung Win
Title: DG, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 9567410450
Email: maungmaungwin58@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Contact: U Khin Zaw
Title: Deputy Minister
Tel: 9567413778
Email: deputyminister.irrigation@gmail.com




























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA22127

Project Name MA-Large Scale Irrigation Modernization Project (P150930)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Morocco
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (3%), Irrigation and drainage 

(80%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (1 
7%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Water resource 
management (33%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P150930
Borrower(s) Kingdom of Morocco
Implementing Agency DIAEA
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 25-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

27-May-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

Appraisal was carried out from March 17 to 25.

I. Project Context
Country Context
Morocco has been on a steady path of growth in the past decades, which has proved relatively 
resilient in the face of the recent global economic slowdown. Growth averaged 4.8 percent over 
2001-12 compared to 2.8 percent in the 1990s, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita 
doubled from 2001 to 2012 reaching US$2,951, unemployment declined from 13.6 percent in 2000 
to 9 percent in 2012, and absolute poverty decreased from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 8.8 percent in 
2008. 
 
The Arab Spring that has swept the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region in early 2011 
spurred a peaceful political transformation in Morocco. Morocco had engaged on a wide-ranging 
reform program, with the adoption of a new constitution through a popular referendum on July 1, 
2011. The new constitution lays the foundation for extended regionalization as a democratic and 
decentralized system of governance. It also contributes to improving the status of women through 
the adoption of the principle of gender equality and through provisions on increasing the 

participation of women in decision-making bodies. In November 2011, parliamentary elections 
followed the promulgation of the constitution, leading to the formation of a four-party coalition 
government that has embraced the constitution's principles and called for more social solidarity and 
inclusion.  
 
Inequality, poverty, and vulnerability remain important challenges in Morocco. A quarter of the 
population is still economically vulnerable (near-poverty). There are persistent disparities as 70 
percent of poverty is still rural, and most development indicators in rural areas lag behind urban 
areas, largely as a result of difficult geography, deteriorating infrastructure, poor access to basic 
services, and limited capital investments to improve labor value added and hence returns to self-
employment and contract labor. Ten percent of Morocco’s 13.4 million rural residents lived below 
the poverty line in 2011. Rural poverty exacerbates gender disparity with relatively higher illiteracy 
and primary school dropout rates for rural women, and higher infant and maternal mortality. 
 
Morocco has engaged in a dynamic process towards strengthening economic opportunities and 
social inclusion. Several high profile development programs (e.g. the second phase of the National 
Human Development Initiative, INDH) and new sectoral strategies in the areas of education, 
employment, and youth have been initiated. Nonetheless, additional efforts are needed to support 
the country-led reforms. The movements associated with the political transition and constitutional 
changes generate pressure on the Moroccan State for credible and faster reforms, notably in the 
areas of job creation and improvement of the quality of public services delivered.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is central to Morocco’s economy, as evidenced by the strong correlation among GDP 
and agriculture GDP. Over the last agricultural campaign, thanks to favorable weather, the sector 
represented 15.6 percent of GDP, contributing the most to the country’s overall growth. The 20 
percent increase in agricultural production allowed Morocco’s GDP to jump from 2.7 percent in 
2012 to 4.4 percent in 2013. The agricultural sector represents a critical element in the country’s 
demographic and socio-economic situation, generating 40 percent of the jobs nationwide, mostly in 
rural areas where the majority of the poor live. The sector is largely composed of small farmers 
mostly dedicated to low-value agriculture, but also counts a limited group of dynamic and well 
performing large farmers with state-of-the-art technologies and well integrated into the national and 
international markets. The sector exhibits great gender disparities. Women’s work is typically 
unpaid (in 2003-04, 58 percent of cases; in 2008, 91 percent), or it is seasonal and unstable when 
remunerated (59 percent of cases in 2003-04; 84 percent in 2008). 
 
Irrigation increases both the level and stability of incomes in rural areas. Despite representing only 
16 percent of the cultivated land, irrigated agriculture contributes to about half of the agriculture 
GDP, 75 percent of agricultural exports, and 15 percent of overall merchandise exports. The 
country has 1.46 million ha of permanently irrigated land, 682,600 ha of which are part of nine 
Large Scale Irrigation (LSI) perimeters operated by nine public agricultural development agencies 
(ORMVA). ORMVAs are autonomous agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Maritime Fisheries (MAPM), with the responsibility of constructing new irrigation 
schemes, rehabilitating and modernizing existing ones, ensuring Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) of irrigation and drainage facilities, and providing extension services to farmers. The 
remaining area is shared between small and medium scale traditional irrigation schemes managed 
by Water Users Associations (WUA, 334,000 ha) and private irrigation (441,000 ha). Morocco is 



among the first countries with experience in irrigation Public-Private Partnership (PPP). In 2004, it 
launched the first successful irrigation PPP in the world, in the citrus production perimeter of 
Guerdane. Other PPP are at various stages of preparation (Azemmour Bir Jdid, Dar Khrofa, 
Chtouka). 
 
The ability of irrigated agriculture to continue to drive shared prosperity in Morocco is threatened 
by increasing water scarcity. Reduced rainfall, increased rainfall variability, reduced run off, 
groundwater depletion, and degradation of water resources have reached alarming levels. Annual 
renewable water resources total 22 billion m3, corresponding to 730 m3/inhabitant, which is below 
the United Nations’ threshold for indicating water stress (1,000 m3/inhabitant). The water deficit is 
estimated at around 2 billion m3. Climate change is expected to worsen this situation. Impacts of 
climate change are already visible in Morocco: the proportion of dry years increased by four times 
and surface water availability decreased by 35 percent between the period 1947-1976 and 
1977-2006. Water scarcity impacts irrigated agriculture in different ways: 
• In private irrigation, which largely relies on groundwater, reduced and more variable 
rainfall translates into groundwater overexploitation. The majority of the wells are neither 
registered nor monitored, and improvement in water pumping technologies and butane subsidy 
facilitate overextraction. Decreasing groundwater levels have a specific equity dimension, 
impacting at first smallholders with less capacity for drilling and pumping deeper.  
• In LSI perimeters, which rely on surface water, water scarcity translates into reduced 
volumes allocated to farmers and limits summer crops production. While agriculture remains the 
primary user of surface water, accounting for about 85 percent of the withdrawals, severe 
restrictions in irrigation have been common in the last 15 years. LSI perimeters in the Oum er Rbia 
river basin received, on average, only 60 percent of the water volumes they were designed for. 
These volumes were consistently lower than the water allocation stated in the Regional Masterplans 
for Integrated Water Resources Management (PDAIRE). Wherever possible, farmers in LSI 
perimeters have been making up for this shortfall by complementing water allocated by the 
ORMVAs with groundwater, bearing the extra pumping costs and further aggravating groundwater 
depletion.  
Farmers in LSI perimeters face structural constraints that limit the productive use of the scarce 
water resource. These include among others: collective water management, rigid water distribution 
rules, frequent shut-downs, unequal access to water, and land tenure issues. All of these constraints 
lock farmers in LSI perimeters into a low-risk and low return equilibrium in which they carry out 
low input, extensive farming focused on low value crops, and avoid more capital intensive 
strategies which allow for high value products and higher returns but bear higher risks in case of 
water deficiencies. 
 
LSI perimeters suffer from aging irrigation networks and poor Operation and Maintenance (O&M). 
The ORMVAs have limited budget to improve this situation. Recovery rates in Morocco are 
amongst the best in MENA, varying between 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 percent 
(2010). In some LSI perimeters, water tariffs are insufficient to cover the operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs, and even more so the amortization costs, translating into the need for 
subsidies from the Government. Tariffs in LSI perimeters vary between 0.27 and 0.77DH/m3 
depending on the perimeters and the associated energy bill, compared to 1.30 to 1.80DH/m3 in 
perimeters managed through PPP. While there was an increase in O&M budget since 2009 (average 
2001-08: Tadla DH14.6 M, Doukkala: DH18.6 M; average 2009-13: Tadla DH31.1 M, Doukkala 
DH36.8 M), the allocation remains insufficient to meet the needs. Cost recovery rates in Morocco 
are amongst the highest in MENA, varying between, 68 and 100 percent, with an average of 76 

 percent. While the recovery of water bills should be improved in the LSI perimeters were 
the most important arrears are generated, this increase would not be sufficient to meet the financial 
needs of the ORMVAs. Consequently, a plan to increase water tariffs in LSI perimeters was laid out 
in 2011, but it sparked protests by farmers, which led the Government of Morocco (GoM) to 
postpone the measure. A political economy analysis of the irrigation sector reform, revealed that 
there is typically no capacity to pay problem, and that the main reason for farmers’ opposition was 
the lack of direct improvements in service quality associated with tariff increase. 
 
The GoM is putting in place incentives, investments, and institutional reforms to ensure greater 
returns at the farm and overall economy levels in light of increasingly restricted water resource. 
This is done through two synergic strategies: 
• The Morocco Green Plan (PMV) aims to double the agriculture sector’s value-added and 
create 1.5 million jobs by 2020, thus transforming the sector into a stable source of growth, 
competitiveness, and broad-based economic development. In addition to its transversal institutional 
and policy reforms, the PMV comprises two Pillars reflecting the dualistic nature of Moroccan 
agriculture: Pillar I targets commercial farmers and their integration into the national and 
international markets, while Pillar II targets small farmers mainly in marginal areas. Under both 
pillars, technology and organizational support is provided to implement an agri-food chain 
approach linking farmers to market. The Agricultural Development Fund (FDA), the GoM’s 
principal agricultural subsidy instrument, has been reformed and support measures aligned with the 
strategic directions of the PMV. Since PMV’s launch in 2008, production has increased by 45 
percent, agricultural exports have risen by 18 percent, and 77,000 permanent jobs have been 
created. 
• The National Plan for Saving Water in Irrigation (PNEEI) promotes more productive water 
use by introducing efficient irrigation technologies (mainly drip irrigation) on 555,000 ha of the 
country’s irrigated land by 2020, of which 335,000 ha in private farms and 220,000 ha in LSI 
perimeters. This process is supported though the FDA, with up to 100 percent subsidy for the 
adoption of drip and microsprinkler irrigation, and up to 70 percent subsidy for sprinkler irrigation. 
Since PNEEI’s launch in 2008, the adoption of drip irrigation has been proceeding at a fast pace in 
privately developed irrigation areas, with over 200,000 ha completed (60 percent of the 2020 
target). In LSI perimeters, conversion is ongoing on 57,000 ha only, due to the need for prior 
investments in the irrigation networks. The figure is expected to increase steadily in the coming 
future, considering that pre-feasibility studies in LSI perimeters have been completed for 100,000 
ha. While impacts remain to be observed, field experiments in Tadla demonstrated that agricultural 
water productivity (defined as value of produce per unit of water used) could be doubled by 
switching from the traditional surface irrigation to improved water management under drip 
irrigation. 
 
The Large Scale Irrigation Modernization project is fully aligned with the comprehensive reform 
process of Morocco. The project supports the ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala and Gharb in 
providing farmers located in the LSI perimeters with an improved water service. This means 
individual access (rather than collective), on-demand (rather than on rotation), reliable (with faster 
re-establishment of the service in case of shut-downs), and equitable (in terms of flow and pressure 
across the irrigation network). Targeted farmers will be freed up of some structural constraints and 
have the opportunity to improve their farming choices, adopting improved irrigation technologies 
(mainly drip irrigation), which are more efficient in the use of the scarce water resource and better 
suited for high-value crops.


II. Proposed Development Objectives
The project development objectives are: (i) for targeted ORMVAs, to provide an improved water 
service to farmers, and (ii) for targeted farmers, to have better access to improved irrigation 
technologies.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improving the irrigation network infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will construct pressurized irrigation networks to replace existing gravity networks and 
renovate existing pressurized irrigation networks. Under adequate management, the networks’ 
design will allow providing farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical 
requirements of improved irrigation technologies. Activities include: (i) studies; (ii) technical 
assistance to monitor construction works; (iii) upgrading irrigation canals and constructing 
reservoirs; (iv) constructing feeder pipes and rehabilitating pumping stations; (v) constructing 
filtration stations; (vi) constructing distribution piped networks, or rehabilitating and extending 
existing distribution piped networks; and (vii) installing outlets and associated devices.

Component Name
Component 2: Supporting farmers’ access to improved irrigation technologies
Comments (optional)
Component 2 will strengthen farmers’ knowledge of and access to improved irrigation technologies, 
to allow them taking advantage of the improved water service provided by the ORMVAs. Farmers 
will become familiar with the advantages of the improved irrigation technologies, and will have 
easier access to financing opportunities to adopt them. Once the improved irrigation technologies is 
in place, farmers will receive irrigation advisory services, and their capacity to access, use, and 
maintain the irrigation systems will be strengthened. i Farmers will also develop better knowledge 
of their groundwater, where appropriate.

Component Name
Component 3: Supporting implementing agencies’ management of the irrigation network, and 
implementation of the project
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will strengthen the institutional capacity of the ORMVAs in operating and 
maintaining the irrigation networks, to ensure that new and improved networks are managed so to 
provide farmers with an improved water service, in line with the technical requirements of improved 
irrigation technologies. Component 3 will also support implementing the project. Component 3 
activities will include: (i) technical assistance to improve O&M of the irrigation network; (ii) 
training, technical assistance, computer equipment, and associated tools for project management; 
and (iii) implementation of the EMP; (iv) provision of equipment and infrastructure rehabilitation 
for DIAEA and ORMVAs.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00


International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
Total 150.00

V. Implementation
The project will have five implementation entities. The ORMVAs of Tadla, Haouz, Doukkala, and 
Gharb will implement most of the activities. The Department of Irrigation and Rural Infrastructure 
(DIAEA) of the MAPM will implement one activity under Component 3 and will be responsible for 
overall project coordination, management, and reporting. 
 
The DIAEA and the ORMVAs are both experienced in managing World Bank-funded projects, the 
Oum er Rbia basin irrigated agriculture modernization project (PROMER, 2010-2016) being the 
most recent. Each ORMVA targeted by the project manages a LSI perimeter covering about 100,000 
ha. They have good technical and managerial capacity to implement large irrigation development 
and modernization projects. Training and technical assistance will be provided as needed.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC974

Project Name Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor 
Areas Project (P133326)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and 
research (10%)

Theme(s) Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural 
policies and institutions (20%)

Lending Instrument Specific Investment Loan
Project ID P133326
Borrower(s) International Department, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency State Council's Leading Group for Poverty Reduction(LGPR), Foreign 

Capital Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-May-2013

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

28-May-2013

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

20-Feb-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Aug-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Chinese Government has always made poverty reduction an important goal and task of national 
development and China’s success in reducing poverty has been remarkable, an achievement that is 
acknowledged worldwide.  In the mid-1980s, the Government started the development-oriented 
poverty reduction programs in rural areas. Subsequently, the Government formulated and 
implemented the Seven-year Priority Poverty Reduction Program (1994-2000) and the Outline for 
Poverty Reduction and Development of China’s Rural Areas (2001-2010). After three decades of 
successful poverty alleviation and strong economic growth that has lifted some 600 million people 
out of poverty, the rate of poverty reduction, however, is beginning to show signs of becoming less 

responsive to broad-based growth. In addition, with increasing rural-urban disparities and diverging 
living standards, the Government recognized that the number of remaining rural poor was likely to 
be underestimated and adjustments to the previous poverty reduction policy were needed to better 
understand the patters of the remaining rural poverty and to integrate traditional rural poverty 
reduction with rural-urban transformation and urbanization policies.  
 
Consequently, in 2011, the Government revised the rural poverty line from CNY1,196 (2009) to 
CNY2,300 (US$361) which increased the number of rural poor from 27 million in 2010 to 128 
million in 2011. In addition, the State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and 
Development released the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural 
Areas (2011-2020) to provide a new strategic direction for addressing rural poverty. The strategy 
complements the traditional geographical targeting of designated poverty counties with the concept 
of adjacent destitute mountain areas of which 14 are prioritized for comprehensive regional 
development investments. The new strategy aims to eliminate hunger and elementary needs by 
2020, achieve a growth rate in rural per-capita income in poor areas that is above the national 
average, and promote the convergence of human development indicators and public services 
coverage across rural and urban areas. To narrow the rural-urban gap, the strategy lays out a broad 
approach that includes rural industrialization based on comparative advantage, infrastructure 
development, relocation and village consolidation, rural-urban integration, comprehensive public 
service provision and expansion of household-based social protection programs, such as the 
minimum living allowance (dibao), rural pension, and healthcare, and education, family planning, 
and environmental management.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The project is proposed to be implemented in Gansu, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces.  The three 
provinces face the common challenge of persistent rural poverty in remote rural areas.  Many of the 
project areas are traditional semi-subsistence areas where the poverty rate ranges between 30 to 50 
percent.  Agriculture remains an important source of local employment and income but geographic 
and climatic conditions, labor migration, underinvestment, and underdeveloped infrastructure pose 
challenges to future agricultural development.  In all three provinces, a gradual restructuring of the 
agricultural sector is needed to allow productivity and farm income to increase and to overcome 
constraints to agriculture modernization.  
 
Gansu Province.  Project counties are situated in the Liupan Mountains of Gansu in northwestern 
China.  Project areas have comparative advantages in horticulture, and several counties have 
successfully developed advanced production and marketing bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal 
herbs, and potato.  Still, rural poverty is high, often above 40 percent.  Poverty appears not so much 
rooted in poor production potential but more in the dominance of enterprises in the horticulture 
sector which appear to capture a considerable share of revenue in the value-chain while relatively 
little value is reaching the household or farm level.  One of the challenges in Gansu under this 
project is to strengthen the institutional environment for smallholders through the promotion of 
effective farmer cooperative arrangements that allow farmers to participate effectively in the 
modernization of the sector and to benefit from the high-value agricultural production chains. 
 
Sichuan Province.  Project areas are located in the Wumeng and Wuliang Mountains of southern 
Sichuan.  They are characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and very limited flat 
or terraced land for farming.  Per capita farmland is often less than half a mu or about 0.03 hectares.  
Altitudes within one county range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and 


agro-climatic conditions vary widely.  Alpine meadows and shrublands are generally used of 
livestock grazing, often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At 
lower elevations, steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. 
 
Local communities belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority.  Yi language is used widely while 
only few people speak Mandarin Chinese in rural areas. Due to the remoteness of these areas, the 
unique cultural background of the population, as well as low education levels, communities are not 
well integrated into the mainstream society and labor mobility is limited as compared to other areas. 
Development opportunities are limited as well; and investments in public service expansion appear 
to be prohibitively expensive in many remote locations.   The development challenge in Sichuan is 
to identify and focus on those project areas with long-term development potential and to promote 
agricultural production systems that can generate income and are environmentally sustainable. 
Opportunities exist for producing and primary processing of higher value and niche-market 
products, such as walnuts, medicinal herbs, and fruits, and for restructuring the high altitude 
livestock sector to become environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
Guizhou Province.  Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. Out of Guizhou’s total 
population of 40 million, 11.5 million live below the national poverty line. About 80 percent of the 
province belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains in which 
sixty-five poor counties and 85 percent of Guizhou’s poor are located.  These areas are 
characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil 
erosion and management problems.  The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability 
of productive farmland, combined with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, represent 
significant challenges to agricultural development.  Recent improvements in transportation 
infrastructure, both highways and village access roads, however, are providing potential 
opportunities to reach large urban markets in Chongqing and Guiyang.  These remain un-tapped to 
date because of the limited investment into the agricultural sector itself. For the future, modern 
agricultural production systems that build on: (a) more sustainable land use; (b) improvements of 
the organizational level of farmers, and (c) carefully designed land consolidation programs offer 
promising ways to overcome technology constraints, attract investment, and link agricultural value 
chains to urban markets.

Relationship to CAS
The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 
enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the Project Development Objective would be measured through the following 
key performance indicators, namely the:  
 
a)       The generation of incremental net value of agricultural production through project 
investments;  
b) The fair and equitable distribution of the net production value among the various  
stakeholders in the value chain; 
c)  Additional private sector investment leveraged through project investments; and  
d) Viability and sustainability of the project models and potential for up-scaling.  
 
Additional component-specific performance indicators as well as sector core indicators will be 
formulated and included into the results framework during project preparation

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and 
mountain areas.  The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income 
generation that are based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain 
development, institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor 
farmer households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and 
capacity building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments.   
 
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the 
following components and activities: 
 
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development.  The objective of this component would be to 
develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar 
industries in each project county.  This would be achieved through the restructuring and 
modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each 
pillar industry.  The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more 
viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household 
groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in 
the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.  The component would also support the 
establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer 
household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and 
market-based approach. 
 
Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support.  The objective of this component would be 
to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate restructuring of 
the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1.  The component would support investments in: (a) 
production road infrastructure; (b) irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc. (c) communications and 
information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and equipment; and (d) public market 
facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and complement farmer 
and private investments.  In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting 
public services, such as food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, 
marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer. 
 
Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support.  The objective of this 
component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and 


cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under omponent 1.  Specific 
investments would include:  (a) a conditional grant program to poor households and households 
groups to encourage the self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of 
agricultural and other inputs to allow them to participate in new production arrangements; (b) 
training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for community-based 
economic groups in ethnic minority areas; (c) training for government officials on the roles of 
government and private sector and on how to built public-private partnership arrangements; in 
addition, training on appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas; (d) technical 
assistance to value-chain operators; (e) policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good 
governance, and fair benefit-sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and (f) marketing 
studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and agricultural sector 
development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector 
support in rural areas.  
 
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  The component would 
establish the project management and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, 
transportation and technical assistance services. It would support the coordination between 
implementation agencies at all levels and with other government programs and institutions and the 
capture of implementation lessons from value chain development.  It would also include support to 
establishing and operatingthe project’s progress and impact M&E system.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  300.00 Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Total Cofinancing:  Financing Gap:  0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 150.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 300.00




















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC11855

Project Name Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II 
(P149553)

Region SOUTH ASIA
Country Bangladesh
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), 

Crops (20%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), 

Rural markets (25%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P149553
Borrower(s) Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

04-Sep-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

09-Sep-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

05-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

26-Feb-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the last 20 years, Bangladesh 
aims to become a middle income country by 2021; to achieve this will require among other that the 
GoB overcomes considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic growth. 
The country’s GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent between 2000 and 2010, accompanied by a decline 
in the national poverty headcount rate from 48.9 percent to 31.5 percent over the same period, 
effectively lifting some 16 million people out of poverty. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million 
inhabitants, has also made noteworthy gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most 
of the MDGs.  
Bangladesh remains a predominantly agricultural country and growth and development 
achievements in rural areas must be brought on par with those in urban areas. Agriculture occupies 


some three-quarters of the scarce land space of the country and supports the livelihoods of the 
majority of the population. While overall poverty has significantly declined over the 2000 to 2010 
period, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still 35.2 percent) has not declined as fast as in urban 
settings; moreover, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three 
times higher than in urban areas. The contribution of agriculture to the country’s economic output 
has declined over the past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries still combine for almost 
one-fifth of GDP. Moreover, with some 70 percent of the population living in rural areas and over 
43 percent of the country's total labor force engaged in agriculture, achieving further economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction will require 
policies and investments conducive of lasting transformational changes in rural areas – including 
through technological innovations in agriculture.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
To eliminate the country’s extreme poverty by the year 2030 and to promote shared prosperity for 
the poorest 40 percent, agriculture  must continue to grow (in ways that are sustainable and adapted 
to climate change) and rely on a more diversified production base. Poverty reduction in rural areas 
depends crucially on growth in agricultural productivity, which is driven by investment in 
infrastructure, generation of new or improved technologies adapted to changing climate, and their 
adoption by farmers and other value chains actors (e.g. processors). Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination and adoption). This needs to 
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through smallholder participation in 
emerging/established supply chains for higher value agriculture. To achieve these strategic goals, 
the GoB has been seeking the support of development partners such as the Bank, to develop and 
finance activities aimed at boosting agricultural production through productivity enhancement, and 
increasing smallholders’ income.   
In Bangladesh, while the performance of the NARS has been impressive in contributing to food 
security (in particular with rice), research in some key sub sectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet 
to reach its potential productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations 
(including a range of new climate smart technologies for production and post-harvesting). The 
extension system has still extremely limited reach into the myriad communities of the nation (in 
particular for the fisheries and livestock subsectors were local level public extension workers are 
absent), and worse, hardly communicates with the NARS, or the relevant private and non-
government entities also engaged in technological advance. In short, the national agricultural 
innovation system is far from exploiting the systemic interactions that should drive it to success, and 
the insufficiencies pervade the system both within the subsystems, the all-too disconnected and in 
some instances less than strong elements of the NARS: public-private links are disturbingly absent, 
and links between research entities public and private with the higher education sector are sparse 
and severely underexploited. To enable agriculture and stakeholders to adapt readily when 
challenges occur and to respond readily when opportunities arise, the proposed project will seek to 
overcome some of the key constraints to increasing the efficiency and performance of the national 
agricultural innovation system. 
The National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012) and the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council Act (BARC, 2011) provide the sector policy framework for the proposed 
NATP-2. NAEP advocates inter alia the development of decentralized, integrated, demand-driven 
agricultural research and extension services. Support is now required for the Department of 
Agricultural Extension (MoA) towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAEP and as well 

as technical assistance for the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of Fisheries 
(both MFL) for the completion of their respective sector extension strategy/policy. The 2012 BARC 
Act aims at fostering the coordination of research activities conducted by the twelve NARS 
institutes, making BARC responsible for the allocation of resources among the NARS institutes and 
for the approval of the institutes’ research programs; it is among other things expected to reduce 
duplication of research efforts and enhance accountability. Implementation of the BARC Act 
remains a challenging process and requires additional financial and technical assistance. Further, 
there are some significant differences in the institutional capacity and performance among the 
various NARS institutes (with livestock and fisheries lagging behind), and the project is expected to 
strengthen the research agenda and outcomes for livestock and fisheries given the importance of 
these sub sectors for rural economic growth and rural livelihoods.

Relationship to CAS
Agriculture has long occupied a central place in the Bangladesh development agenda and in the 
CPSs of the WBG. In the CPS for FY11-14 (subsequently extended to FY15), agriculture is 
highlighted in Pillar 3, Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, although the sector surely 
contributes to the growth Pillar 2, and benefits from initiatives under the 4th Pillar of Governance. 
As the CASPR (Report No. 73983-BD) of November 20, 2013 notes concerning Pillar 3 Outcome 
3.1 on Agriculture and Food Security, program implementation has been ramping-up and is showing 
significant improvements in agricultural productivity as measured in crops and livestock 
performance. Recurrent natural disasters and deficiencies in technology remain the basic threats to 
improvements in agricultural production, and are therefore the focus of Bank interventions in the 
sector. IFC, with financing from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, is also assisting by 
supporting the climate resilience of agribusiness companies and their supply chains, and is 
exploring availability of low-cost housing and livestock protection structures in flood-prone coastal 
areas. Furthermore, IFC’s investment climate and advisory services include activities in agriculture 
that are complementary to NATP-2 (e.g. development of Seed Act and National Seed Policy, 
strengthening of sanitary and phyto-sanitory registration and certification system, development of 
the dairy value chain). The proposed follow-up to NATP Phase 1 was retained in the revised CAS 
for FY15 implementation.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
6. The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the 
agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their 
market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will 
support a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote 
market-oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for 
smallholder farmers by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to 
increased farm income and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed 
by the project. The following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: 
Comp.1: Promoting Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: 
Supporting Livestock Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: 
Project Management and Coordination. 
7. NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the 
extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups 

and producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification 
and diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains 
and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1.

Key Results (From PCN)
(i) Client satisfaction (including for female-led households) with the agricultural extension and 
advisory services provided by the agricultural innovation system has increased  
(ii) New technologies generated by the agricultural innovation system have been adopted by 
producers (including by female-led households) and other value chain actors targeted by the project  
(iii) The increase achieved in agricultural productivity (for crops, fisheries and livestock) is 
larger for farmers supported by the project  
(iv) The proportion of smallholder agricultural production marketed relative to total smallholder 
farm output has increased 
(v) The women-led Common Interest Groups for homestead gardening are making a significant 
contribution to improving nutrition in participating households

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and 
extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer 
organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value 
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for 
the vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the 
interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to 
include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up) . 
The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under 
NATP-1 and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. NATP-2 includes a 
broader component that addresses the multiple dimensions required for decentralized, demand-
driven agricultural research as a core pillar of an agricultural innovation system in the country 
context. The project further includes three sub sector components, each tackling specific constraints 
to the development of selected commodities from technology generation to transfer and adoption at 
farm level, to market-oriented production and agro processing. This value chain approach is 
expected to lead to a better integration of research and extension, which was regularly reported in 

NATP-1 as an area requiring further improvement. Finally, the project includes a component that 
covers most cross-cutting activities as well as regular project management tasks. Project 
components, their objectives and contribution to the PDO, as well as the core activities covered, are 
described below. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System 
This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation 
support from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and 
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity 
enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of 
rural markets, technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes  
(NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory 
service centers. The component will also include the window for competitive research and matching 
grants under the Agricultural Innovation Fund.   
 
Component 2: Supporting crop development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production 
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of 
smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). 
This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g. 
smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary 
certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of 
smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the 
adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support 
to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) 
will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.  
 
Component 3: Supporting fisheries development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of 
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate 
the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps, 
and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and 
fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value 
chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and 
post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro 
entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the 
corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 4: Supporting livestock development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, 
and facilitate the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat 
meat). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance 
in e.g.: laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial 
insemination, fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, 




food safety, and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing 
technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected 
value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination 
Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall 
day-to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project 
PIUs from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational, 
safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The 
PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led 
activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a 
national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact 
evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and 
dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project 
management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination 
of all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of 
NATP).

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 3.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 150.00
 US  Agency for International Development (USAID) 25.00
 Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change 0.00
 International Fund for Agriculture Development 22.00
 Total 200.00


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA19698

Project Name Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)
Region AFRICA
Country Ethiopia
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Irrigation 

and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), 
Ag ro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource 
management (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support 
(10%), Gender ( 10%), Nutrition and food security (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148591
Borrower(s) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 07-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 09-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

09-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

26-Mar-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is land-locked and located in the Horn of Africa, with an 
area of 1.1 million km2. Its bio-physical environment includes a variety of ecosystems, with 
significant differences in climate, soil properties, vegetation types, and agricultural potential, 
biodiversity and water resources. Ethiopia is a country of many nations, nationalities and peoples, 
with a total population of 91.7 million (2012).  Only 17 percent of the population lives in urban 
centres, the great majority of them in Addis Ababa. At a current annual growth rate of 2.6 percent, 
Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025, and is projected by the UN to be 
among the world’s ten largest countries by 2050. Ethiopia is vulnerable to terms of trade shocks 
from international food and fuel prices, and to large domestic weather-related shocks as 
demonstrated by the 2011/12 East Africa drought. 
 
Ethiopia has a federal, democratic government system, established in the early 1990s, with nine 
autonomous states (‘regions’) and two chartered cities. Decentralization of governance to the 

regional and district (woreda) levels has been actively pursued since 2003. The Ethiopian People’s 
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has been in power in Ethiopia since 1991. EPRDF 
comprises four regionally-based parties from the four major regions (Amhara, Oromia, Southern 
Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (SNNPR), and Tigray). The long-serving Prime Minister, Meles 
Zenawi, (from Tigray) died in August 2012 and was succeeded by Hailemariam Desalegn (from 
SNNPR) who has pursued largely the same policies. The next national elections are scheduled for 
2015. 
 
Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth over the past decade. Economic growth averaged 
10.7 percent per year in 2003/04 to 2011/12, compared to the regional average of 5.0 percent. 
Growth reflected a mix of factors, including agricultural modernization, the development of new 
export sectors, strong global commodity demand, and government-led development investments. 
Private consumption and public investment have driven demand side growth, with the latter 
assuming an increasingly important role in recent years. On the supply side, growth was driven by 
an expansion of the services and agricultural sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was 
relatively modest. Recently, annual growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high 
single-digit levels. Growth in the export of goods has also moderated in recent years and a decline 
was observed in 2012/13 for the first time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in 
recent years and, while inflation is currently much lower, keeping it down remains a major 
objective for monetary policy. 
 
Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress on social and 
human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$470  is 
substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the ten lowest worldwide. 
Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United 
Nations Development Program (UNDP). High economic growth, however, has helped reduce 
poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been lifted out of 
poverty, and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 
2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11  (using a poverty line of close to US$1.25/day). However, 
because of high population growth, the absolute number of poor (about 25 million) has remained 
unchanged over the past fifteen years. Ethiopia is among the countries that have made the fastest 
progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and HDI ranking over the past decade. It 
is on track to achieve the MDGs for gender parity in education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and 
malaria. Good progress has been made in universal primary education, although the MDG target 
may not be met. Reduction of maternal mortality remains a key challenge. 
 
GoE is currently implementing its ambitious Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP; 
2010/11-2014/15), which sets a long-term goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2025, 
with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the plan period. To achieve the GTP 
goals and objectives, GoE has followed a “developmental state” model with a strong role for the 
government in many aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and 
agriculture as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms 
GoE’s commitment to human development. Development partners have programs that are broadly 
aligned with GTP priorities. 
 
The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) builds on the progress 
achieved by Ethiopia in recent years and aims to help GoE address structural transformation and 
assist in the implementation of the GTP. The CPS framework includes two pillars. Pillar One, 


“Fostering competitiveness and employment”, aims to support Ethiopia in achieving: (i) a stable 
macroeconomic environment; (ii) increased competitiveness and productivity; (iii) increased and 
improved delivery of infrastructure; and (iv) enhanced regional integration.  Pillar Two, “Enhancing 
resilience and reducing vulnerabilities”, aims to support Ethiopia in improving the delivery of social 
services and developing a comprehensive approach to social protection and risk management. Good 
governance and state building form the foundation of the CPS. In line with the GTP, gender and 
climate change have been included as cross-cutting issues to strengthen their mainstreaming across 
the portfolio. The programs of IFC and MIGA are well aligned with the CPS framework, 
contributing mainly to the strategic objectives under Pillar One.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in the Ethiopian economy and an important 
source of economic growth. Although there is an on-going structural transformation in the 
Ethiopian economy, predominantly from agriculture to services and manufacturing, agriculture still 
comprises 45 percent of total output and continues to dominate employment (78 percent). The 
sector is also a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports. Despite 
its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Over the past 15 years 
the average rate of growth has been around seven percent per year according to official statistics. 
Sources of growth have come from an increased area under cultivation and from increased 
productivity, the latter driven by large public investment in the sector, including agricultural 
extension, rural roads, and advances in public policy such as improvements in land tenure security. 
In addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth is correlated with 
poverty reduction, for smallholder farmers and also through positive impacts on non-farm rural 
economies. 
 
Although Ethiopia has a trend of negative overall balance of trade, the country has consistently had 
a positive balance of trade in the agriculture sector. The agriculture imports per capita and exports 
per capita stood at $13.28 and $18.27 respectively in 2011. The top three agriculture exports have 
been coffee, oil seeds and pulses while the largest imports have been cereals, edible oils and sugar. 
In spite of the positive trade balances in the sector, marketing (including intra-regional trade) in the 
sector is constrained by mixed and often unfavorable policies for input and output markets and poor 
infrastructure leading to high transportation costs. There remains considerable potential for both 
increased exports from the sector and further import substitution, especially for cereals 
(predominantly wheat) and sugar.   
 
The further growth of the agriculture sector is expected to feature prominently in the second phase 
of the GTP (GTP-II), currently under preparation.  Maintaining the current growth rate in the sector 
will be challenging as recent gains from land expansion may be exhausted, and further increases 
will need to come from increased agricultural productivity. Progress requires both investment and 
policy reform.  The general thrust on policy reform is to pursue agricultural transformation by 
increasing private sector investment and value added in the country to increase the value of exports. 
In 2012, the Government agreed a G8 New Alliance framework for Ethiopia with a number of 
commitments for policy actions to facilitate the expansion of private investment.  Under this 
framework, the Government intends to focus its efforts in particular on: i) increasing stability and 
transparency in trade policy; ii) improving incentives for the private sector investment; iii) 
developing and implementing a transparent land tenure policy; and iv) developing and 
implementing domestic seed policies that encourage increased private sector involvement in this 

area. To support the transformation agenda, the Government established the Agricultural 
Transformation Agency (ATA) in 2011 to support the Ministry of Agriculture to advance policy 
and build capacity.  Notable achievements include the new Agricultural Cooperatives Development 
Strategy and the passing of the Seeds Proclamation. 
 
The Government’s agricultural development strategy focuses on both encouraging large scale 
investment in commercial agriculture and support to smallholder farmers, who in 2012/13 
contributed 96 percent of the total agricultural production according to official statistics. To 
increase agricultural productivity of smallholders and their transformation to commercial farmers 
requires a strengthening and focusing of support services and infrastructure, and greater private 
investment to support input and output value chains.  To drive this transformation, the Government 
is moving towards focused support to specific commercialization clusters targeting areas with the 
highest potential for the production of commodities for which Ethiopia has a comparative 
advantage and can stimulate agro-processing and value addition.   
 
Despite the large investment into public agricultural services, especially into extension, which has 
seen a rapid rise in the number of extension workers and beneficiaries served year on year, there are 
capacity weaknesses which continue to inhibit the identification and dissemination of technologies 
to support increased productivity.  Strengthening research and extension linkages, further expansion 
and capacity of the extension service and enhancing farmer access to inputs are required to support 
investments in extension workers.  Improving agriculture research has been prioritized in GTP and 
the same is expected in GTP II because of the pivotal role it plays to improve agricultural 
productivity and production and recognizing that in recent years it has been underfunded.  Animal 
health and production services also suffer from capacity limitations and low outreach, leading to 
low productivity and quality across a range of animal products.  
 
Access to and application of agricultural inputs is a decisive factor to improve agricultural 
productivity and production.  In addition to improved seeds, animal breeds and fertilizers, there is 
considerable opportunity to promote the use of machinery for production and post-harvest 
activities.  Innovations such as row planters for teff have had a considerable impact on productivity. 
However, input markets in Ethiopia are typically overly dependent on cooperative unions and the 
agro-dealer market is small and underdeveloped.  While cooperatives can play an important role in 
linking smallholder farmers to input and output markets, they are often hampered by weak 
management and facilities, and currently only handle a small percentage of agricultural output.  
There is potential for strengthening cooperatives while also enabling greater private engagement in 
both input and output markets.  
 
Output marketing system and infrastructure in Ethiopia are dominated by traditional, informal 
exchanges. For a large part of the country, this means trading with limited infrastructure. There are 
few market structures, storage, loading and unloading facilities, quality checking and banking 
services in or around most of the market centers. This has resulted in the cost of trading being very 
high due to cumbersome conditions for transaction, low product qualities and post-harvest losses.  
Value chains (other than for coffee which has a relatively efficient market structures) are therefore 
characterized by an absence of market participants, market inefficiencies and limited value addition. 
With increasing agricultural surpluses, rapid urbanization and increased opportunities for agro-
industrial investment, there are gaps in the current functioning in a number of value chains which 
are prioritized under the commercialization cluster approach to achieving transformation.  
 


Agricultural water development is crucial to improve smallholders’ livelihood and income in 
Ethiopia, since irrigation can help farmers increase their crop production, increase crop varieties, 
and lengthen their agricultural seasons. From a very low base, over the next five years there are 
targets to increase the total area of irrigated land from the current 640,000 hectares (about 4 percent 
of currently cultivated land) to about 1.8 million hectares. Small Scale Irrigation (SSI) and Rain 
Water Harvesting (RWH) will account for about two-thirds of this expansion, as these technologies 
require lower capital and technical investments and they are possible on small plain areas. Beyond 
the next five years, plans are to reach the full irrigable potential of the country of over 5 million 
hectares. Household irrigation as well as medium- and large-scale schemes will be an important 
strategy to achieve this goal, in combination with exploring and developing groundwater potential, 
especially given that an estimated 85 percent of Ethiopia’s total surface water irrigation potential is 
estimated to be in large-scale schemes.  
 
Future agricultural growth needs t o be sensitive to gender.  On average, female farm managers in 
Ethiopia produce 23 percent less (in terms of gross value of output) per hectare than their male 
counterparts. Differences in both the levels of productive factors used and the returns that these 
factors generate drive this gender gap. Future inclusive agricultural growth should consider: (i) the 
promotion of labor-saving technologies for women; (ii) the provision of relevant information to 
female farmers, customized to the needs of female farmers; and (iii) the easing of the time burden 
of household responsibilities, by providing services to reduce the time that female farmers need to 
perform household duties to enable them to devote more time to productive farm activities. Recent 
research demonstrates the potential of women to contribute to agricultural growth and improve 
outcomes, including improved nutrition.   
 
In Ethiopia, forty percent of children under the age of five suffer from stunting as a consequence of 
chronic and cyclical malnutrition. The National Nutrition Program (NNP) was revised in 2013 to 
strategically address the nutrition problem in the country to include initiatives that have emerged 
since the 2008 NNP, including taking into account the multisectoral and multidimensional nature of 
nutrition and the linkages among key implementing sectors, one being agriculture.  This program, 
endorsed by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health and another eight line Ministers, 
includes a strategic objective to strengthen implementation of nutrition sensitive interventions in the 
agriculture sector. The initiatives focus on improving the consumption of diversified diets at the 
household level through: (i) diversification of crop, fruits and livestock production; (ii) promotion 
of appropriate technologies for food production and processing through the handling, preparation 
and preservation for food diversification to ensure nutritious food utilization;  (iii) building the 
capacity of Development Agents (DAs) at community level and agriculture program managers at all 
levels to implement nutrition sensitive agriculture;  (iv) supporting local complementary food 
production and creating economic opportunities for women through development groups and 
cooperatives; and, (v) supporting agricultural research centers to develop seeds of high nutritional 
value.  Thus, it calls for aligning the agricultural growth programs to improve nutritional status. 
 
With the limits of bringing uncultivated land under production being met, the likelihood of climatic 
variability and the potential degradation arising from more intensive production practices increases, 
and thus there is an urgent need for agriculture to conserve resources and reduce degradation. In 
recent years, considerable amount of work in natural resource conservation and development work 
has been undertaken. In 2013/14 alone, the communities undertook natural resources conservations 
work on 20.15 million hectares of land throughout the country, according to official statistics.  This 
current momentum of community mobilization in natural resource conservation by pursuing 




activities such as slope stabilization, watershed approaches to water management and reduction of 
tillage should be sustained to make the sector more resilient and sustainable. 
 
The opportunities for inclusive and sustainable growth in the sector are strong as is the 
Government’s commitment to achieving ambitious growth and transformation targets.  The 
Agricultural Sector Policy and Investment Framework (PIF), 2010 – 2020, provides an investment 
framework to align the investment and policy priorities with higher level goals to transform the 
sector and is designed to operationalize the CAADP Compact signed by the Government and its 
development partners. Under the PIF, there have been concerted efforts to collaborate and partner 
on investments and the Agricultural Growth Project (AGP I – P113032) was a clear output of this. 
The first phase of the program was financed to around US$350 million, including US$150 million 
from IDA, US$50 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), a US
$50 million Multi-donor Trust Fund with contributions from the Netherlands, Canada and Spain, 
and parallel financing from USAID and Italy.  Currently, AGPI operates at  kebele levels (the 
lowest administrative unit) in 96 woredas of the four regions of Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR and 
Tigray and has provided support for improved public agricultural service provision, technology 
transfer, improved market access and marketing, infrastructure (household and small-scale 
irrigation, feeder roads and market centers) and capacity building.  The project further explicitly 
aims to increase the participation of women and youth in the sector.  The proposed project therefore 
aims to build on AGP1, to scale up the geographical extent, consolidate the investments, and meet 
the emerging challenges of the sector outlines above. 
 
Under AGPI, the project has been operating in 4 regions (Amhara, Oromia, SNNP and Tigray), 96 
woredas and 2,423 kebeles, targeting 1.57 million direct beneficiaries.  The AGP2 project would 
cover 157 woredas, which would include all woredas targeted under AGP1 plus an additional 61. 
The woredas are distributed among the following regions: Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR, Tigray, 
Benshangul-Gumuz, Gambella, Harari and Dire Dawa Administrative Council. The expansion into 
the new regions and Dire Dawa would be on a limited scale, with two woredas in each of 
Benshangul-Gumuz and Gambella, and one in each of Harari and Dire Dawa.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization 
of small holder farmers targeted by the project.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Agricultural Public Support Services.
Comments (optional)
To increase access to public agricultural services for smallholder farmers, the project will support 
the strengthening of public services delivery, including for agricultural extension services;  animal 
production and animal health services; crop production and plant health services; natural resource 
management services; soil fertility management services; and agricultural mechanization.

Component Name
Agricultural Research
Comments (optional)
To increase the supply of demand driven agricultural technologies which directly link to the other 
components, the project will support technology adaptation and generation and the release of 


technologies to the agricultural extension system; pre-extension demonstration and participatory 
research for recommended agricultural technologies; and source technology production, including 
the production of breeder and pre-basic seeds for major crop varieties.

Component Name
Small-scale Irrigation
Comments (optional)
To increase the access to and efficient utilization of irrigation water of small holder farmers, the 
project will support the increased availability of irrigated water through: i) the rehabilitation, 
upgrading and/or improvement of existing Small-scale Irrigation Schemes; ii) establishment of new 
SSI systems integrated with access roads where necessary; and iii) household irrigation systems. 
The project would also support improved water management services through establishing and/or 
strengthening Irrigation Water Users Organizations and the introduction of improved irrigation 
agricultural management.

Component Name
Agricultural Marketing and Value Chains
Comments (optional)
To commercialize small holder farmers through market access and efficiency of input and output 
markets, the project would support: the promotion and distribution of agricultural inputs, 
specifically seed multiplication and distribution; the strengthening of formal and informal farmer 
organizations, including formal farmer organizations and informal, commercially oriented farmer 
groups; the strengthening of selected livestock and crop value chains; and market infrastructure 
development and management.

Component Name
Project Management, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
To ensure project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a 
consistent and effective approach to capacity development, the project would support: project 
management and coordination; monitoring, evaluation and learning; and the Capacity Building 
Support Facility.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 581.80 Total Bank Financing: 350.00
Financing Gap: 216.20
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 15.60
International Development Association (IDA) 350.00
Total 365.60

V. Implementation
The AGP 2 will build on institutional arrangements and implementation mechanisms established for 
th AGPI.  As in the first phase, the implementation of the project will rely on existing GoE 
structures, with the exception of parallel funding through the USAID and Canadian DFATD that 
will be channeled through specific implementation arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture will 
have the overall responsibility of the coordination and implementation of the project. To fulfill its 


bilities, the MoA will use - or will establish in the new targeted regions - the institutional 
mechanisms already established for AGP 1 at Federal, Regional, and Woreda levels, i.e: (i) the 
Steering Committees (SCs), (ii) the Technical Committees (TCs), and (iii) the Project’s 
Coordination Units (CUs). The existing composition of these Committees will be reviewed in order 
to include new implementing agencies such as the Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research 
(EIAR). At the Zonal level, the Zonal Agriculture Office (ZAO) will provide technical support, 
extension services and M&E to the group of woredas under its authority. The ZAOs will coordinate 
with the Woreda Offices of Agriculture (WOA). 
 
Implementation of the project will be decentralized. Federal implementing agencies will provide 
guidance and support to regions, spearhead most institutional capacity building activities and 
undertake monitoring, evaluation and communication activities. At regional and woreda levels, the 
Bureaus/Offices of Agriculture will assume primary responsibility for execution of the project.  
Implementation of AGP at the regional level will also be supported by relevant service providers 
and institutions.  
 
The annual planning process will follow a two-pronged approach associating: (i) a demand-driven 
approach based on the Community Level Participatory Planning (CLPP) approach adopted for AGP-
I in which communities are assuming primary responsibility for identifying and executing the 
community-based investment of the project, and (ii) a strategic-based approach in which 
investments are pre-identified through the Kebele, Woreda and Regional development plan or 
through specific feasibility studies, and implemented in close collaboration with the community 
after a consultation process. At the woreda and kebele levels, the implementation of the project 
would be undertaken jointly by Woreda Office of Agriculture through the Woreda Development 
Committee (WDC), the Kebele Development Committee (KDC), and the communities. The WDC 
and the KDC will be guided by their respective SCs and TCs.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 


PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 






























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 








































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Rural Community Finance
Project



Republic of Liberia

Rural Community Finance Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agencies: Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit (TASU) and
Technical Assistance and Supervision Company
(TASC), and Central Bank of Liberia (CBL)

Total project cost: US$10.86 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 4.01 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.38 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per year

Contribution of borrower: US$0.54 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.39 million including US$3.2 million frombeneficiaries, US$1.1 million from RCFIs and US$0.09
million from CBL

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Rural Community Finance Project as
contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Rural Community Finance Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of its civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of Ebola
virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity and
impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a Least
Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies heavily on
foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in 20142 and,
according to the 2014 Human Development Index, increased by 68.2 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. With a 2013 Human Development Index score of 0.412,
Liberia ranked 175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be less than 14 years old.
Poverty is widespread in Liberia, and is particularly acute in rural areas. An
estimated 51 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily
concentrated, and a high percentage lack access to basic infrastructure and social
services, with poor road conditions leaving many areas inaccessible. Approximately
55 per cent of rural Liberian households are food insecure.3

3. The agricultural sector is the primary source of livelihood for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. There are also
cash-crop plantations including rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil and sugar cane.
Although agriculture is the largest contributor of GDP, small-scale farmers are
among the poorest in the country. Liberia has signed the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) Compact, committing to the Maputo
Protocol goal of 10 per cent national budget expenditure on agriculture by 2017
(the current level is 3 per cent of the national budget). As a result of low
agricultural production and productivity, Liberia imports between 50 per cent and
60 per cent of its staple food requirements, leaving the country vulnerable to price
fluctuations in global markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for
Liberia for the period 2011-2015 is aligned with the CAADP and national policies,
especially the Liberia Agriculture Sector Investment Program. Three
IFAD-supported projects are currently contributing to the RB-COSOP: (i) the
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project; (ii) the Smallholder Tree Crop

1 Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries list for 2014, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
2 World Bank World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas Method (Current US$).
3 Liberia Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey, June 2013.



2

Revitalization and Support Project; and (iii) the support to the Farmers’ Union
Network.

5. As the Liberia RB-COSOP reached its midway point, its performance and relevance
were reviewed to identify the way forward for future IFAD support under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation system. The findings of the 2013 review
revealed that the strategic objectives under the RB-COSOP continue to be relevant,
with the provision that the transition from an emergency situation to a development
approach is realized. The needs and priorities of smallholder farmers and their
organizations are changing. Their growing interest in investing in agriculture and in
other microenterprises and small business is generating greater demand for credit
and will necessitate better access to rural finance. This demand has been
recognized in government efforts to promote growth in the local economy and
reduce poverty in the long term. The Government’s interest in building the rural
finance sector has been mirrored by the CBL. With the current RB-COSOP set to
end in 2015, the new RB-COSOP will require a stronger focus on rural finance.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Project area. The project will facilitate the creation of new rural community

finance institutions (RCFIs) in selected areas throughout the country. RCFI locations
will be identified through feasibility studies and criteria including the degree of
commitment by host communities, absence of banking facilities and viability. CBL’s
strategic goals and objectives will also be taken into account. Priority will be given
to locations with significant business potential, including central towns with high
demand for financial services. The project area will also include all locations with
existing RCFIs.

7. Although the project will be nationwide in scope (excluding urban Montserrado
county), its coverage may initially be divided into implementation clusters. At the
district or county level, the following criteria will be used to identify suitable
communities: (i) social, poverty and demographic indicators for identifying
vulnerable communities with high potential; (ii) complementarities with ongoing
and planned initiatives; (iii) the potential for commercial activity, including the
production of cocoa and coffee, and value addition; (iv) the potential for poverty
reduction and employment creation; (v) the potential for mobilization of shares and
savings; and (vi) demand for financial services, particularly among low-income
groups.

8. Target group. The primary target group will be the economically active rural
population: petty traders, smallholder farmers, food processors, local transporters,
craftsmen, artisans and ex-combatants. Special attention will be given to reaching
women and youth, and small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women. As a project
designed to improve access to rural finance, targeting will be inclusive: by virtue of
the fact that the RCFIs will be community-owned, access to the financial services
will be open to the entire community. The project will directly target 24,000
shareholders, at least 50 per cent of them women, and 25 per cent of them young
men and women.

9. The proposed project will complement ongoing initiatives through partnerships to
maximize the impact on the target group. This includes partnerships with farmers’
organizations supported by existing projects that show interest in financial services.

B. Project development objective
10. The overall development goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty and

household food insecurity on a sustainable basis by facilitating access to finance for
at least 24,000 rural individuals and their families. The project’s development
objective is to improve access to rural financial services on a sustainable basis,



3

enabling the development of the rural sector. This project development objective
will be assessed through three indicators, namely that at least: (i) 20 per cent of
the adult rural population (over 16 years) in the project area uses the financial
services of RCFIs supported by the project; (ii) 50 per cent of RCFI shareholders
have received at least one loan; and (iii) 75 per cent of RCFIs supported by the
project achieve 100 per cent operational self-sufficiency (OSS) by the project end.

C. Components/outcomes
11. This five-year project will aim to enhance access to sustainable and affordable rural

financial services in Liberia. The three main outcomes of the project are that: (i)
RCFIs deliver demand-driven and efficient financial services to their clients; (ii)
professional and efficient technical support and supervision services are provided to
RCFIs by an apex body – the Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit/Technical
Assistance and Supervision Company (TASU/TASC)4 and; (iii) a more conducive
regulatory and supervisory environment promotes the rural financial sector. The
project will comprise three components: (i) Rural financial services; (ii) Enabling
environment for rural finance; and (iii) Project management and coordination.

12. Rural financial services. This component includes three subcomponents:
(i) direct support in the creation of 10 RCFIs and extended support to nine existing
RCFIs with support from CBL and a commercial bank; (ii) creation of a TASU/TASC
within CBL to implement the subcomponent 1.1 and support RCFIs; and (iii) a
country-specific grant to mitigate the impacts of the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Given negative impacts of Ebola virus disease on household incomes, earning
capacity, financial and other reserves, and saving capacity, IFAD will support the
recovery of existing RCFIs and the establishment of new ones with US$0.5 million.

13. Enabling environment for rural finance. This component will provide technical
assistance to CBL for developing a sound regulatory framework for deposit-taking
and credit-only financial institutions. There will be a focus on rationalizing Liberia’s
the regulatory environment, including policies and reporting formats for RCFIs,
microfinance institutions (MFIs) and credit unions. This will be achieved in an open
manner that ensures stakeholder participation.

14. Project management and coordination. Component 3, comprising
project-related coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, financial
management and procurement oversight, will be undertaken by the programme
implementation unit (PIU) operating under the supervision of the programme
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture. The PMU is responsible
for the coordination and harmonization of all donor-funded agricultural projects.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The institutional design of the project is simple: the existence of a centralized PIU

for all Ministry of Agriculture projects supported by IFAD makes it possible to
coordinate the rural finance activities assigned to TASU/TASC and CBL. The main
institutional responsibilities comprise: (i) implementation of all grass-roots activities
under component 1 by TASU/TASC; (ii) implementation of component 2 activities,
which are related to CBL’s core mandate, by CBL; (iii) PIU implementation of all
activities related to its mandate (see paragraph 19); and (iv) guidance on major
issues, which will be provided by a project steering committee (PSC).

4 The TASU will be established within the Central Bank of Liberia and will develop over time until
deemed sufficiently strong for transformation into an independent company (TASC), providing services
to member institutions in exchange for a fee.




4

16. TASU/TASC and CBL will share responsibility for implementation. This complies with
the international consensus that central banks’ project interventions should be
limited to activities clearly related to their primary mandates. In this case,
regulation and supervision of financial institutions fall under the mandate of CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will be signed by the PIU, TASU/TASC and CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will also be signed by TASU/TASC and each affiliated
RCFI.

B. Organizational framework
17. The project will operate under the guidance of a PSC composed of representatives

from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning,
and CBL. The PSC will provide project oversight, approve all manuals and revisions,
approve the annual workplan and budget before its submission to IFAD, receive
draft annual reports and decide on major issues. According to PIU implementation
guidelines, all sector-specific projects must have their own PSC with the necessary
technical requirements and expertise.

18. The PMU was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and is
affiliated with that ministry’s Department of Planning and Development . The PMU is
a shared unit in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in the agricultural
sector. The PMU is responsible for overall coordination of activities and information
exchange among partners, ministries and other stakeholders, and for ensuring
synergy among the project implementation units of the various donors.

19. Within the PMU, the IFAD PIU in Monrovia is responsible for the implementation of
all IFAD-funded projects in Liberia related to agriculture. The mandate of the PIU
comprises: project accounting, withdrawals, consolidating annual workplans and
budgets, preparing annual reports, corresponding with government authorities on
issues related to the financing agreement (excluding technical implementation),
documentation, procurement, submitting reports to IFAD and other agencies, M&E,
supervision of support and midterm review (MTR) missions, impact assessment and
end-of-project evaluation.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. A system to integrate planning, M&E, and knowledge management will be
developed at start-up to: (i) provide stakeholders with the data required to steer
implementation; (ii) provide the Ministry of Agriculture and other stakeholders with
information on progress in order to measure the project’s success in increasing
access to finance and other indicators; (iii) support coordination and synergies with
other development projects; (iv) monitor the project’s success in building
participatory processes that ensure the full involvement of rural poor people;
(v) provide participating communities and RCFIs with regular feedback and
analytics; and (vi) provide information on the achievement of RB-COSOP targets.
The PIU will manage this system in collaboration with partners.

B. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. Liberia’s Corruption Perceptions Index score has decreased slightly from
41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and to 37 in 2014. According to the latest IMF Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment conducted in 2012, Liberia’s
Government has made significant improvements since the 2007 assessment, but
the overall state of the public financial management remains somewhat weak. As
part of the project design, a financial management assessment of the PIU
responsible for implementing existing IFAD projects was undertaken. The
assessment found that the existing PIU’s financial management arrangements and
capacity are adequate to meet IFAD requirements. However, since the financial




5

management arrangements of the main implementing partner TASU/TASC are not
yet in place, the initial risk rating was determined to be medium.

22. Financial management. The main responsibility for the project’s financial
management will rest with the PIU. The PIU will maintain a full set of accounts
according to IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted accounting
standards. The PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project
financial statements according to accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual or equivalent guideline to be approved by the Fund.

23. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts in United States dollars
held by CBL – one for the IFAD loan and one for the IFAD grant. In addition, two
operating accounts in United States dollars in a commercial bank acceptable to
IFAD will receive funds from the designated accounts. There will also be an
operating account to receive government counterpart funds. Once the IFAD
financing has entered into force, IFAD will make an initial deposit into the
designated accounts equal to the requirements of six months of implementation
(authorized allocation). IFAD financing will be disbursed following certified
withdrawal applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures, which
will be specified in the letter to the borrower.

24. Procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out according to national
procedures as long as they comply with IFAD guidelines. By default, the project will
utilize the procurement committee established within the Ministry of Agriculture’s
PIU.

25. Audit arrangements. The PIU will appoint independent auditors acceptable to
IFAD under terms of reference cleared by IFAD and in line with IFAD’s guidelines for
project audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project together with a management letter on audit observations of internal
controls shall be submitted to the Fund within six months of each fiscal year end.

D. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions whenever needed, will be organized with the
participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, CBL, TASU/TASC, RCFIs and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be
conducted as general inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and
lessons learned, and to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact.
Missions will be an integral part of the knowledge management cycle, with mission
members supporting project and implementing agencies’ staff.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including price and physical

contingencies, are estimated at US$10,860,000; contingencies account for
3 per cent of these costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$3,006,000 (28 per cent). Taxes represent US$404,000. The total base cost is
US$10,426,000 while price and other contingencies account for US$434,000.
Significant contributions will be made by beneficiary communities (purchase of
shares), RCFIs (contributions to operating costs of RCFIs and TASU/TASC) and CBL
(staff time). The total costs by component and subcomponent are summarized by
financier in table 1 below.

28. The base cost of component 1 – Rural financial services – represents an investment
of US$9.7 million (93 per cent of the total base cost) while component 2 – Enabling
environment for rural finance, accounts for US$313,000 (3 per cent of the total





6

base cost). Project management and coordination under component 3 account for
4 per cent of the base cost, or US$417,000.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.  Rural financial
services

i. RCFIs 239 3.3 2 693 36.8 - - 1 139 15.6 - - 3 240 44.3 7 310 72.2

ii. TASC 114 4.9 2 108 91.1 - - - - 92 4.0 - - 2 313 22.9
iii. Grant for

economic
recovery
after
Ebola virus
disease 8 1.7 - - 490 98.3 - - - - - - 498 4.9

Subtotal 361 3.6 4 800 47.4 490 4.8 1 139 11.3 92 0.9 3 240 32.0 10 121 93.2
2.  Enabling

environment for
rural finance
i  Technical

assistance
to CBL 5 1.8 277 98.2 - - - - - - - - 364 2.6

3.  Project
management
and coordination 31 6.7 426 93.3 - - - - - - - - 591 4.2

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.5 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed by the Government, IFAD, CBL, RCFIs and their clients.

IFAD will finance 55 per cent of the project costs through a loan on highly
concessional terms to the Government of US$5.5 million and a grant of
US$0.49 million. The RCFI contribution to operating costs is estimated at
US$1.1 million (11 per cent) and the shareholders’ contribution to share capital is
estimated at US$3.2 million (30 per cent). For the first 30 months, CBL will house
the TASU/TASC and provide a manager, with a total cost of US$0.09 million
(1 per cent). The Government’s contribution will be in the form of waived taxes and
duties on imported and local goods and services as per standard regulations for
IFAD funding (US$0.4 million, representing 4 per cent of the total cost). Total cost
financing arrangements by category of expenses are summarized in the table 2
below.




7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total Foreign (Excl.
Duties

and
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % exch. taxes) taxes

I. Investment
costs

A. Consulting
services - - 467 95.3 23 4.7 - - - - - - 521 3.7 490 - -

B. Workshops
and training 129 6.8 1 667 87.6 108 5.7 - - - - - - 2 494 17.9 190 1 585 127

C. Works 39 5.6 667 94.4 - - - - - - - - 1 020 7.3 106 565 35
D. Vehicles

equipment
and material 112 14.2 611 77.5 66 8.4 - - - - - - 1 036 7.4 568 110 110

E. Grant - - - - 140 100 - - - - - - 140 1 - 140 -
F. RCFI

capitalization - - - - - - - - - - 3 240 100 4 210 30.1 - 3 240 -
G. Rural

finance
facility - - 111 100 - - - - - - - - 111 1.1 - 111 -

Subtotal I 280 3.8 3 522 47.7 336 4.6 - - - - 3 240 43.9 7 378 67.9 1 354 5 751 273
II. Recurrent

costs

A. Salaries - - 1 222 48.0 124 4.9 1 139 44.7 61 2.4 - - 2 546 23.4 1 273 1 273 -
B. Operating

costs 120 12.8 756 80.8 29 3.1 - - 31 3.3 - - 935 8.6 468 354 114

Subtotal II 120 3.5 1 978 56.8 153 4.4 1 139 32.7 92 2.6 - - 3 482 32.1 1 741 1 627 114

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.7 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100 3 095 7 379 387

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project will generate a wide range of direct benefits for: (i) approximately

24,000 shareholders and users, and their household members; (ii) RCFIs; and
(iii) the economies of the communities where RCFIs will be located. At the macro
level, the project will bring informal financial transactions into the formal sector and
make decentralized rural financial institutions more viable. The Government will
benefit from additional tax revenues payable by the RCFIs. The entire country will
benefit from a strengthened network of financial institutions, through which
remittances and transfers can be made from within and outside the country. Finally,
the country will benefit from higher confidence in the financial sector, especially in
rural areas, as a result of the improved regulatory framework and supervisory
systems under the guidance of the CBL. Other macro-level benefits are not
quantifiable using classical methods of economic and financial analysis, such as
increased deposits in formal financial institutions, higher confidence in the formal
financial sector and a larger network for transfers and payments.

31. Total project benefits are expected to increase from US$50,050 in year 1, to
US$2.71 million in year 5, and will remain at approximately US$2.8 million during
years 7-15. The economic analysis shows that the project will generate an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 17 per cent over a 15-year period, with a net
present value of US$5.5 million. Given that many of its benefits are not
quantifiable, the actual ERR will likely be higher. Sensitivity analysis shows that in
the event of adverse factors, the ERR is relatively robust with regard to higher
costs, lower benefits and time lags.

32. The highest contribution to the ERR derives from investments made by borrowers
from RCFIs. The number of investments is constrained by the number of RCFIs
created. The number of RCFIs that can be created through the project is likewise





8

constrained by the funding available for financial and technical support. There is a
potential to increase the number of new RCFIs beyond the 10 for which funding is
available. If additional funds are provided, the ERR will be higher than the projected
17 per cent.

D. Sustainability
33. The project will support the creation of 10 new RCFIs and consolidate the nine

existing ones. The detailed projections, which are based on conservative
assumptions, show that the new RCFIs will break even in years 3 or 4 without
project support, and in years 1, 2 or 3 with project support. Two years are needed
to mobilize a sufficient number of shareholders and depositors, an adequate volume
of shares and deposits, and to disburse a sufficient number of loans with good
repayment performance. The learning curves for administrative procedures (in the
first three months) and loan management (in months six to twelve) are expected to
be steep. The sustainability of access to financial services will also improve as
RCFIs mature since they are likely to attract more customers over time. This will
create additional benefits for the economy.

34. The projections for this project compare well with the results of the Rural Finance
and Community Improvement Programme, a similar initiative in neighbouring
Sierra Leone that is also based on the Rural Community Finance Project concept.
Out of the 51 financial service associations created, 41 (or 80 per cent) had an OSS
of 100 per cent at project end. Out of 17 newly created community banks, 14 (82
per cent) had an OSS of 100 per cent at project end.

35. The projections for TASC show that this apex body of RCFIs will be able to generate
income from audit services and from fee-based support services. The resulting
income will cover related operating expenses in a progressive manner, from
0 per cent in year 1 to 26 per cent in year 5. This result will largely depend on the
quality of services, which in turn depends on the volume of shares and deposits,
and the number of RCFIs included in the TASC. If the number of RCFIs increases,
the sustainability of TASC will improve accordingly. However, this depends on the
availability of funding.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
36. The main risks related to project implementation include: (i) competition from

subsidized credit programmes; (ii) caps on interest rates; (iii) a lack of interest
from local communities; (iv) the reluctance of CBL to delegate supervision authority
to TASC; and (v) weak cooperation from the microfinance sector in efforts to
improve regulatory frameworks. Adequate risk mitigation measures have been
introduced, and the residual risk ratings after risk mitigation are rated as low or
moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. The project design is aligned with IFAD’s: (i) Strategic Framework 2011-2015;

(ii) Policy on Targeting Policy (2006); (iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance Policy; (v) Private-Sector Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support;
(viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010); (ix) Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy (2012); and (x) Environmental and Social Assessment
Procedures.

B. Alignment and harmonization
38. Strategy for financial inclusion. With its 2009 Liberian Strategy for Financial

Inclusion (2009-2013), the Government aims to create an inclusive financial
environment by enabling open access to financial services. The overall objective of
inclusive finance is to establish viable microfinance providers that facilitate




9

micro-entrepreneurs’ sustained access to a diverse range of financial services. In
order to enhance sustainability, efficiency, outreach and good governance, financial
service providers will receive assistance from various actors, including CBL. The
strategy for financial inclusion will work at three levels: (i) establishing sustainable
microfinance providers at the micro level; (ii) building a supportive infrastructure at
the intermediate level; and (iii) creating an enabling policy and regulatory
environment at the macro level.

39. CBL has recently begun drafting the new Liberian Strategy for Financial Inclusion
2014-2018. Its vision is to build a sustainable financial sector that provides access
to and enhances the use of a wide range of affordable financial services in Liberia.
Its objectives are to: deliver financial services; enhance access to finance,
particularly credit; integrate the informal sector into the formal economy; improve
the environment for small and medium-sized enterprises; enhance financial
literacy; and improve consumer protection. These objectives have been
consolidated in a plan of action, which places the responsibility for establishing
RCFIs with CBL, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and one
commercial bank.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. Several of the approaches adopted by this project are innovative: the creation of a

new type of financial institution in Liberia builds on the experience of several other
West African countries. Other innovations include the creation of an apex body to
support RCFIs, the biometric identification of shareholders in order to offer new
products at reduced costs, and the emulation of indigenous rural finance practices.
The project is in itself part of IFAD’s scaling-up process in West Africa following the
Rural Finance and Community Improvement Project in Sierra Leone. Upon the
successful trial of the implementation model, it will be possible to increase the
number of RCFIs beyond those created in Liberia through this project.

D. Policy engagement
41. Liberia’s microfinance sector does not have the clear regulations needed for its

development. One project component (under CBL supervision) is exclusively aimed
at developing a new legal framework for this sector and training actors on the new
regulations and reporting formats.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix 1.

43. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




10

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to four million ten thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 4,010,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Liberia in an amount equivalent to three hundred fifty-eight thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 358,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli
Watershed Development Project

Republic of Turkey

Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Turkey

Executing agency: Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$25 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.4 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$3.85 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.86 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development
Project, as contained in paragraph 32.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Turkey for
the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. Socioeconomic background. Turkey is an upper-middle-income country with a

population of 74.9 million and a GDP of US$822 billion in 2013 (according to the
World Bank). It is a European Union accession candidate and a member of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the G20.
Turkey is an increasingly important donor of bilateral official development
assistance and has a functioning market economy.

2. Poverty has declined in Turkey. In the last decade alone, the poverty rate was
halved, from 44 per cent in 2002 to 21 per cent in 2011; however, regional income
disparities remain. Imbalances persist in socioeconomic structures and income
levels across both rural and urban settlements, and across regions. Since 2000, the
regional development policy of Turkey has evolved to include enhancing the
competitiveness of regions, strengthening economic and social cohesion, and
reducing regional disparities. The Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018) aims at
directing public investments to areas that prioritize reducing regional development
disparities and utilizing their potential for regional development, particularly within
the Anatolia region.

3. Agriculture is no longer Turkey’s main driver of economic growth: in 2012, it
contributed only 9 per cent of the country’s GDP. Yet it is still important for rural
development, employment (particularly for women, who account for 44 per cent of
the labour force), export and manufacturing. In Turkey, farmers fall into two
categories: (i) commercialized farmers who use the latest technologies, have links
to a wide range of domestic and international information sources, are acutely
aware of global trends and consumer preferences, are interested in innovation and
are integrated into national and international markets; and (ii) resource-poor
farmers who practise subsistence or semi-subsistence farming, and are not
business-oriented. The major constraints facing smallholder agriculture are land
fragmentation, a lack of input technology, weak producers’ organizations and
limited access to markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP)

4. Turkey’s transition to upper-middle-income country status has not ended poverty in
the country. In fact, even in relatively prosperous provinces, pockets of poverty
remain, particularly in the uplands. For years, the public and private sectors have
neither been interested nor able to address the constraints facing smallholder
agriculture in upland areas. The proposed project aims to support the Government’s
efforts to reduce degradation in the upland areas of the Göksu sub-catchment and
improve the natural resource base as a means of improving income and livelihoods
in upland villages. The project area has suffered from low investment in all sectors,




2

and continuing low standards of living have resulted in rural outmigration. IFAD’s
focus on poor and vulnerable farmers in less advantaged areas is therefore highly
relevant.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The proposed project will be implemented in selected villages within 9 districts in

the Konya and Karaman provinces of central Anatolia. These districts are located in
the Göksu sub-catchment, one of the four sub-catchment areas in the east
Mediterranean watershed. There are 32,000 households living in the project area’s
202 villages, with a total population of 114,151 situated in the mountainous zones
of these 9 districts. The elevation in this area varies from 600 to 1,800 metres. The
majority of the population is engaged in producing fruit and field crops on
166,536 hectares. On average, these farmers each cultivate about 3.5 hectares of
fragmented cropland and keep goats (between 30 and 50 heads each). Cultivation
is either totally rainfed (the most prevalent) or mostly rainfed, with some irrigated
patches (about 15 per cent).

6. The target group. The project will target 32,000 households consisting of
productive smallholder farming households, poor households and nomadic
households. Productive smallholders include men and women who reside
permanently in the uplands and who practise mixed farming, with a marginal to
adequate surplus for marketing. Poor households consist of youth and women in
search of livelihood opportunities to avoid migration. This group will benefit from
direct targeting mechanisms guided by quotas for livelihood support to women in
participating in farmers’ organizations (FOs) and value chains. The poorest
households are nearly landless, not engaged in agricultural production and rely on
social assistance. The approximately 120 nomadic households in the project area
live on rangelands and engage in small ruminant production and small-scale milk
processing for household consumption and sale.

B. Project development objective
7. The overall goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty by supporting economic

diversification. The development objective is to increase farmers’ incomes through
improved agricultural production and marketing activities, and strengthen resilience
to climate shocks. The project will also improve the living standards of the nomadic
tribes in the Taurus Mountains by improving natural resource management.
Outcomes will include: (i) sustainably increased farm productivity; (ii) higher
product prices received by smallholder producers; and (iii) climate-resilient natural
resource management practices adopted.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components:

(a) Component 1. Agricultural productivity and natural resource
management will improve overall agricultural productivity and profitability by
sustainably managing land and water resources in upland areas through good
agricultural practices and climate-smart investments that reduce external
shocks.

Subcomponent 1.1. Improved agricultural productivity and quality will
focus on promising crops upstream in the value chains to bridge critical gaps
in order to improve the productivity and quality of cherries, grapes,
strawberries and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs). Crop selection is
based on: (i) local production capacities; (ii) comparative advantages; (iii) the
seasonality of supply and demand; (iv) market access and productive
potential in different locations; and (v) indigenous knowledge and traditions.
Project support will include the introduction of: (i) new crop varieties;




3

(ii) modern growing techniques (e.g. production in plastic tunnels and a
high-wire training system for vineyards); (iii) water-saving irrigation
techniques supported by solar energy use (e.g. on-farm drip irrigation); and
(iv) agronomic practices that increase production and improve quality.
On-farm investments will be provided through the matching grant
programme.

Subcomponent 1.2. Natural resource management will promote best
practices and introduce adaptation measures for climate-resilient investments
in agricultural and grazing lands. The project will assist beneficiaries in
developing participatory grazing plans that integrate input from herders. It
will also support investments in overnight shelters to protect shepherds from
wild animals and inclement weather, scratch posts, salt licks and portable
mobile solar panels to provide energy in highland rangelands.

(b) Component 2. Market access enhancement will: increase farmers'
incomes through higher farm-gate prices; improve market knowledge and
linkages; reduce post-harvest losses; and enhance farmers’ ability to meet
market demand for quality, volume, regularity, homogeneity, packaging and
branding.

Subcomponent 2.1. Capacity-building for marketing will improve the
knowledge and skills of small farmers and FOs such as development
cooperatives and producers’ associations, and raise awareness of the
importance of post-harvest activities. Training will be provided on food
hygiene and safety, drying and sorting practices to reduce waste and improve
quality, and accounting and marketing. Producers' access to commercial
extension will be facilitated.

Subcomponent 2.2. Value chain development will finance downstream
investments by beneficiaries to support marketing of improved produce under
component 1 through the matching grant programme. Enterprises that add
value to farm produce and service providers in the value chains will be eligible
for project support. With the participation of the beneficiaries and their
associations, strategic investment plans (SIPs) will be prepared for each value
chain. These plans will serve as an investment framework that guides support
to beneficiaries at different stages in the value chain. The SIPs will be
developed in full collaboration with farmers, FOs and small and
microenterprises for cherries, grapes, strawberries and MAPs. SIPs will guide
investments – on- and off-farm – in the following: (i) post-harvest treatments
for hygiene and food safety of all value chain products; (ii) drying, grading,
sorting and packaging of dried grapes and MAPs; (iii) labelling and branding of
newly introduced value chain crops such strawberries and MAPs; and
(iv) re-cooling for cherries and cooling for strawberries.

(c) Component 3. Project management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will be implemented over seven years. As part of a programmatic
approach, the project will be the first of two phased over two overlapping cycles of
the performance-based allocation system cycles. The approach is also in line with
multi-year government plans and programmes. The value chain approach will be
adopted as a means of strengthening the long-neglected links between productive
poor farmers and markets (given the focus of both the public and the private sector
on more prosperous, resource-endowed and less ecologically challenging areas).
The project will use the SIP approach, which was introduced in the 2005
Sivas-Erzincan Development Project and has since been used in the Diyarbakir,
Batman and Siirt Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development



4

Project. The proposed project will enhance the SIP approach by selecting pro-poor
value chains with strong potential to benefit from upstream and downstream
investments and become replicable and scalable models.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock will be the lead implementing

agency. The overall management responsibility will rest with this ministry’s General
Directorate of Agricultural Reform in Ankara, where a central project management
unit (CPMU) will be established. Two provincial project management units (PPMUs)
will be set up within the ministry’s provincial directorates in Konya and Karaman,
and will be responsible for day-to-day project management and implementation.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

11. The investments will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans and budgets
(AWPBs) prepared in consultation with beneficiaries, with inputs from SIPs for the
identified value chains. Each farmer support team will prepare an annual workplan
in collaboration with project beneficiaries in their villages. The PPMUs will review
implementation and develop consolidated provincial-level AWPBs. The consolidated
provincial AWPBs will be reviewed and incorporated into a project-level AWPB by
the CPMU. The AWPBs will be finalized according to procedures agreed upon with
IFAD and detailed in the project implementation manual. The AWPBs will be
submitted to the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform by the project manager
for review and approval by the steering committee, and presented to IFAD on a
no-objection basis.

12. Continuous learning and knowledge management will be integrated into the project
and mainstreamed into implementation at all levels. The project’s knowledge
management framework will inform the project learning agenda, including the
outputs, outcomes and impacts defined in the logical framework. The Ministry of
Food, Agriculture and Livestock already has a computerized management
information system in place for tracking the inputs, beneficiaries and productivity of
the Government’s agricultural support programme; this system will be linked with
the project’s monitoring and evaluation system. Thematic knowledge products
generated through the project – and knowledge management tools such
as capacity-building activities, communities of practice and South-South
Cooperation initiatives – will be developed and disseminated.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
13. Financial management. The CPMU will be responsible for financial management,

with support from the PPMUs in Konya and Karaman. The project will adopt
accounting procedures and policies consistent with international accounting
standards and with IFAD and government requirements. The Government of
Turkey’s Public Expenditures System, developed by the Ministry of Finance, will be
used to execute all payments from government counterpart contributions and IFAD
loan and grant.

14. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. Separate designated accounts
denominated in euro will be opened at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey
for the IFAD loan and grant with an authorized allocation of approximately
12 months of project expenditure. The designated accounts will be replenished
using the imprest modality. Withdrawal applications will be prepared by the CPMU
every three months or when 30 per cent of the advance has been depleted –
whichever occurs first. Details of the disbursement arrangements, including the
amounts advanced to the designated accounts, will be specified in the project
implementation manual and stated in the letter to the borrower/recipient.

15. Audit. Annual project financial statements will be audited by the Treasury
Controller, who currently carries out external audits for all externally financed




5

projects in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and under terms of
reference cleared by IFAD.

16. Governance and financial management risks. A financial management risk
assessment of the proposed project and its fiduciary arrangements has concluded
that the project’s financial management arrangements and internal control systems
satisfy IFAD’s minimum requirements to: (i) provide accurate and timely
information on the progress of project implementation; and (ii) guarantee the
separation of functions through multiple independent controls. The assessment
rated the residual control risk after the implementation of appropriate risk
mitigation measures as low. Fiduciary risk might arise from an initial lack of
financial management capacity within the CPMU and the geographical spread of
project activities. Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit
function to include reviews of the use of funds at the village level, recruitment of an
experienced senior accountant in the CPMU and finalization of the project
implementation manual. The latter two are conditions for disbursement of project
funds.

17. Grace period. As per the Government’s request, the grace period is five years
instead of the standard three-year grace period for loans on ordinary terms.

SupervisionE.
18. The project will be supervised directly by IFAD. Supervision and implementation

support will be based on IFAD’s operational modalities and practices, including
those for loan and grant administration, and project implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
19. The project cost is estimated at US$25 million, of which US$18.21 million

(or 72.8 per cent of the total) will be used to finance component 1: agricultural
productivity and natural resource management; US$4.74 million (or 18.9 per cent
of the total) will finance component 2: market access enhancement; and
US$2.05 million (or 8.2 per cent) will finance component 3: project management.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Agricultural

productivity and
natural resource
management 12 474.17 68.5 83.62 0.5 2 226.23 12.2 3 427.53 18.9 18 211.55

2. Market access
enhancement 3 962.47 83.7 41.22 0.9 632.64 13.4 100.50 2.1 4 736.83

3. Project
management 1 453.36 70.8 275.16 13.4 323.11 15.7 2 051.62

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

B. Project financing
20. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including physical and price

contingencies, will be financed over a seven-year period as follows: IFAD financing
will comprise a loan amounting to US$17.89 million and a grant of US$400,000.
The Government’s contribution will be in the form of a budgetary allocation of
US$3.24 million and US$0.61 million in foregone taxes. Project beneficiaries will
contribute an estimated US$2.86 million in cash.




6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 977.30 37.8 220.55 8.5 1 386.65 53.6 2 584.49

2. Equipment and
materials 1 067.30 33.5 467.68 14.7 1 653.86 51.9 3 188.84

3. Goods, services and
inputs 7 100.91 79.6 1 538.00 17.2 280.35 3.1 8 919.26

4. Consultancies 397.39 63.8 124.84 34.8 100.50 16.1 622.73

5. Training 3 410.76 92.5 275.16 7.5 3 685.93
6. Workshops 126.85 84.8 22.83 15.3 149.68
7. Grants and subsidies 3 742.78 84.1 632.64 14.2 75.83 1.7 4 451.25

8. Salaries and
allowances 709.40 70.8 292.85 29.2 1 001.90

9. Vehicles 89.79 84.8 16.60 15.3 105.95

10. Other operating Costs 267.87 92.4 22.11 7.6 289.98

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
21. The overall project analysis resulted in an economic internal rate of return of

17 per cent over 20 years. The project’s contribution to economic welfare is derived
from: the increased quantity and quality of market-oriented production; better
market access; and higher prices resulting from investments in branding and
employment along the value chains. The sensitivity analysis shows that the
economic internal rate of return remains robust at 10 per cent in the event of a
10 per cent reduction in benefits or a two-year delay in benefits.

D. Sustainability
22. The project is designed to ensure producers’ sustainable access to markets through

integration into existing and new value chains while maintaining the focus on good
agricultural practices and natural resource management. This includes enhancing
the quantity and quality of target crops, and providing assistance with modern
marketing (including branding) and market information. The introduction of farming
as a business for the producers will result in the optimization of land, water and
labour resources in the project area. Strengthening FOs through training and
capacity-building will enable longer-term and more stable contractual relationships
with collectors, processors and exporters. These impacts are expected to last
beyond the seven-year project period. Partnerships between producers’ groups and
the private sector will also be strengthened as a result of improved knowledge
management.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
23. At the macro level, the main risks relate to a reduced emphasis on poverty in

Turkey and macroeconomic instability. All of the Government’s development
priorities as outlined in the national and regional development plans and its
programmes are aimed at reducing income disparity over the long term. The
project area particularly suffers from such disparities; however as a politically
stable upper-middle-income country, the prospects for continuing economic growth
in the country are sound. Turkey continues to move towards European Union
accession and measures to meet standards for trade are being adopted along with
stringent environmental protection protocols. The project team has mitigated any
risk that the implementing agencies will lack capacity to provide market-oriented
information and build capacity by planning for the long-term contracting of a



7

marketing consultant. The consultant will be tasked with enhancing the
private-sector orientation of all stakeholders, including government staff at the
central and provincial levels.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

24. The project was designed in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework (2011-2015)
and IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender and environment, and natural resource
management. In addition, the 2012 Technical Note on Matching Grants and the
Private-Sector Strategy have been utilized to ensure that the project makes the
best use of all financial, technical and knowledge products available to IFAD.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
25. Turkey is a member of OECD and is chairing the G20 in 2015. The country is an

increasingly important donor of bilateral official development assistance. In a large
upper-middle-income country like Turkey, IFAD’s overall development contribution
could seem marginal, particularly considering the size of its considerable
development assistance as a donor. There has been demand for IFAD to
demonstrate new models, approaches, knowledge products and services, and global
reach to mobilize required expertise. New models and approaches used by previous
IFAD projects are being mainstreamed by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Livestock, including SIPs, which were introduced by the Sivas-Erzincan
Development Project in 2005, and also used in the Diyarbakir, Batman and Siirt
Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development Project. The
matching grant programme, originally developed by the World Bank for the Village
Based Participatory Investments Program in 2004 and mainstreamed by the
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock in 2006, was enhanced by IFAD to make
it a pro-poor instrument. Through its knowledge management agenda, this project’s
CPMU will contribute to better harmonization of donor-funded and government
programmes for rural development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
26. IFAD’s recent focus on value chains is being integrated into the project as a means

to strengthen the links between poor farmers and markets (as a consequence of
both the public and private sectors’ focus on more prosperous, resource-endowed
farmers in less ecologically challenging areas). The project further develops the SIP
approach in rural Turkey with the selection of pro-poor value chains. Given the low
level of investment in the agricultural sector, the project will promote private-sector
investment through the matching grant programme, which facilitates public-private
partnerships though a service provider for marketing. It is expected that the
business models and innovations proven to be successful through this project will
be scaled up with government or other donor support.

27. Producers' climate adaptation capacity will be improved by training in agronomic
practices and awareness-raising on natural resource management geared to
maximize their incomes within the prevailing climate. Innovations such as
integrated pest management, vegetable production under cover, drip irrigation,
solar energy, efficient methods for water harvesting and training in natural resource
management will improve climate resilience.

Policy engagementD.
28. Turkey does not have a significant bilateral donor presence and IFAD’s relatively

limited investment does not entail strong policy engagement at the macro level.
IFAD’s investment has been strategically applied to engage in policy dialogue aimed
at influencing the Government's allocation of resources in impoverished areas.
Greater strategic focus is needed on the links between poverty reduction and the
sustainable management of fragile ecosystems. The establishment of IFAD’s




8

country office in Ankara will be an opportunity to enhance its role in aid
effectiveness.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
29. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Turkey and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

30. The Republic of Turkey is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

31. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
32. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Turkey in an amount equivalent to fifteen million nine hundred
and fifty thousand euros (EUR 15,950,000) (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Turkey in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty thousand euros
(EUR 350,000) (equivalent to approximately US$0.4 million) and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.


12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.




producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of


7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.


41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)


Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the


Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.




Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Madagascar
for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II
(AD2M-II)


Republic of Madagascar

Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: Ministry of Agriculture

Borrower: Republic of Madagascar

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$56.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 24.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$34.4 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) Trust Fund grant:

SDR 4.2 million (equivalent to approximately
US$6.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace
period of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per
cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$7.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: 100 per cent loan

Contribution of borrower: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.8

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Madagascar for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan to the to the Republic of Madagascar for
the Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The agricultural sector is the backbone of Madagascar’s national economy,

accounting for 30 per cent of GDP (2009),1 generating 30 to 40 per cent of exports,
and employing 80 per cent of Malagasy families on approximately 2.5 million family
farms. The three subsectors – agriculture, livestock and fisheries – are key to
reducing poverty and enhancing food security; they support 75 per cent of the
country’s population, accounting for 86 per cent of all jobs and 60 per cent of youth
employment. Rice production is the leading economic activity, generating the
income of approximately 10 million inhabitants. Rice is grown by 86 per cent of
households, covering 40 per cent of cropland in use and accounting for 37 per cent
of agricultural cash income.

2. With an annual average growth rate of 1.5 per cent, sector performance remains
weak and is among the major causes of rural poverty. Other causes include
fragmented production, low productivity, rural insecurity, overuse of natural
resources, vulnerability to natural hazards such as cyclones, droughts and floods,
and limited access to economic and commercial opportunities due to isolation,
aging infrastructure and difficulty accessing agricultural markets and rural finance.

3. The 2009-2013 crisis had negative socioeconomic impacts, resulting in increased
poverty and, in particular, extreme poverty. The effects of the crisis were
exacerbated by the suspension of foreign aid, which represented half of the
country's overall budget. Five years of transition and political instability led to a
decline in agricultural productivity, further aggravated in 2012 and 2013 by the
locust infestation, which destroyed as much as 50 per cent of food crops, and
severe drought, which impacted negatively on agricultural production in most
regions. In 2012, the national poverty line2 was, at US$0.67 per person per day,
significantly below the international threshold of US$2. According to the 2015-2019
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the poverty rate
remains high, with 71.5 per cent of people living below the poverty line in 2012.

4. In 2010, 35 per cent of Malagasy households were food insecure, against 25 per
cent in 2005. Acute malnutrition affects 8.6 per cent of children under 5 years of
age, of whom 1.4 per cent are affected severely. Madagascar is among the four
countries in the world with the highest prevalence of chronic malnutrition (47.3
per cent) and ranks fifteenth in terms of the number of children affected (2 million).

1 Source: Economist Intelligence Unit, Country report, December 2009.
2 According to the National Institute for Statistics (INSTAT 2013).



EB 2015/115/R.8

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with Government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The proposed second phase of the Project to Support Development in the Menabe
and Melaky Regions (AD2M) is justified on three grounds: (i) macroeconomic
considerations; (ii) sector-specific considerations; and (iii) as a tool for achieving
development goals.

6. With regard to the performance of AD2M, agro-economic opportunities and
potential, as yet undeveloped. Key actions include: (i) scaling up good practices;
and (ii) consolidating project benefits through financial allocations under the
2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle. Phase II satisfies all
of the criteria required to receive financing from IFAD.

7. Given the risks posed by unpredictable rainfall patterns to the production systems
and populations of Menabe and Melaky, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) Trust Fund will support AD2M Phase II (AD2M-II) by
implementing a strategy focused on the governance of climate risks, and provide
added value to the resilience and adaptation activities to be developed during the
second phase.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. AD2M-II will target the same geographical area as the first phase of the project,

namely the Menabe and Melaky regions, due to: (i) the existence of significant
agro-economic potential yet to be developed; (ii) the weak coverage of communes3
in these regions during the first phase of the project; and (iii) the desired
economies of scale in terms of approach and project costs. The scope of the project
will be broadened, from 19 to 44 communes, in 7 districts (see appendix II).

9. The target group will be as follows: (i) 35,000 new direct beneficiary households
belonging to one of the three categories of family farm; and (ii) 22,000 households
that already benefited from the first phase and will benefit further from cross-
cutting consolidation activities. A total of 57,000 households will benefit from the
activities to be implemented under the project, comprising small agricultural
producers and rural promoters of economic initiatives operating within the
production poles and the communes linked to them. The number of beneficiaries is
estimated at 342,000, or 58 per cent of the total population (approximately
586,000 people) living in the 44 project area communes.

B. Project development objectives
10. The objectives of AD2M-II are consistent with those of the 2015-2019 country

strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). The overall objective is to sustainably
improve incomes and food security in the productive areas of Menabe and Melaky.
Its specific objectives are to: (i) scale up effective and climate change resilient
family farm production systems; and (ii) enhance producers’ access to
remunerative markets in priority value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The updated technical components of the project comprise: (i) the promotion of

effective and climate change resilient production systems; and (ii) support for
access to markets and economic opportunities.

12. The major outcomes expected are improved water management and water balance
on plots through the redevelopment of 9,120 hectares of hydro-agricultural
schemes and the development of 6,470 hectares of new land, which will result, in
the 44 communes of the project area, in accelerated uptake of various improved
and resilient practices and significant increase in yields and production.

3 Phase I of AD2M covered 19 out of the 88 communes in the two regions.



EB 2015/115/R.8

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

13. In terms of land tenure security, the expected results are the establishment of
long-term land tenure administrative authorities and structures at the commune or
inter-communal level (20 land offices, a land tenure information and resource
centre, etc.) and safeguards for the land rights of small agricultural producers, so
as to increase investment and improve production methods, yields and incomes.

14. Expected outcomes in terms of input supply and small agricultural equipment
include the production of 250 tons of seed by new seed multiplier famers through
viable businesses integrated into regional and national seed networks, as well as
the provision of effective inputs and equipment to meet the needs of family farms.

15. In terms of marketing, 48 producers’ groups will be organized in order to negotiate
and fulfill production contracts, and 30 per cent of production will be sold on the
basis of written or oral contracts.

16. In terms of rural finance, eight new operational credit unions will be established
and 8,800 people will benefit from credits, including at least 1,000 from credit with
training, 3,200 for shared village granaries, and 4,000 for productive credit.

17. Farmers’ organizations will be operational and provide members with services they
could not obtain individually, especially in collective input supply.

18. Nutrition education sites and family vegetable gardens will be established, helping
at least 1,000 vulnerable farming families with children under 5 years of age to
access a more balanced diet.

19. Four hundred microprojects targeting the most vulnerable households involved in
the management of natural resources and communal village land will be
implemented, scaling collective actions to combat deforestation and environmental
degradation to the village community level so as to foster participatory natural
resource management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The adoption of the so-called “production poles” approach, in widespread use since
the AD2M midterm review, is fully justified in the project area. These should evolve
into “agricultural development poles”, which will form the centrepiece of the second
phase. This approach will comprise the concentration4 of productive investments,
support to agricultural services and efforts to enhance market access focused in
priority areas. It is in line with the project rationale as fine-tuned during the first
phase, incorporating the development of productive infrastructure and the
expansion of arable land, promoting more effective and market-oriented
smallholder farming as well as the organization of producers. Efforts to build the
resilience of cropping systems to climate change must be strengthened in the
second phase. The approach will remain participatory and inclusive.

21. The ASAP grant financing will be used to consolidate the agricultural resilience
benefits of AD2M and to provide the missing link in all poles by securing long-term
investments. The ASAP financing will support in particular production- and
productivity-building activities that are most likely to withstand the impacts of
climate change over the long term while generating immediate socio-economic
benefits.

B. Organizational framework
22. The project will remain under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture as the lead

implementing agency. The bodies responsible for the coordination and guidance of
the project will remain the same: (i) the National Steering Committee (NSC), which
will ensure project alignment with national strategies; and (ii) the regional
orientation and monitoring committees, which will ensure in particular the

4 This in the context of a large and isolated project area with high potential, taking into account limited financial resources.



EB 2015/115/R.8

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

alignment of annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) with the regional priorities in
Menabe and Melaky. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) will continue
coordination and management, and its staff will be strengthened to take account of
the constraints of expansion into new communes (isolation, poles, etc.). The
performance of both project staff and staff of locally-based partner NGOs will be
evaluated annually against the functions and objectives as set out in the AWPB.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. The PMU will consolidate AWPBs, prepared in accordance with established standards
and on time. It will be responsible for project implementation and for organizing
and administering the meetings of the regional orientation and monitoring
committees and the NSC. The AWPB will be approved by the NSC and transmitted
to IFAD for approval before the first disbursements are made from the ASAP grant
and IFAD loan.

24. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will comprise: i) continuous
systematic internal monitoring, not only to track the implementation of activities
planned in the AWPB but primarily to ensure the attainment of various outcomes
contained in the new project logical framework. A climate change adaptation
specialist with expertise in geographic information system (GIS) and participatory
farmers’ field schools will be recruited (with ASAP financing) to serve as a key
resource throughout the project. Participatory mapping activities involving farmers’
field schools will provide system inputs. The baseline survey for the second phase
of the project will also serve as the impact survey for the evaluation of the first
phase.

25. An M&E plan will be developed to improve the coordination and implementation of
activities. The project M&E manual will be revised to reflect the new provisions and
various improvements to be made to M&E. Monitoring will be participatory so as to
facilitate the transfer and building of development self-management capacities
among the population.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures developed

during the first phase will be reviewed and updated. Existing procedures will remain
in place, to be supplemented where necessary. The financial management and
accounting of the project will respect the existing rules and practices applicable to
all IFAD-financed project in Madagascar. The existing accounting software will be
updated and accounting staff will undergo training. Aspects relating to financial
management and flow of funds are detailed in appendix 7 of the project design
report, “Financial management and disbursement systems”.

27. During the second phase, the procurement procedures will be identical to those
already used by AD2M, respecting the applicable rules and general provisions in
this area in Madagascar and IFAD.

E. Supervision
28. The East and Southern Africa Division of IFAD will directly supervise the project.

IFAD and the Government of Madagascar will jointly conduct a midterm review at
the end of the third year. The supervision plan is provided in appendix 6 of the
project design report.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total project cost, including material and financial contingencies, for the

2016-2022 period is estimated at US$56.7 million.

30. Component 1: Promotion of effective and climate change resilient production
systems, will cost approximately US$40.8 million (72 per cent of the total project



EB 2015/115/R.8

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost); component 2: Support for access to markets and economic opportunities, will
cost US$7.0 million (12 per cent); and the coordination, management and
monitoring and evaluation system will cost US$8.9 million (16 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Promotion of effective and climate change

resilient production systems 20.2 5.8 7.5 1.2 6.1 40.8
2. Support for access to markets and

economic opportunities 6.1 1.0 7.0
3. Project management and monitoring and

evaluation 8.1 0.2 0.5 8.9
Total 34.4 6.0 7.5 1.2 7.6 56.7

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$34.4 million (60.7 per cent);

(ii) an ASAP grant of US$6 million (10.6 per cent); (iii) OFID cofinancing of
US$7.5 million (13.2 per cent); (iv) a Government of Madagascar contribution of
US$7.7 million (13.5 per cent); and (v) a beneficiary contribution of US$1.2 million
(2 per cent).

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Consultations 9.9 87.7 0.7 6.6 - - - - 0.7 5.8 11.3
2. Construction 11.3 42.0 7.7 6.5 7.5 27.9 1.2 4.3 5.2 19.3 26.9
3. Equipment and

materials 5.2 62.6 1.7 20.3 - - - 1.4 17.1 8.3
4. Training 2.6 60.5 1.7 39.5 - - - 0 4.3
5. Salaries/allowances 4.0 95.7 0.1 3.3 - - - - 0.04 0.9 4.2
6. Operating costs 1.4 80.0 - - - - - 0.30 20.0 1.7

Total 34.4 60.7 6.0 10.6 7.5 13.2 1.2 2.0 7.7 13.5 56.7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. Based on projections, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project will

be 14.75 per cent. This EIRR, which is well above the opportunity cost of capital
(8.2 per cent), is satisfactory given that some additional benefits have not been
taken into account, including those generated by support activities (construction,
equipment, training) and those deriving from technical assistance, training,
information and awareness-raising support. Furthermore, the benefits of improving
land tenure security have not been fully reflected since they are difficult to
quantify; these include investments linked to local land tenure plans, socio-land
tenure analysis, land tenure mediation for the allocation of new plots;
strengthening land offices, partner capacities and training on offer; reducing
transaction costs by improving access to financial services and technology; and
improving living standards, hygiene and nutrition among the project target group.

33. In conclusion, the EIRR is robust with respect to changes in costs or benefits, and
remains satisfactory given that it does not take a number of direct and indirect
benefits into account. The sensitivity analysis, calculated over an extended
economic lifecycle of 20 years, assesses the risks that may constrain AD2M-II
implementation as a result of adverse changes in economic or financial conditions,
including increased prices. Under conditions favourable to the project, such as
increased benefits or reduced costs, the EIRR would further exceed the base rate of
14.75 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.8

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Sustainability
34. From the outset of AD2M-II, the PMU will develop an exit strategy, which it will

implement, transferring responsibilities to project-supported structures, including
communes and farmers’ organizations. The sustainability of the strategy depends
on the assumption of responsibility by producers. The sustainability of land tenure
security will be guaranteed by its inclusion in a proactive national policy and by the
institutionalization, at all territorial levels, of decentralized structures and specific
implementation modalities. It will remain, nonetheless, dependent on the
sustainability of such structures, especially land offices. The sustainability of
hydro-agricultural developments will depend primarily on the management and
maintenance of irrigation networks. The simple gravity model chosen for irrigation
networks takes into account the weak technical capacity of the management
structure, which relies primarily on users through water users’ associations; such
associations should be involved in the project from the outset, strengthened,
supported and ultimately transferred responsibility for managing irrigation
schemes.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. The major risks relate to governance, the severity of the climate, the destructive

effects of climate change on social and production capital of small producers, locust
infestation and physical insecurity, especially cattle rustling. Administrative and
financial management risks are considered low, relating primarily to the lack of an
operational internal audit system for IFAD projects in Madagascar. A detailed table
of risks and mitigation measures is presented in chapter III, F and in appendix 4 of
the project design report.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. AD2M-II project design is aligned with IFAD’s mandate and Strategic Framework
2011-2015. Project activities are aligned with IFAD’s Madagascar COSOP
2015-2019, in particular strategic objective 1: the widespread adoption of effective
and climate change resilient production systems.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The AD2M-II objectives are aligned with: (i) the General Government Policy,

adopted in May 2014; (ii) the 2015-2019 National Development Plan; (iii) the
2015-2025 Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Sectoral Programme, based on the
priorities and commitments agreed upon by the main sector stakeholders under the
National Pact, which marked Madagascar’s official accession to the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme; and (iv) the National Policy to Combat
Climate Change. The AD2M-II objectives are consistent with the 2015-2019 UNDAF
objectives, since the project will contribute substantively to the five pillars of
economic and social development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. The first phase of the project resulted in the adoption of numerous innovations in

the project area. The results have been satisfactory and the following innovations
will be scaled up during the second phase: i) farmers’ field schools; ii)
agro-ecological techniques recently introduced and popularized by the project
through farmers’ field schools; iii) off-season growing for vulnerable smallholders
with no irrigated land; and iv) the taxation, identification and certification combined
operation approach in project-supported land offices.

39. The learning process will continue, in particular by capitalizing on experiences and
instituting systematic exchanges with other rural development stakeholders,
especially projects financed by IFAD and other technical and financial partners
(such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency Central Highlands Rice
Productivity Improvement Project and the World Bank Emergency Food Security



EB 2015/115/R.8

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and Social Protection Project). The project will benefit from knowledge built in
similar areas by other successful projects in the country: i) access to markets and
marketing (the Rural Income Promotion Programme and the Support Porgramme
for Rural Microenterprises and Regional Economies); and ii) agricultural advisory
services and the strengthening of professional organizations.

40. Climate change adaptation is also among the key themes. The ASAP financing will
help strengthen activities aimed at building farmers’ resilience to the effects of
climate change: hydro-agricultural development, including spate-irrigated areas,
reforestation, agro-ecology and natural resource management approaches in
general. Project implementation will thus provide the knowledge base and solid
expertise to replicate and expand the application of alternative activities to build
resilience to climate change.

Policy engagementD.
41. AD2M-II is anchored in the economy and the institutional environment at the

communal and regional levels. It promotes decentralization and the organization of
stakeholders at the local level so as to ensure the sustainability of investments. The
project incorporates activities relating to policy consultation, capacity-building,
farmers’ organizations, land tenure security, rural finance and knowledge
management.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Madagascar and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix 1.
session.

43. The Republic of Madagascar is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
Republic of Madagascar in an amount equivalent to twenty-four million five
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 24,500,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Madagascar through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme in
an amount equivalent to four million two hundred thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 4,200,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for the National Agricultural
Technology Programme – Phase II Project


People’s Republic of Bangladesh

National Agricultural Technology Programme – Phase II
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: World Bank

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$214 million (net of beneficiary contributions)

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.8
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Government of Bangladesh, World Bank, United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)

Amount of cofinancing: World Bank loan: US$176 million
USAID grant: US$7.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$6.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.5 million

Appraising institution: World Bank

Cooperating institution: World Bank



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan to the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project for the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the past 20

years, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh aims to become a middle-income
country by 2021; achieving this will require that the Government of Bangladesh
overcome considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic
growth. The country’s annual GDP growth averaged about 6 per cent between 2000
and 2013, accompanied by a decline in the national poverty headcount rate from
48.9 to 31.5 per cent over the first decade of the century, effectively lifting some
16 million people out of poverty.

2. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million inhabitants, has also made noteworthy
gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Despite these gains, it remains a poor country, with a 2013
GDP per capita of about US$1,000. Bangladesh is regularly hit by natural disasters
that severely impact the economy, disproportionally affecting the infrastructure
and agriculture sectors, as well as vulnerable groups. Nutrition outcomes have not
kept pace with the progress achieved with most social and economic indicators.

3. Agriculture covers about three quarters of the country’s scarce land and supports
the majority of the population’s livelihoods. While overall poverty has significantly
declined over the last decade, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still around 35
per cent) has not declined as fast as in urban settings; and the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three times higher than in
urban areas.

4. Agriculture’s contribution to the country’s economic output has declined over the
past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries still account for 17 per cent
of GDP. Some 67 per cent of the population live in rural areas and over 43 per cent
of the country’s total labour force are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, achieving
further socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty
reduction will require policies and investments conducive to lasting
transformational changes in rural areas – including through technological
innovation in agriculture.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

5. While the performance of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) has
been impressive in contributing to food security (particularly with rice), research in
some key subsectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet to reach its potential
productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations
(including a range of new climate-smart technologies for production and post-
harvest). The proposed National Agricultural Technology Programme (NATP) – the
second phase of three projects initially planned – will seek to overcome some of



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the key constraints still holding back the NARS, and to add greater value to the
output of the agricultural sector.

6. The NATP phase two (NATP-II) project is fully aligned with the government’s
priorities, in particular with: (i) the Perspective Plan 2010-2021 outlining the
strategy for achieving food security, making adequate infrastructure available and
pursuing environmentally friendly development; (ii) the Sixth Five-Year Plan (6th
FYP) identifying focal sectors for pro-poor growth, including agriculture, livestock,
community-based fisheries and rural finance; (iii) the policy framework of the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012); and (iv) the Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Council (BARC, 2011).

7. Being agriculture-centric, the NATP-II project will complement the ongoing IFAD-
funded portfolio in Bangladesh and is fully aligned with the country strategic
opportunities programme’s (COSOP) objectives of achieving: (i) better adapted
livelihoods of poor people in vulnerable areas to climate change; (ii) greater
market access and improved value chains for small producers and entrepreneurs;
and (iii) economic and social empowerment for marginalized groups, including poor
rural women.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The three-phase programme will cover all of the 64 districts by the

third phase. In this context, NATP-II will cover 57 districts (including the 25
covered by NATP-I) and span a broad range of agroecological zones across
Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in up to 270
subdistricts (or upazillas); this includes 120 already covered under NATP-I, plus up
to 150 new upazillas. New upazillas will be selected following the multicriteria
approach successfully applied under NATP-I (including poverty incidence, high
prevalence of marginal farmers and agroecologically stressed areas).

9. Target group. In compliance with government policies and strategies, the primary
target group for NATP-II will be smallholder farmers: particularly small, marginal
and landless farmers. Special emphasis will be placed on targeting women.

B. Programme development objective
10. The development objective of this project is to increase agricultural productivity of

smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected
districts. This will be achieved by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the NARS and
the extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at
increasing farm productivity and reducing post-harvest losses; and (ii) promoting
the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and producer
organizations by facilitating their linkages with markets.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Enhancing agricultural technology generation. Component 1

will improve the performance of NARS through the support to agricultural
technology development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions
(institutional and human capacity). Research will be funded through competitive
grants. The component will also finance a number of activities (including specific
studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and others) in support
of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.

12. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes – embedded in the
different project components – an agricultural innovation fund (AIF). The AIF is at
the core of the NATP-II scale-up strategy; it aims to provide grant funding for
eligible research and microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project
beneficiaries. The AIF is fully aligned with the holistic approach to agricultural
innovation promoted by the project. In order to effectively contribute to achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the project development objective, the AIF includes the following three funding
windows: (i) AIF-1 (US$26.2 million) will promote agricultural technology
generation through a programme-based research initiative (AIF-1 PBRG) and a
competitive research grant programme (AIF-1 CRG); (ii) AIF-2 (US$17 million),
through matching grants, will promote farmers’ adoption of innovative technologies
generated by the research community; and (iii) AIF-3 (US$4.6 million),
through matching grants, will support private operators in developing business and
market opportunities for farmers, as well as in providing relevant private services
to farmers. NATP-II will use calls for proposals, scientific and technical peer-
reviewing and transparent selection mechanisms for the allocation of all grants
under the AIF; disbursement against the AIF is subject to the Bank’s approval of an
AIF Manual of Operational Guidelines and Procedures. NATP-II will explore
synergies between its AIF and the access to rural financial services promoted under
IFAD’s new project for Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
(PACE).1

13. Component 2: Supporting crop development. Component 2 will increase farm
yields, diversify agricultural production, and improve market linkages for
smallholder farmers by: (i) improving the outreach and quality of crop extension
and advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers from
the Department of Agricultural Extension; (ii) promoting information and
communication technology (ICT) in agricultural extension services and supporting
farmer-to-farmer extension; (iii) developing farmers’ skills to scale up the
dissemination of good agricultural practices including those developed under NATP,
as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable production of safer food;
(iv) promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm
output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce
post-harvest losses and support processing; (v) facilitating stronger collaboration
with the private sector for agribusiness development on agroprocessing, market
access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
services; and (vi) strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through
capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure.

14. Component 3: Supporting fisheries development. Component 3 will promote
productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a
better access to market opportunities for fish farmers. NATP-II will provide support
for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small-scale aquaculture
ponds) and inland capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beels [a lake-like
wetland with static water] and haors [a hoar may host several beels]) by (i) scaling
up NATP good aquaculture practices for the production systems prevailing in the
project area; (ii) promoting community-based fisheries management; (iii)
supporting the participation of fisheries common interest groups (CIGs) and
partner organizations (POs) in value chains; (iv) reinforcing research-extension-
farmer linkages; and (v) strengthening the capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-
II will explore linkages with fishery activities under the ongoing IFAD-supported
operations in the haors.

15. Component 4: Supporting livestock development. Component 4 will promote
productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service
delivery, as well as better access for livestock farmers to markets. Activities under
this component will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry
farming, and focus on: (i) strengthening livestock institutions, improving livestock
extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programmes to a larger number of

1 PACE aims to enhance the livelihoods of rural women and men by improving profitable business opportunities for
microentrepreneurs, and creating wage employment for extreme and moderatly poor people. PACE will provide NATP-II
finance groups with business planning/development services to prepare business plans for funding through PACE's
microenterprise loan programme. In addition, crop, fisheries and livestock farmers unable to access NATP-II matching
grants could be referred to PACE loan schemes.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers; and (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected
livestock markets.

16. Component 5: Project management. Activities under this component will:
(i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish
liaison mechanisms between the World Bank and the project, and between the
project and the Government of Bangladesh, and (iii) coordinate the implementation
of selected overarching project activities with the support of external technical
assistance.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
17. NATP-II will build on and scale up successful interventions and address important

lessons learned from NATP-I. The integrated approach to reaching the project
development objectives will include a foundational component that contributes
towards decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research, as the basis for an
enhanced agricultural technology system. The project will include a further three
subsector components (crops, livestock and fisheries) to address a range of
constraints to technology generation, technology transfer and adoption at farm
level, and farmers’ access to markets. This approach is expected to lead to an
enhanced linkage between agricultural research, extension, and production – an
area regularly reported under NATP as requiring further improvement.

B. Organizational framework
18. The representative of the borrower is the Ministry of Finance. NATP-II will be

implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. It will be fully
integrated into the Government of Bangladesh administration, and project
implementation is designed to promote the use of existing government structures
at the central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

19. A joint steering committee, composed of senior representatives from the
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
involved in project implementation, as well as representatives from the farmers
and private sector, who will provide strategic guidance, approve annual budget and
activity plans, monitor overall implementation progress, facilitate interagency
coordination and resolve any outstanding issues requiring high-level decisions.

20. Project management unit. A small project management unit (PMU) will be set up
to oversee implementation of project activities, carry out day-to-day project
management functions, facilitate coordination among components, and liaise with
the World Bank on all project implementation-related aspects. The PMU will also be
in charge of project monitoring and evaluation, producing a project implementation
manual (PIM) that is acceptable to the development partners, detailing the
operational, financial and administrative procedures of NATP-II. The PMU will also
be responsible for the implementation of component 5.

21. Project implementation units. All other project components will be integrated in
the corresponding line department (or agency); each department/agency will set
up a component-specific project implementation unit (PIU). Under the Ministry of
Agriculture, BARC and the Department of Agricultural Extension will each set up a
PIU; BARC for the implementation of component 1 (agricultural technology
generation) and the Department of Agricultural Extension for component 2 (crops).
Under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, the Department of Fisheries will set
up a PIU for the implementation of component 3 (fisheries) and the Department of
Livestock Services will set up a PIU for component 4 (livestock). Using project
funds, the Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock Services and BARC
will recruit service providers (e.g. international institutions, agro-consulting firms,



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

academia or others) to deliver the technical assistance needed for strengthening
their institutional capacity and supporting their PIUs with the implementation of
component-specific activities.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Planning. The PMU will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and
budget, getting it approved by the Ministry of Finance and cleared by the World
Bank. The plan will include planned activities along with targets and expenditures
and will reflect the general project targets and activities.

23. Monitoring and evaluation. NATP-II will have a multi-tier results monitoring and
impact evaluation system that will inform on the progress made towards achieving
the development objective. Results will be sex-disaggregated reported as much as
possible to capture the gender dimension of NATP-II.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge sharing and learning is a
key activity throughout all of NATP-II’s components. The project will utilize ICT for
extension and capacity-building purposes, and further aims to build an agriculture
knowledge repository and a knowledge platform under its ICT initiative. Another
important tool will be the farmers information and advisory centres that will serve
as fully equipped agricultural technology and knowledge-sharing centres.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. A fiduciary assessment of NATP-II was carried out during design, and follows World

Bank procedures. The fiduciary assessment rated the risk in financial management
(FM) as “substantial”, due to (i) the involvement of multiple PIUs and accounting
centres; (ii) the timeliness of consolidation of FM reports; and (iii) compliance with
the requirements of multiple donors. Risk-mitigating measures have been
incorporated into the design of the FM implementation arrangements, and a
number of additional measures will be taken to ensure overall FM capacity and
performance.

26. NATP-II will hire an experienced consultant for the PMU (a senior financial
management specialist), with qualifications acceptable to the Bank and IFAD, to
lead and coordinate FM activities. The consultant will support the project in
strengthening budgeting practices, internal controls, fund reconciliations, and other
relevant financial functions, including coordination with the FM staff at the PIUs.
The current manual system of accounting will be enhanced within 12 months of
project effectiveness by a computerized FM information system to facilitate easy
and timely access to financial information and its consolidation. In order to ensure
that clear practices are harmonized across the project, the PIM will include all the
relevant parts of FM operations, donors’ compliance and financial disclosure. Prior
to effectiveness, the project will also adopt an online, off-the-shelf, web-enabled
accounting software. Annual external audits of all project components will be
conducted by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate and will be supplemented
by additional internal audits from an independent audit firm (twice in the project
lifetime).

27. Flow of funds. Financing from the International Development Association (IDA),
IFAD and a USAID trust fund will be disbursed through three separate designated
accounts. These will be opened and operated by the PMU. All PIUs will maintain a
designated operating account to receive funds from the PMU. The IFAD loan will be
administered by the World Bank under a cooperation agreement with IFAD. An
initial advance will be provided and will be replenished based on regular statements
of expenditure. The same method will be applied between the PMU and PIUs. After
the first year of implementation, the Bank will review the FM performance and, in
consultation with IFAD, may recommend converting the disbursement modality to



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

one based on interim unaudited financial reports, including a six-monthly forecast
of fund requirements.

28. Project-related transactions relating to all funding sources (IDA, USAID, IFAD and
the Government of Bangladesh) will be accounted for separately in the PMU
following double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a cash basis. The key project
accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible are as follows:
(i) budget preparation and monitoring; (ii) payments for eligible project
expenditure to third parties; (iii) disbursement of project funds to various agencies,
as per approved work plan; (iv) maintenance of books and bank accounts; (v) cash
flow management; (vi) financial reporting to the Government of Bangladesh, the
World Bank, IFAD and other stakeholders; (vii) preparation of withdrawal
applications to claim funds from the World Bank and IFAD; and (viii) assistance to
the external auditor and ensuring appropriate follow-up of audit. Details on the
proposed FM and disbursement arrangements can be found in annex 3 of the World
Bank’s Project Appraisal Document.

29. Procurement. Procurement financed under the project will be carried out in
accordance with the World Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and
Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Procurement Guidelines) and “Guidelines:
Selection and Employment of Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Consultant
Guidelines), and the provisions stipulated in the financing agreement. The
procurement method will depend on the nature of the expenditure and the value of
the contract. The PMU and all PIUs will preserve all procurement records and
documents in accordance with provisions of the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA
2006).

30. Procurement under NATP-II will be guided by the World Bank-approved
procurement plan and processed through pooled procurement by the PMU for
selected goods and services (e.g. ICT equipment and peripherals, furniture and
office equipment, consultant services to be provided across various components,
and others) under component 5, and by the four PIUs and the PMU for all other
component-specific goods, works and services. To mitigate procurement risks from
low in-house capacity, the project will contract six procurement specialists
(consultants): two for the PMU and one for each PIU. An acceptable procurement
plan covering the first 18 months of project implementation is available.
Institutional procurement approval will be provided by the respective Head of
Procurement Entities (HOPE) or his/her delegate as per delegation of financial
powers of the four agencies (departments’ Director General and BARC Chairman);
the HOPE for the PMU is the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency).

31. Audit. The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate of the Comptroller and Auditor
General will conduct an audit of the project’s annual financial statements within six
months from the end of the fiscal year. The project director will be responsible for
audit follow-up and taking remedial actions. Internal audits will include prepayment
audits and independent appraisals of the financial, operational and control activities
in the sector. The responsibilities of the internal auditors will further include
reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and
the level of compliance with financial procedures and government laws and
regulations. The first audit will be due by the end of the second year of
implementation.

32. Governance. Lessons learned over the last five years to improve project
implementation and safeguard against potential governance issues have been
incorporated in the project design, implementation arrangements and monitoring



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures. The project design allows for full and distinct accountability with a
single line agency (BARC, Department of Fisheries and Department of Livestock
Services) for each component. Project monitoring and impact evaluation will be
carried out in collaboration with the PMU and the PIUs by an independent entity
recruited competitively and operating with national and international consultants.
An independent assessment (technical and financial audit) of the AIF will be carried
out for project midterm review to improve the grant system’s performance
accordingly. Beneficiaries’ feedback will be obtained through IT apps tailored to the
project’s needs and channelled directly to the NATP-II management information
system’s area coordinated by the third-party monitoring firm. The project will also
set up project-level grievance redress mechanisms with local communities being
consulted early in the process. In addition, in line with the Bank’s Disclosure Policy
and the country’s Right to Information Act, all information in the project shall be
made public.

33. Several risks and risks mitigation measures related to procurement, financial
management, and environmental and social safeguards compliance have already
been described in the corresponding parts of the project appraisal document. In
order to further minimize governance and corruption risks, NATP-II will follow a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). This plan outlines a framework
for action, institutional arrangements, specific responsibilities, and additional
measures to facilitate effective and appropriate use of project funds. It is based on
the Bank’s and IFAD’s experiences in addressing governance and anticorruption
issues. The GAAP will be adjusted as necessary during implementation to reflect
governance issues that may emerge and/or to strengthen or add actions.

E. Supervision
34. The IFAD loan will be administered and supervised by the World Bank.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
35. The total estimated cost of NATP-II amounts to US$214 million (net of beneficiary

contribution), inclusive of contingencies and taxes.

B. Programme financing
36. Of the total cost of US$214 million, US$23.8 million will be financed through an

IFAD loan on highly concessional terms. The World Bank will be providing a loan of
US$176 million and USAID will contribute a grant of US$7.4 million. The
contribution of the Government of Bangladesh, in the form of parallel cofinancing,
will cover all vehicles purchased for NATP-II, as well as the salaries of civil servants
assigned to work full-time on the project, and other expenses.2 The financing of
taxes on eligible expenditures will be permitted with IFAD funds, to harmonize with
IDA practice and simplify the project’s accounting and disbursement procedures.

2 As per the table, the Government of Bangladesh contribution reported amounts to US$6.65 million (or 3 per cent of
project costs). This is likely to be underestimated, as it does not include the hiring by DOF and DLS of upazilla-level
extension staff. However, since this process is underway and has not yet been submitted to the Manpower Committee
(Finance Division/Ministry of Finance), the final number of staff that actually will be recruited is not yet known. Hence, the
exact amount to be added to the reported government contribution is not yet available.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan World Bank loan
USAID Gov't of

Bangladesh Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Goods, works,
services and
operating costs

19.0 11.5 140.0 84.5 6.7 4.0 165.7

2. AIF-13 2.3 8.8 16.5 63.0 7.4 28.2 26.2
3. AIF-2 2.0 11.8 15.0 88.2 17.0
4. AIF-3 0.5 10.9 4.0 87.0 4.6
5. Project
preparation
advance (World
Bank)

0.5 100.0 0.5

Total 23.8 11.1 176.0 82.2 7.4 3.5 6.7 3.1 214

37. In addition, beneficiaries will be required to provide cash contributions towards the
matching grants. Beneficiary contribution is expected to amount to US$6.5 million.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. Project benefits. It is estimated that over one million farming households will

directly benefit from project activities, including from improved extension services,
stronger linkages with research, on-farm demonstrations of new technologies,
capacity enhancement through training and skills development, as well as
cofunding productive assets. Based on previous experience, significant spillover
effects and knowledge transfer to farmers who are not members of groups
supported by NATP (the CIGs) can be anticipated. Therefore, all members of the
supported farming communities will potentially benefit from the technologies
generated, the improved extension services provided, as well as from the market
linkages developed. Up to three million farmers in the project area are expected to
benefit from NATP-II. The project will promote gender mainstreaming and women’s
empowerment to ensure that a significant proportion of direct beneficiaries is
female.

39. Economic analysis. The parameters used in making these projections were based
on the NATP-I experience and impact. On this basis, the NATP-II internal rate of
return is calculated at 28 per cent, the project’s economic rate of return (ERR) at
31 per cent, and the corresponding net present value at US$49.9 million. This ERR
remains robust under hypothetical scenarios of a 10 per cent decrease in expected
net revenues and/or a 10 per cent increase in project costs.

D. Sustainability
40. To ensure the durability of the model for technology transfer and delivery of

advisory services to farmers, NATP-II will promote a pluralistic extension system
that supports various complementary elements (e.g. public extension staff, local
private extension agents, lead farmers, Farmers’ Information and Advice Centres,
ICT connectivity, gender focus).

41. Improved access to knowledge, markets, market and price information and
financial services will help contribute to the sustainability of CIGs and POs
supported by the project. To further increase smallholders’ voices and economic
strength in the selected value chains, NATP-II will establish producer organizations
for farmers. In addition, bankable CIGs and POs will be linked up with financing
institutions involved in other programmes/projects supporting access to finances.

3 For explanation of AIF-1, AIF-2 and AIF-3 see para. 12.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

42. The sustainability of NATP-II outcomes will further be supported by the institutional
capacity and skills development agenda of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overall risks of NATP-II not achieving the project development objectives and

targets, and for NATP-II activities to have a negative impact on the people and the
environment are considered substantial.

44. The substantial risks identified with regard to policies and sector strategies refer to
the potential for lack of operationalization of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research
Council Act; delays in hiring public extension workers by the Ministry of Fisheries
and Livestock; and the lengthy approval process for the validation of the NAEP.
Under NATP-II, these will be addressed through: (i) strengthening the BARC
institutional capacity in the area of research management by hiring an international
service provider; (ii) expanding the use of private community-based extension
agents for livestock and fisheries with the aim of developing sustainable models for
private extension (e.g. scaling up fee-based services for livestock, promoting
additional sources of revenues for local extension agents for fisheries; and
(iii) adopting in NATP-II some of the core pillars of the NAEP (e.g. promoting a
group approach, complementary farmer-to-farmer extension; promoting private
extension services, etc.).

45. The substantial risk identified with respect to institutional capacity for
implementation refers to the challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two
different ministries and their capacity to implement the respective components. As
shown in the previous project, the coordination challenge can be adequately
addressed through a neutral PMU that has strong leadership. The recruitment of a
senior project director and a team of technical experts (consultants only, no civil
servants) at the PMU level will be a key factor for the successful coordination
across line agencies. An important mitigation measure in the implementation
arrangements for NATP-II (different from the previous project) is the support from
service providers recruited internationally for each line agency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
46. NATP-2 is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and with the

current RB-COSOP for Bangladesh, focusing on market access and value chains,
and on the economic empowerment of marginalized people. The project design
adheres to IFAD policies on private sector participation, environment, targeting and
gender. It further complies with the World Bank’s safeguards on indigenous people.
In terms of environmental impacts, the project is classified as “B”.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. The project, whose design has seen the close involvement of the Government of

Bangladesh, will support the Government’s strategic priorities in agriculture, i.e.
increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate
change, and enhancing nutrition through safer and more diversified food. NATP-II
will support the decentralization process already under way for agricultural
research and extension services.

48. Project implementation will be done through existing government structures at
central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

49. NATP-II will be cofinanced by the World Bank and USAID. It benefits from the
experience of all three partners and will link up with existing and relevant projects,
such as the IFAD-supported PACE project and the Haor Infrastructure and
Livelihood Improvement Project.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Innovations and scaling up
50. With the Agricultural Innovation Fund, NATP-II offers a tool to promote research

efforts for new and innovative technologies. The AIF is at the core of the NATP-II
scaling-up strategy; it aims at providing grant funding for eligible research and
microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project beneficiaries. The
AIF promotes a competitive research grant programme; farmers’ adoption of
innovative technologies generated by the research community; and will support
private operators in developing business and market opportunities for farmers and
by providing relevant private services to farmers (through matching grants).

D. Policy engagement
51. With its contributions to the agricultural technology development, NATP-II is

expected to support policies that create an enabling environment for smallholder
farmers. This work will include commodity-specific market and value chain
analyses, and the preparation of sector policy notes for senior decision makers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing
to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in an amount equivalent to seventeen
million special drawing rights (SDR 17,000,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan for the Support to National
Priority Programme 2



Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

Support to National Priority Programme 2

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$54.8 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 34.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$48.5 million)

Cofinancier(s):1 Microfinance Investment Support Facility for
Afghanistan (MISFA)

Amount of cofinancing: US$2.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$1.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 The National Priority Programme 2 is tentatively being financed by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
a group of financiers including the European Union, the World Bank and the Department for International Development of the
United Kingdom.



EB 2015/115/R.10

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Support to National Priority
Programme 2, as contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
for the Support to National Priority Programme 2

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Afghanistan is currently undergoing a major security, political and economic

transition that will fundamentally shape its future. In late 2014 and early 2015,
Afghanistan assumed responsibility for its own security and a new Government was
established. With the transition, development assistance is being transformed from
off-budget operations executed by external service providers to on-budget
operations managed and implemented by national institutions, with capacity-
building support as required. The present programme is fully aligned with these
changes.

2. Afghanistan’s population was estimated at 30.6 million in 2013, with an annual
growth rate of 2.4 per cent. The population is relatively young, with 64 per cent
under 25 years of age, and a median age of 17. Approximately 76 per cent of the
population lives in rural areas. Afghanistan is ethnically diverse, with some 25
distinct ethnic groups.

3. Following almost four decades of conflict, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest
nations in the world. An estimated 36 per cent of the population lives below the
poverty line. The Human Development Report ranked the country 169th out of 187
countries in 2013, with a human development index of 0.468. Its gender inequality
index was 0.712 in 2012, ranking it 147th out of 148 countries.

4. Afghanistan has received a substantial level of development aid since 2003. Public
institutions have been strengthened, health care and education significantly
improved, and road infrastructure constructed. There are indications that these
activities have generated positive development outcomes in terms of life
expectancy, health status, education levels and living conditions. In recent years,
external assistance has fuelled high economic growth, with the annual GDP growth
rate (constant prices) averaging 10.4 per cent for the 2009-2013 period.

5. Despite these improvements, most Afghans continue to endure conditions of
hardship and insecurity. Infrastructure has been ravaged by conflicts and internal
markets remain largely disrupted. Limited arable land per capita, low precipitation
and harsh climate conditions in many areas contribute to the hardship and resource
poverty endured by farmers. Poverty is multidimensional, involving a complex
interplay among a lack of assets, years of conflict and insecurity, disasters,
inadequate infrastructure, weak public services and traditional roles.

6. The agriculture sector contributes 24 per cent of GDP and employs approximately
70 per cent of the rural labour force. Afghanistan produces food and cash crops,
some export and industrial crops, and livestock products. At present, there is
increasing potential to overcome the devastation wrought by years of conflict and
develop the crop and livestock subsectors to increase output, food security and
rural incomes.



EB 2015/115/R.10

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

7. IFAD has historically been responsive to the specific needs of fragile states in terms
of policies, strategies and investments. Indeed, a substantial portion of the 2013-
2015 resource allocation cycle has been allocated to fragile states. This focus is
becoming increasingly structured and articulated, as requested by IFAD's governing
bodies. Two recent documents addressed the scaling up of engagement in fragile
States: A Strategic Vision for IFAD 2016-2025 (IFAD10/2/R.2), which prescribed
increased attention to the specific context and needs of fragile states, with
emphasis on building national capacities; and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation (IFAD10/2/R.3), which outlined ways
to better engage in fragile situations and promoted the capacity-building of
community organizations and public institutions.

8. The present programme builds on this emerging strategic vision and adapts
relevant elements of the business model to the Afghan context. It focuses on
building national capacities and linkages across the agriculture sector – working
with community organizations, public agriculture services and the private sector –
to enhance community resilience and improve food security. It supports national
programmes, in complementarity and synergy with partners, in particular the
European Union. Consistent with the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery of
May 2011, it invests in high-impact crop and livestock activities with comparative
advantages, market demand and growth potential. Consistent with the Afghanistan
country strategic opportunities programme, it provides strategic and programmatic
support to the Government in agricultural sector transformation, rural economic
growth and poverty reduction.

9. The programme is fully aligned with the Government’s request to partners to
progressively align with the newly prepared national priority programmes, moving
from fragmented, project-based support to a sector-wide, programmatic approach
in support of coordinated development. It will enable IFAD to contribute to
sustainable, nationally driven development; to build the capacities of public and
private institutions and community organizations; to modernize the agricultural
sector; and to support the transition of smallholders from subsistence to
commercialized farming. It will also position IFAD to help the Government tackle
systemic sector challenges, particularly policymaking and public investment
programming.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. IFAD’s support for National Priority Programme 2 (NPP2) aims to achieve national

coverage over a three-phase implementation period of 15 years. The Support to
National Priority Programme 2 (SNaPP2) constitutes the first phase of IFAD support.
It will be implemented in three selected pilot provinces, namely Balkh, Herat and
Nangarhar, with planned geographical expansion to additional provinces over the
second and third phases. In the three pilot provinces, the programme will primarily
focus on six districts: Nahri Shahi and Dih Dadai in Balkh; Karukh and Zendhajan in
Herat; Darah e Noor and Khewa/Kuzkunar in Nangarhar. However, it will also invest
in other districts to the extent required by relevant agricultural backward and
forward linkages, value chain linkages, relevance of activities, synergy with other
development operations, and security considerations. Within the six identified
districts, the programme will cover about 589 community development councils
(CDCs) consisting of 57,000 households (427,500 people); it will also cover
additional CDCs and households in the other districts as required. Should security
deteriorate substantially in any selected district or province, the programme will
formally shift to another district or another province subject to consultations
between the Government and IFAD.



EB 2015/115/R.10

3

11. The programme has a three-tier target group: (i) at the subnational institutional
level, it will target provincial and district extension staff of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), community mobilizers of the Ministry of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), and farmers’ resource centres
(FRCs); (ii) at the local institutional level, CDCs, NGOs and relevant private sector
entities will be strengthened and serve as interlocutors; and (iii) at the grass-roots
level, target groups will include poor rural women and men, kuchis (nomadic
herders), small farmers and herders, producers’ groups and women’s groups.
Woman-headed households and rural youth will be the object of specific
programme targeting.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of IFAD financing will be to contribute to improving the food security and

economic status of poor rural households in the three selected provinces. The
programme has two objectives: (i) institutional development and capacity-building
of community organizations, public extension services and relevant private sector
entities; and (ii) sustained increased incomes for small farmers and herders
fostered by improvements in productivity and output, infrastructure and market
linkages.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The programme has two components. Component 1: Institutional

development – approximately US$14.0 million, 26 per cent of total programme
cost.

14. Subcomponent 1.1: Extension services. The programme will strengthen the
extension directorate’s structures by: (i) establishing a women’s extension
department in MAIL to coordinate a cadre of female extension workers across the
target areas; (ii) strengthening the male extension worker cadre at the district
level; (iii) targeting young graduates from local agricultural faculties for recruitment
as extension assistants; and (iv) incorporating updated techniques and approaches
into the agricultural curricula.

15. Subcomponent 1.2: Farmers’ organizations. MAIL and development partners are
establishing a national network of FRCs across Afghanistan. The capacities of FRCs
and other relevant community organizations will be upgraded to enable them to
broker business relationships among stakeholders, bringing together decentralized
MAIL and MRRD services, input suppliers, market integrators and small farmers.

16. Subcomponent 1.3: Private sector. Private sector linkages, contract farming and
value chain upgrading will be integrated with district extension services and
community groups. Market linkages among producers and private companies will be
promoted, as a range of agricultural products can be processed to increase shelf
life, year-round availability and output price. Business service packages will be
developed to address the needs of typical enterprises. The capacities of
entrepreneurs will be upgraded and their links with producers’ groups enhanced.

17. Subcomponent 1.4: Policy and implementation support facility. This facility will
provide technical assistance (TA) to MAIL for agricultural development
programmes; provide TA and capacity-building to other relevant ministries; and
strengthen MAIL and MRRD knowledge management and communication products.

18. Component 2: Strategic investments – approximately US$35.8 million, 65 per
cent of total programme cost.

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Infrastructure. The programme will invest in irrigation
infrastructure and other community productive infrastructure, in line with
government policy and priorities.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Productive investments. The programme will help to improve
the productivity of rainfed wheat, horticulture and livestock production to improve



EB 2015/115/R.10

4

food security and increase household incomes in the target communities. Farmers
and herders will be trained in improved technologies, post-harvest activities and
information sharing.

21. Subcomponent 2.3: Rural financial services. The programme will invest in a range
of financial products and delivery mechanisms to improve target group access to
financial services. These will include: (i) targeting the ultra-poor; (ii) developing
value chain financing products; (iii) promoting sharia-compliant financial products;
(iv) offering TA and incentives to participating financial institutions; and (v) possibly
competitive grant schemes for agribusinesses in due course.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

22. The MAIL will be the lead implementing agency and the MRRD an additional
implementing agency. Relevant programme approaches and activities will be
mainstreamed into their operations. However, in the light of MAIL’s current capacity
gaps at decentralized levels, specific activities will initially be implemented by other
contracted ministries, projects and service providers (national entities, as far as
possible). The capacity-building of relevant national public and private organizations
will be a key responsibility of all contracted service providers, and the programme
will seek full implementation by reputable national institutions as soon as possible.

B. Organizational framework
23. The programme’s governance framework consists of the programme steering

committee (PSC), a provincial coordination committee (PCC) in each province, and
the existing MAIL programme support team (PST).

24. At the national level, the PSC will be responsible for policy and strategic guidance,
overseeing management and implementation, approving annual workplans and
budgets (AWPBs) and reviewing progress. It will consist of senior representatives of
MAIL, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and MRRD.

25. Each PCC will be convened by MRRD’s National Solidarity Programme (NSP)
management and chaired by a MAIL district representative. Their membership will
consist of representatives of provincial entities, contracted service providers and
PST personnel. PCCs will be responsible for coordinating the implementation of
activities and sharing information and knowledge.

26. The PST will be responsible for managing and coordinating the programme. It will
be expanded with the addition of a programme manager and technical specialists to
carry out relevant activities. Programme staff will be recruited on a competitive
basis in line with IFAD guidelines and subject to IFAD prior review.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

27. AWPBs and activity calendars, based on the design report and informed by
operational experiences and supervision missions, will constitute the programme
planning framework. The PST will prepare AWPBs through a consultative approach
involving community organizations, FRCs, MAIL, MRRD and other stakeholders.
Following PCC approval, provincial-level plans and budgets will be consolidated by
the PST into a programme AWPB and submitted to the PSC for approval and to
IFAD for concurrence at least two months prior to the start of each fiscal year. The
consolidated programme AWPB will contain a procurement plan, in compliance with
IFAD requirements. All plans will be disaggregated by gender.

28. The programme’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will collect data and
information to measure performance and progress towards objectives, and serve as
a learning tool by providing information for reflection on programme strategy and
operations. It will support decision-making at various levels and facilitate results-



EB 2015/115/R.10

5

based management. Where feasible, the programme will help to strengthen MAIL
M&E capacity.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The programme will formulate a
knowledge management strategy, in line with IFAD policy. Its website will be
completed within the first year of implementation and used as a knowledge-sharing
tool, hosted on IFADAsia. Information from M&E studies, reviews and study tours,
lessons and best practices will be shared through knowledge products such as
newsletters, publications, case studies and audio-visual reports. Knowledge-sharing
events will be organized at the community level and visits carried out to exchange
knowledge and learning by observing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Financial management. MAIL has extensive experience in managing IFAD-

financed projects. Current arrangements are efficient. Procedures are based on a
solid programme implementation manual (PIM) approved by IFAD in early 2014.
The PST finance unit has qualified and experienced staff confident in applying IFAD
procedures. For SNaPP2, the current PST staffing will be strengthened to enable it
to manage an additional programme. The IFAD contribution to SNaPP2 will be on-
budget and will rely on government systems. The PST will use, in addition to the
MOF public financial management system, its own accounting system to monitor
budget execution, control financial transactions, produce financial reports and
increase staff accountability. To ensure effective financial control, internal control
procedures applied under ongoing IFAD-financed operations, included in the PIM,
will be updated and applied to SNaPP2. An auditor will be contracted to undertake
internal audit activities in support of PST efficiencies.

31. Flow of funds. The flow of funds will be based on standard arrangements
applicable to on-budget externally financed projects. Funds from the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF) grant account will be transferred to a designated
account in United States dollars opened for this purpose in Da Afghanistan Bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated account will be maintained and
operated by the MOF. IFAD will advance funds to the designated account, in
accordance with imprest account modalities.

32. Procurement. Programme works, goods and services will be procured by the PST
in compliance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the IFAD Procurement
Handbook.

33. Audit. Annual external audit of project accounts will be carried out by a
competitively selected, reputable auditor. The audit terms of reference will include
visits to contracted implementing partners and service providers, as well as field
visits, where appropriate. MRRD and all contracted service providers will submit
audited financial statements covering SNaPP2 activities to the PST within four
months following the end of each fiscal year. Where United Nations agencies are
exempt from such a requirement, they will submit unaudited annual financial
statements of expenditures to the PST.

E. Supervision
34. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. The supervision process will

guide the programme towards the achievement of its strategic objectives and broad
poverty reduction outcomes, while ensuring fiduciary compliance. A midterm review
and a programme completion mission will be undertaken, in programme year three
and at closure, respectively.

35. In the light of the prevailing security situation, the country team will assess
alternative methods to complement IFAD supervision and implementation support
processes, such as contracting and/or otherwise involving local organizations.



EB 2015/115/R.10

6

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
36. The total programme cost is estimated at US$54.8 million over a six-year

implementation period. This is inclusive of contingencies, cofinancing, beneficiary
contributions and counterpart funding. Programme costs are organized in three
components: (i) institutional development (26 per cent); (ii) strategic investments
(65 per cent); and (iii) programme management (9 per cent).

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount %

A. Institutional
development 12 862 92 - 0 - 0 1 134 8 13 996 26

B. Strategic and productive
investments 30 838 86 2 500 7 2 123 6 289 1 35 750 65

B. Programme financing
37. The programme is expected to be financed by: (i) an IFAD DSF grant in the amount

of US$48.5 million; (ii) Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan
(MISFA) cofinancing in the amount of US$2.5 million; (iii) a Government
contribution equivalent to US$1.7 million; and (iv) a beneficiary contribution
equivalent to US$2.1 million.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount

1. Civil works 12 752 88 - - 1 417 10 289 2 14 458
2. Vehicles 132 41 - - - - 189 59 321
3. Equipment and materials 181 100 - - - - - - 181
4. Consultancies 538 100 - - - - - - 538
5. Goods, services and inputs 4 934 95 - - 241 5 - - 5 175
6. Grants 2 376 100 - - - - - - 2 376
7. Credit 9 000 78 2 500 22 - - - - 11 500
8. Capacity-building/training 11 872 100 - - - - - - 11 872
9. Salaries and allowances 4 956 94 - - - - 302 6 5 258
10. Operating costs 1 721 55 - - 465 15 922 30 3 108
Total Programme Costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. The programme will provide benefits to approximately 57,000 poor rural households

(427,500 women and men) represented by 589 CDCs. The immediate expected
benefits are increased productivity resulting from improved extension services,
farming and management practices, and access to markets and financial services.
These benefits will be expressed in terms of improved food security and increased
household incomes. In addition, participating households will have access to
training and capacity-building benefits. A number of other beneficiaries, such as
producers accessing rural financial services, woman-headed households adding
value to production, and youth receiving vocational training, have not been
quantified.

C. Programme management 4 762 94 - 0 - 0 279 6 5 041 9

Total programme costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787 100



EB 2015/115/R.10

7

39. Additional benefits will accrue from capacity-building interventions. Participating
farmers will be able to access improved services from their CDCs, which will be
strengthened and supported. Women from the poor and very poor groups will be
empowered to manage their own social and economic development, with better
access to markets and inputs. The improvement of rural markets, rural access
roads and extension services will lead to higher output prices for farmers.

40. The programme’s economic internal rate of return is estimated at 24 per cent.
Sensitivity analysis shows the programme would be robust in the event of increases
in costs, decreases in benefits and delays.

D. Sustainability
41. The programme concept itself – support to a national priority programme rather

than a stand-alone project – directly addresses sustainability. Programme
management will be mainstreamed within existing ministerial structures and
financing will be on-budget rather than off-budget. Programme implementation will
utilize existing structures and arrangements to the maximum extent possible,
without creating new ones. The existing CDCs nurtured by the MRRD/NSP will serve
as the instrument for community engagement at all stages. Existing producers’
groups, such as farmers’ cooperatives and dairy unions, will be supported. District-
level capacities of extension services will be strengthened, with clear benefits for
sustainability. Similarly, FRCs will broker linkages between producers and the
private sector, which may be sustained, depending on the strength of the relevant
business relationships.

42. The programme exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at provincial and
district levels; gradually transfer full implementation responsibilities to ministries
and CDCs; foster profitable business relations between producers and markets; and
improve the capacities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overarching risk relates to the recent political and security transition in

Afghanistan. Three post-transition scenarios, and the implications for the
programme, have been projected: (i) a best-case scenario, with a smooth political
transition, relative security, empowered institutions and economic growth; (ii) an
intermediate scenario, with a fragile political context, conflict confined to remote
areas and moderate economic growth; and (iii) a worst-case scenario, with political
instability, factionalism and continued conflict, and economic stagnation.

44. Many key elements related to the risk scenarios, such as a conflict-sensitive
approach to site selection, are already embedded in programme design. Other
elements, such as the configuration of TA, will be fine-tuned depending on the
prevailing scenario. During the initial stage of implementation, IFAD and the
Government will jointly reassess post-transition developments, update the
opportunities and risks under each scenario, and fine-tune the mitigation measures
and trigger points.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

45. As indicated earlier, the programme is consistent with policies, strategies and
investments relevant to fragile states, in particular A Strategic Vision for IFAD
2016-2025 and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for inclusive and sustainable rural
transformation. It is fully aligned with corporate policies on private sector
engagement, environmental impact and climate change mitigation and adaptation,
and gender mainstreaming. The programme’s environmental impact assessment
places it in category "B".



EB 2015/115/R.10

8

Alignment and harmonizationB.
46. The programme’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and

the Government’s priority to increase agricultural productivity. It is consistent with
national efforts to enhance development impact, reduce the duplication of aid
programmes and introduce programmatic approaches. It is aligned with the multi-
donor framework for agriculture production and market development, and in
particular with the assistance provided by partners such as the European Union,
World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Department
for International Development of the United Kingdom, German Agency for
International Cooperation and United States Agency for International Development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
47. The Government considers the programme a model for partner participation in the

NPP approach, which will be scaled up by MAIL when other partners provide funding
for NPP2. The programme is designed to expand, replicate, adapt and sustain
successful investments. Through its investment tools and forward-looking policy
support, the programme will create the pathways, drivers and spaces for scaling
up. Investments will be unbundled to facilitate operation of the core activities at
scale.

Policy engagementD.
48. The programme will inform agricultural sector policy through its implementation of

key NPP2 components and its structuring of the NPP2 governance and management
framework. The programme design process has already influenced overall
government policy as represented by NPP2. The programme’s policy and
implementation support facility will offer TA to all national institutions involved in
NPP2, in particular MAIL and MRRD.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A programme financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

50. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan in an amount equivalent to thirty-four million four hundred fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 34,450,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Argentina for the Programme for Economic
Insertion of Family Producers of Northern
Argentina (PROCANOR)


Republic of Argentina

Programme for Economic Insertion of Family Producers
of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Argentina

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change (UCAR)

Total programme cost: US$39.18 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$24.17 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.33 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.48 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.21 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Argentina for the Programme for Economic Insertion of
Family Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Argentina for
the Programme for Economic Insertion of Family
Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the Greater North region. In
2010, 18 per cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed
households had unmet basic needs. The provinces in Northern Argentina have the
highest rural poverty rates in the country.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF), has
demonstrated the capacity to improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is
implemented within its country programme as an instrumental part of the public
policy to support family farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with
UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme is based on public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design leverages opportunities for
building partnerships among agribusinesses, commercial enterprises and farmers’
organizations. It will prioritize emerging and dynamic value chains: (i) quinoa;
(ii) potatoes and ocas (Andean potatoes); (iii) chia; (iv) amaranth; (v) llama meat;
(vi) llama and vicuña wool; (vii) yacón (a tuber); and (viii) horticulture. These
value chains are characterized by market limitations and the increased participation
of family farmers.

5. The programme area includes the 10 provinces of Argentina’s Greater North:
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Formosa, Jujuy, La Rioja, Misiones, Salta, Santiago
del Estero and Tucumán, with activities concentrated in the provinces of
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Jujuy, Salta and Misiones.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in the priority value chains and organized into producers’
organizations. The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

2

incorporation of vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to improve sustainable integration of

small-scale producers into value chains. The five-year programme aims to reach
8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has four components:

 Component 1: Development of inclusive markets. This component will
strengthen development of dynamic, emerging value chains, with a focus on
family producers and joint ventures between small producers' organizations
and other private-sector actors. To develop markets for products, it will
support market promotion, brand creation and certification of origin. It will
also promote public procurement and the creation of market infrastructure.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by funding: scholarships for the
daughters and sons of family producers; training in business management,
business alliances and strategic partnerships; and special training for
government staff and producers’ organizations.

In addition, the programme will develop technologies for smallholder
producers, including adaptive research, prototyping of equipment, installation
of laboratories and development of seed systems for quinoa and other Andean
crops.

To develop markets for financial services, the component will carry out a
study of rural financial markets, organize provincial workshops and provide
resources to support requests for formal credit by producers’ organizations. It
will also support a study and pilot initiative on smallholder insurance.

In the framework of policy dialogue on value chains, the component includes
studies on the priority value chains and support to regional forums at the
cluster level that will facilitate interaction by value chain participants at the
regional level.

 Component 2: Organizational strengthening. To improve the functioning
of value chains, the programme will support participating organizations in the
following ways:

(a) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid diagnostics, institutional strengthening prior to the formulation of
business plans and establishment of business alliances.

(b) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans, including physical assets, training and technical
assistance, and organic and fair-trade certification. In the rural finance
services sector, it will increase access to working capital through
guarantee funds to obtain loans from financial institutions and revolving
funds for direct credit. Land-use planning and tenure regularization
activities will include participatory development of maps to illustrate
local land tenure and resolve tenure issues.

 Component 3: Productive development. This component will strengthen
the productive capacities of producer families within participating producers’
organizations through investment in productive on-farm assets, technical
assistance, training and farmer field schools in which trials are performed by
producers’ groups and guided by technicians.

 Component 4: Management and administration. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

3

include valid systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
management.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) development of clusters
in the emerging value chains; and (ii) business plans as the principal instruments
for investments, technical assistance and training for producers’ organizations.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. UCAR will be responsible for programme implementation and will directly execute

most activities in component 1 (including those designed to address market
failures) and component 4. Provincial governments will be responsible for
implementing components 2 and 3 through provincial management units, based on
financing agreements with MALF. If necessary, UCAR may implement some
component 2 and 3 activities. Beneficiary organizations will be responsible for
developing and executing the business plans through participatory processes.

11. There will be ample opportunity for beneficiary participation in the programme. In
the planning process, producers’ organizations will participate in cluster-level
forums to identify specific needs, define priorities and exchange ideas on policies
related to value chains. They will be responsible for planning and implementing
business plans, including procurement. Finally, they will monitor and evaluate the
implementation of their business plans, which will provide the programme’s system
with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility necessary to implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. At the cluster level, improvement plans will
be prepared with the participation of provincial authorities, smallholder producers,
private enterprises and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods that use an organizational matrix to manage the
development of clusters and business plans. The system will be integrated into
UCAR’s existing management system, which allows the monitoring of physical
progress based on data entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will
facilitate analysis of information critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation,
implementers will collect information from beneficiary households using a family
questionnaire that includes IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
survey. Institutional advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating
producers’ organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse
experiences in programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MALF, through UCAR, will be responsible for the financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to two designated
accounts in euro. From each designated account, funds will flow to the respective
operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be managed by
UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial operational
accounts denominated in Argentine pesos.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

4

16. Procurement. UCAR, the provincial management units and producers’
organizations will carry out procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans.
Procurement of works, goods and services in the framework of business plans, and
accounting for these expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’
organizations, with support from provincial units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed on by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support
for rapid programme start-up and set up of the accounting, planning, and
monitoring and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s general conditions for agriculturalF.
development financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to the clusters supporting
priority value chains for activities beginning as of the date of negotiations will be
considered eligible up to US$500,000. For recognition, the borrower must submit
the expenses to IFAD for reimbursement once the financing agreement has entered
into force and disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for five years of implementation will be US$39.2 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$7.7 million relates to the inclusive markets component;
US$18.7 million to organizational strengthening; US$8.4 million to productive
development; and US$4.4 million to programme management and administration.
Management costs make up 11 per cent of the programme cost. Costs include
8 per cent for contingencies with respect to price escalation for goods, services and
operating expenses, and 0.3 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to
goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the Government, with a contribution of

US$11.5 million to cofinance support to the business plans of producers’
organizations, operating expenses and staff salaries; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of
US$24.2 million and a grant of US$330,000 for research and knowledge
management; and (iii) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$3.2 million to
cofinance the business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2 below.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

5

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of inclusive markets 5 984 78 188 2 1 531 20 - - 7 704 20
2. Organizational strengthening 11 586 62 - - 4 720 25 2 364 13 18 670 48
3. Productive development 6 136 73 - - 1 393 17 844 10 8 373 21
4. Management and administration 460 10 140 3 3 835 87 - - 4 434 11
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of producers’
organizations) 16 616 65 - - 5 837 23 3 208 13 25 661 66

2. Goods, services and inputs 3 512 90 - - 396 10 - - 3 908 10
3. Consultancies (technical assistance) 1 828 65 328 12 636 23 - - 2 792 7
4. Training 1 444 100 - - - - - - 1 444 4
5. Credit and guarantee funds 765 100 - - - - - - 765 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 3 742 100 - - 3 742 10
7. Operating costs - - - - 869 100 - - 869 2
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 37,700

people), including 7,100 smallholder families and 900 on- and off-farm jobs.
Smallholder producers, organized in approximately 119 producers’ organizations,
including 24 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected
benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The programme’s internal rate of return is 24.3 per cent, and
the net present value 364 million Argentine pesos.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) its choice of dynamic value

chains for which there is sound market demand and in which participating
producers have experience; (ii) its support to beneficiary organizations that will
ensure sustainability after programme completion; (iii) the adaptive research
integrated into component 1; (iv) the environmental, climate change adaptation,
land tenure security and commercial certification measures to be integrated into the
business plans; and (v) its support to sustainable rural finance services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the stable poverty-reduction policy framework in Northern
Argentina and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delays in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which will be mitigated by their early identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) possible hesitance of private companies to join the programme – to be
reduced by open communication and invitation to participate in the clusters;
(iv) market risks, which are low by virtue of the selected value chains’ dynamism
and the reduction of both supply and marketing constraints; and (v) technological
and climatic risks, which will be mitigated through local seed programmes,



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

6

technology development, adaptive research and support to the integration of
climate-proof infrastructure into business plans.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Agri-Food and

Agribusiness Strategic Plan (PEA2). It is also consistent with the recommendations
of IFAD’s 2010 country programme evaluation in seeking a programme approach,
expanding the financial services available to smallholder producers and introducing
the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on dynamic value chains;

(ii) bringing together smallholder producers, public institutions and private
companies in clusters to plan the development of the value chains; (iii) integrating
adaptive research into business plans; (iv) introducing sector-support activities
such as seed programmes and technology development to enhance production and
marketing processes; and (v) enabling access to a spectrum of rural finance
services.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to support family

farming in Argentina and beyond by generating and communicating evidence of the
new approaches it applies. Best practices will be disseminated in coordination with
IFAD’s regional programme for the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
which is active in strengthening pro-poor policy in the region.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Argentina and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will not be tabled at this session. The
Board is requested to approve the programme proposal subject to the completion of
the negotiations of the financing agreement before the April 2016 session of the
Executive Board. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the
April 2016 Executive Board session, as well as any substantive changes to the
terms presented.

31. The Republic of Argentina is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Argentina in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million eight
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 22,850,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Argentina in an amount equivalent to three hundred and ten thousand euros
(EUR 310,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan for the
Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme


Kingdom of Bhutan

Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Bhutan

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests

Total programme cost: US$31.59 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 5.89 million (equivalent to approximately
US$8.27 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.76 million (equivalent to approximately
US$1.06 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.58 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.02 million)

Financing gap:1 US$6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL)

Amount of cofinancing: US$4.81 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.77 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) allocation or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Located on the southern slopes of the Eastern Himalayas, Bhutan is mostly

mountainous and heavily forested, with 70 per cent of its geographical area
covered in forests, 10 per cent with shrubs and only 3 per cent cultivated.
Elevations range from 160 to 7,000 metres above sea level, with 31 per cent of the
agricultural land on steep slopes – greater than 50 degrees.

2. Bhutan’s economy has experienced growth averaging 7 per cent per year, with
GDP per capita increasing from US$1,387 in 2006 to US$2,363 in 2013, and
poverty declining from 23 per cent in 2007 to 12 per cent in 2012. While
approximately 62 per cent of the population depends on agriculture (mostly
subsistence farming) for their livelihoods (95 per cent of the rural poor are
employed in agriculture), the share of agriculture in real GDP declined by more than
half, from 25 per cent in 2002 to 12 per cent in 2012. The share of spending on
agriculture also declined from 22.5 per cent in 1982 to 9.8 per cent in 2013.

3. Poverty in Bhutan is a distinctly rural phenomenon. Poverty also varies by region,
with the eastern parts of Bhutan significantly poorer than the rest of the country.
Many villages are still isolated: those with limited roads and market access tend to
have higher poverty rates. Lack of access to technology, business development
services, fair markets and suitable financial products constrain rural enterprise.

4. The challenges affecting agricultural production include natural disasters, declining
productivity, human-wildlife conflict, a shortage of farm labour, insufficient
irrigation and limited post-harvest management.

5. In addition, climate change is projected to have a major impact on agricultural
productivity as a result of changes in water availability, soil fertility and incidence of
pests and disease. Considering that the nation’s socio-economic well-being depends
largely on agriculture, water resources and forests, the impacts of climate change
have the potential to undermine development efforts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP)

6. Bhutan’s Government has accorded highest priority to agricultural development in
its Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013-2018) in order to: (i) stimulate climate-resilient
production; (ii) build value chain systems for vegetables and dairy, and a
comprehensive marketing system to enhance the commercial viability of other
agricultural products; and (iii) facilitate institutional linkages and policy dialogue
towards the commercialization of agriculture.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

2

7. The programme is therefore designed in alignment with the Eleventh Five Year Plan
as a strategic value chain programme with focused product interventions, taking
into consideration the Government’s priorities and gaps left by previous projects.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. The programme will initially be implemented in the six poorest eastern districts of

Lhuentse, Mongar, Pemagatshel, Samdrup Jongkhar, Trashigang and
Trashiyangtse. Upon midterm review, it will be scaled up to include districts in
central and south-western Bhutan.

9. The programme will follow an inclusive approach to reach all households living in
target communities. It will involve 21,860 households in six districts in establishing
sustainable agriculture production and an additional 7,115 households in building
vegetable and dairy value chains. Within the target districts, the programme will
work in areas that have been identified based upon: (i) demonstrated production
potential in select commodities; (ii) relative accessibility to roads and marketing
channels; and (iii) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities and
farmers’ organizations. Targeting will also focus on the inclusion of women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
10. The goal of the programme is to sustainably increase smallholder producers’

incomes and reduce poverty through commercialization of production by
programme households. The objective is increased returns to smallholder farmers
through climate-resilient production of crops and livestock products in nationally
organized value chains and marketing systems. The goal and objective are both in
line with Bhutan’s poverty strategy.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The programme’s three main components are: (i) market-led sustainable

agricultural production; (ii) value chain development and marketing; and
(iii) institutional support and policy development. There will also be a management
component.

12. Component 1: Market–led sustainable agricultural production. This
component aims to bring about a sustainable increase in agricultural production by
rural households and enhance the resilience of agricultural production systems to
climate-induced shocks. It consists of three subcomponents:

(i) Increased production resilience and diversification in agriculture. This
subcomponent will promote integrated agricultural production and
management through: (a) strengthening existing farmers’ groups and
establishing new groups; (b) strengthening extension services, including the
lead farmers outreach model, and increasing their reach; (c) supporting
agricultural inputs, including seeds and seedlings; (d) developing efficient
irrigation; (e) promoting agricultural system innovations; and (f) piloting an
initiative on strengthening local institutions for increased climate resilience.

(ii) Intensification and expansion of vegetable production. In order to
ensure an adequate volume of acceptable quality produce and planned and
timely production, the programme aims to: (a) expand and intensify
vegetable production by rural households; (b) strengthen existing vegetable
producers’ groups and promote new groups; (c) provide vegetable production
inputs; and (d) promote vegetable seed research.

(iii) Intensification and expansion of dairy production. To ensure that an
adequate volume of high-quality milk is produced by smallholder dairy
farmers, the programme will: (a) strengthen existing smallholder dairy farmer



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

3

groups and establish new groups; (b) improve outreach services for livestock;
(c) support fodder and feed production; (d) provide dairy production inputs;
and (e) install bio-gas units.

13. Component 2: Value chain development and marketing. By building value
chains and marketing systems for vegetable and dairy products, the programme
will increase the incomes of smallholder farmers through their participation in
commercial farm production through three subcomponents:

(i) Development of resilient vegetable and dairy value chains. The
programme will support the design and implementation of vegetable and dairy
value chains, increasing climate resilience and strengthening the capacity of
the Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL) for value chain development and
business plan design and implementation.

(ii) Strengthening agricultural commercialization and enterprise
development. Support will be provided for: (a) agriculture enterprise
development; (b) facilitating access to finance, including a social inclusion
fund and production support fund; and (c) development of multi-stakeholder
platforms and networks.

(iii) Development of community-driven market infrastructure. The
programme will support the creation of value chain infrastructure at the local
level, with ownership and management by communities, farmers’ groups,
cooperatives and small-scale entrepreneurs. Support will include the design
and construction of necessary infrastructure and equipment for vegetable and
dairy value chains.

14. Component 3: Institutional support and policy development. This component
aims to build an institutional and policy environment that fosters the collaboration
necessary for climate-resilient, market-led production and value chain development
in the renewable natural resources (RNR) sector for addressing structural
development constraints. The subcomponents include:

(i) Strengthened value chain and marketing knowledge and
communication. The programme will capture and document knowledge and
best practices from programme implementation, especially related to climate
resilience and value chain and market development by: (a) strengthening
market information systems; and (b) developing a curriculum for RNR training
institutes.

(ii) Mainstreaming climate change resilience and value chain lessons into
agricultural policies and sector strategies. This subcomponent will
involve: (a) participatory policy development and monitoring; (b) support to
Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) in mainstreaming
agricultural policy; and (c) developing a regulatory framework that is
conducive to private-sector development and public-private partnership (PPP).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The programme will be implemented over seven years, from 2015-2022. It will
adopt a flexible, non-prescriptive, process-oriented approach that enables
stakeholders to determine the scope of activities aimed at agricultural and livestock
diversification for climate-resilient livelihoods. Vegetable and dairy intensification
activities will follow a more selective approach to value chain and marketing
development.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. Programme implementation responsibility. MoAF will be the lead agency, with

overall responsibility for the programme and specific responsibility for achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

4

outcomes 1 and 3 (see the logical framework in appendix II). FCBL is the
implementing partner responsible for achieving outcome 2. The national
programme steering committee and regional programme implementation
committee will advise the office of the programme management (OPM), which will
be responsible for the delivery of results. A liaison office under the direction of the
OPM will be established within the MoAF secretariat.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. Programme activities will be reflected in
the Government’s planning and monitoring system. The OPM will establish a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) unit to ensure that all outputs, outcomes and
impact indicators are included in the planning and monitoring system, and will
design tools to capture critical field-level data not included in the planning and
monitoring system. The annual workplan and budget will be the main planning tool,
and will be used to review programme performance and progress.

18. Learning and knowledge management. A knowledge management strategy will
be prepared to facilitate engagement in policy development related to resilient
agriculture and dairy production, and marketing support. It will include strategies
for strengthening market information systems and developing RNR training
curricula. A strong knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be built through the
use of participatory tools and knowledge from M&E, and the development of
knowledge products.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
19. Financial management. The financial management assessment for this

programme concluded that the arrangements made by the MoAF are adequate. In
view of the low fiduciary risk, the country’s public financial management systems
will be utilized provided they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures.
Qualified finance staff will be in place at the OPM and liaison office. Financial
reporting will follow national accounting standards on cash-basis accounting in line
with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The programme’s
financial accounts will be maintained with computerized accounting software and
customized to generate financial reports.

20. Fund flow mechanism. IFAD will make funds available to the Government under
the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. Programme funds will flow
from IFAD via designated accounts established in the Royal Monetary Authority, or
another commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated accounts will be
administered following imprest account arrangements. Advances from the IFAD
loan must be segregated from other funds for the programme.

21. Internal controls and external audit. Internal controls will be established to
ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with IFAD’s
requirements. The Government’s Royal Audit Authority has been mandated to audit
all foreign-funded loan programmes following standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. External auditing arrangements will be
established by the Royal Audit Authority.

22. Start-up costs. Expenditures for programme start-up that are inccured after the
entry into force of the financing agreement but before the satisfaction of the
conditions precedent to withdrawal, shall not exceed an aggregate amount of
SDR 25,000.

23. Procurement of goods, works and services. Procurement of goods, works and
services financed by IFAD under components 1 and 3 will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Government’s Procurement Rules and
Regulations (revised June 2014). Under component 2, procurement will be carried



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

5

out according to FCBL Procurement Rules and Regulations, provided they are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.

24. Governance. A national programme steering committee will provide policy
direction to facilitate implementation and guide programme management. A
regional programme implementation committee will steer design and
implementation of the annual workplan and budget at the local, district and regional
levels. The national programme steering committee will resolve all programme
management issues and disputes concerning implementation; unresolved issues
may be referred to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests. The governance
framework will ensure that the programme includes: (i) mechanisms for regular
internal audits at the OPM and implementing offices; (ii) annual independent
audits; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during supervision; (iv) independent
impact assessments; (v) efficient public financial management systems and efforts
to ensure transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions; and
(vi) community involvement in decision-making, planning, implementation and
monitoring.

SupervisionE.
25. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. A midterm review will be

conducted halfway through the implementation period and will provide
opportunities for programme realignment and scaling up based on the availability of
funds.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total programme cost is estimated at US$31.59 million over seven years,

including contingencies. The total base costs equal US$24.18 million and physical
and price contingencies account for US$1.86 million and US$5.55 million
respectively (8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of total base costs).
Investment costs are estimated at US$26.18 million (83 per cent of the total cost)
while recurrent costs are estimated at US$5.41 million (17 per cent of the total
cost).

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap* IFAD grant
ASAP
grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Market-led
agricultural
production 4 196.0 4 808.7 4 268.6 399.8 3 024.6 658.8 - 17 356.7
2. Value chain
development and
marketing 598.5 3 150.1 1 662.3 173.9 1 729.1 - 4 281.0 11 594.9
3. Institutional
support and policy
development 13.6 144.0 65.7 34.0 268.9 - - 526.1
4. Programme
management,
coordination, M&E 965.7 170.6 - 452.9 - - 521.5 2 110.7

Total programme
cost

5 773.8 8 273.4 5 996.6 1 060.6 5 022.6 658.8 4 802.4 31 588.3

* Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 performance-
based allocation system (PBAS) allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

6

B. Programme financing
27. The programme will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately

US$8.27 million (26.2 per cent of the total programme cost); (ii) an IFAD grant of
approximately US$1.06 million (3.4 per cent of the total cost); (iii) an ASAP grant
of approximately US$5.02 million (15.9 per cent of the total cost); (iv) a mainly
in-kind beneficiary contribution estimated at US$0.66 million (2.1 per cent of the
total cost); (v) a contribution by the Government of approximately US$5.77 million
(18.3 per cent of the total cost); (vi) cofinancing from FCBL of US$4.81 million,
mainly through recurrent costs (15.2 per cent of the total cost); and (vii) a
financing gap of approximately US$6 million (19 per cent of the total cost) subject
to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the
2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing. The Government will
finance taxes and duties, most of the recurrent costs, re-training (in line with the
mandate of the MoAF) and dairy inputs.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.1

6

7

Table 2 a

Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap b IFAD grant ASAP grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 580.2 10.0 2 952.1 50.9 2 046.0 35.3 - - 185.2 3.2 38.6 0.7 - - 5 802.1

2. Equipment and
materials 675.1 10.0 2 298.5 34.0 2 587.6 38.3 204.4 3.0 90.2 1.3 432.7 6.4 462.3 6.8 6 750.7

3. Vehicles 7.3 10.0 - - - - 65.8 90.0 - - - - - - 73.1

4. Goods, services and
inputs 1 241.7 34.8 826.4 23.2 727.3 20.4 47.1 1.3 533.4 15.0 187.5 5.3 - - 3 563.4

5. Consultancies 13.2 0.5 761.4 28.7 206.8 7.8 260.3 9.8 1 413.9 53.2 - - - - 2 655.6

6. Workshops 0.0 - 192.6 34.1 190.5 33.8 166.2 29.5 14.9 2.6 - - - - 564.1

7. Training 2 238.5 34.7 969.9 15.0 238.3 3.7 215.9 3.3 2 785.0 43.2 - - - - 6 447.6

8. Fund - - 272.7 83.3 - - 54.5 16.7 - - - - - - 327.3

9. Operating costs 446.7 29.0 - - - - - - - - - - 1 091.1 71.0 1 537.8

10. Salaries and
allowances 571.2 14.8 - - - - 46.3 1.2 - - - - 3 249.0 84.0 3 866.5

Total programme costs 5 773.8 18.3 8 273.4 26.2 5 996.6 19.0 1 060.6 3.4 5 022.6 15.9 658.8 2.1 4 802.4 15.2 31 588.3
a The final disbursement categories will be decided based on IFAD procedures and will include a maximum of five cost categories to maximize efficiency.
b Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. All crop and farm models analysed are profitable, yielding positive net present

value. Economic analysis of the programme based on financial models and using
economic prices shows it to be profitable, with an estimated net present value of
404 million Bhutanese ngultrums or US$7.3 million, and an internal rate of return
of 16 per cent at a discount rate of 10 per cent.

29. The programme will directly benefit 28,975 households.

30. Immediate benefits include: (i) increased vegetable and dairy production;
(ii) greater use of sustainable agricultural practices; (iii) increased access to
extension and market information; (iv) sustainable extension services; (v) market
access through consolidation of production; (vi) enterprise establishment; and
(vii) greater employment opportunities. Indirect benefits include enhanced rural
employment, strengthened climate resilience and improved household nutrition.

D. Sustainability
31. The programme incorporates many features designed to promote long-term

sustainability. By selecting a limited number of value chains, production support is
area-specific and tailored to value chain planning needs, allowing subsequent
chains to be established. The programme will also build target communities’
ownership through village-level planning and implementation, including
investments in the development of operation and maintenance groups for assets.
Links between production, marketing and enterprise development will be forged to
promote the sharing of benefits between farmers and the private sector.
Accountability and ownership by farmers will be built to allow for demand-driven
services. Finally, the programme will strengthen grass-roots institutions and their
support services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. A major risk relates to the limited capacity of the implementing partner, FCBL, for

value chain and enterprise development, and PPPs. This has been mitigated by the
allocation of additional resources for strategy development, capacity development
support and targeted technical assistance. Strengthening climate change resilience
will be a challenge at the farm and community levels, and within value chains,
where risks, interests and values are diverse; success depends upon joint action
from an understanding of interdependent relationships. This risk has been mitigated
by strengthening climate-smart agriculture and farm management practices
through targeted technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

33. The programme conforms to IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting, gender,
environmental and natural resource management, and knowledge and innovation.
In terms of its environmental impact, the programme falls under Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
34. The programme is in line with the Government’s Eleventh Five Year Plan

(2013-2018) and will specifically contribute to expanding agriculture service
outreach to remote and vulnerable populations, and increasing smallholders’
resilience to climate change and shocks. The MoAF has developed a market-led
agriculture development strategy to facilitate the transition from subsistence to
commercial agriculture; the programme supports this strategy.

35. To enhance efficiency and reduce redundancies among government stakeholders,
the programme will aim to achieve complementarities among partners. Synergies
with the World Food Programme and the World Bank have already been identified.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Innovations and scaling upC.
36. The programme will support the following innovations: (i) the lead farmer model for

agricultural development; (ii) animal health service models; (iii) an e-agriculture
platform; (iv) permaculture approaches; and (v) linking smallholder market
development to the Bhutan commodity exchange. Although none of these
innovations is new, their integrated application in Bhutan through the proposed
programme is innovative. In addition, efforts to strengthen local institutions’
capacity for improved outreach and sustainability in collaboration with government
service networks have not previously been undertaken in Bhutan in an integrated
manner. Linking technical innovation with the development of new models is a
significant innovation in Bhutan.

37. In its second phase, the programme will also include areas with high production
and marketing potential for vegetable value chains in the south-central and
south-western districts, adding 7,500 direct beneficiaries (1,500 households).

Policy engagementD.
38. The programme will facilitate government linkages and policy dialogue towards the

commercialization of agriculture. This includes addressing RNR institutions and
policy issues to build strong agricultural institutions and sound policies for improved
and sustainable agricultural and marketing practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A programme financing agreement between the Kingdom of Bhutan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Kingdom of Bhutan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Kingdom
of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred ninety
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,890,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Bhutan in an amount equivalent to seven hundred sixty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 760,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 3,580,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President














































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening
Programme for the Camelid Value Chain in
the Bolivian High Plateau

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural Development and Lands

Total programme cost: US$38.76 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR12.87 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Contribution of borrower: US$16.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening Programme
for the Camelid Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau, as contained in
paragraph 47.

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the
Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In the past eight years, the performance of the economy of the Plurinational State

of Bolivia was sound, based on favourable macroeconomic policies despite slow
growth of major economies. From 2006 to 2013, the economy grew at an average
rate of 4.9 per cent, resulting in a fiscal surplus and a sustained increase in
international reserves. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased from 51 per cent in 2006
to 27 per cent in 2010. Per capita income increased from US$1,100 in 2006 to
US$3,000 in 2014, with a GDP of US$30,000 million. Notwithstanding this, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia is one of the poorest countries in South America and
one of the most unequal: about 65 per cent of a total population of 10 million
inhabitants live in poverty and 2.7 million people live in extreme poverty.
Inequality remains high. The Gini index dropped from 0.59 in 2006 to 0.51 in
2009, and in rural areas from 0.64 to 0.53 in the same period. Poverty here has
the face of indigenous and peasant women, and the highest levels of food
insecurity. Of the 340 municipalities, 102 (30 per cent) are in an extremely
vulnerable situation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. The proposed programme is fully justified in taking into account poverty conditions,
food insecurity and vulnerability of the rural population in selected priority
municipalities in the targeted area. Moreover, programme interventions are
relevant, taking into account the important contribution of South American
camelids to the economy of the population in the Bolivian High Plateau, whose
welfare is associated with the income derived from breeding and processing, and
from the marketing of fibre, meat and hides. The proposed activities will help
reduce difficulties and obstacles in primary production such as: (i) low productivity,
low quality and livestock numbers in the Bolivian High Plateau; (ii) improper
handling of animals and herds; (iii) limited availability of feed and water due to
deterioration of natural resources and climate change; (iv) expansion of the
agricultural frontier for quinoa cultivation; (v) low value added to raw materials;
and (vi) inadequate access to services (veterinary, inputs, etc.). The programme
will also address limitations on processing and marketing, including: (i) lack of
technical assistance; (ii) high production costs; (iii) inadequate access to markets;
(iv) lack of access to financial services; and (v) absence of relationships among the
diverse actors in the production complex. In this context, a long-term strategy is
proposed based on the sustainability of joint venture projects with access to
markets, and strengthening of organizational actors. Programme implementation
will scale up development approaches promoted by other IFAD-funded projects in
the country.The programme contributes to achievement of the objectives of the



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

2

National Development Plan, the Patriotic Agenda 2025 and the Agricultural
Development Sector Plan 2014-2018 of the Ministry of Rural Development and
Lands (MDRyT): poverty eradication and financial, productive and natural resource
sovereignty, which emphasizes that agricultural production must be used to meet
domestic demand and ensure food security.

3. The proposed programme, although not included in the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia 2008-2012 and its 2013-2014 extension, is consistent with IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 objectives to assist rural poor people in improving their
food security, increasing their incomes and strengthening their resilience by
implementing cost-effective and sustainable initiatives, which can create
opportunities for wealth creation and employment in rural areas.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. Programme area. The programme has been designed to be implemented in

approximately 47 municipalities in three departments of the High Plateau: La Paz,
Oruro and Potosi. Selection of the programme area was based on: (i) poverty
conditions; (ii) indices of economic, social and environmental vulnerability; and
(iii) the production potential of South American camelids and their by-products.
The programme area concentrates 67 per cent of the population of camelids in the
country, representing 1,915,436 animals, with Oruro accounting for 57 per cent, La
Paz 33 per cent and Potosi 17 per cent.

5. The programme area is characterized by altitudes ranging from 3,600 to
4,600 metres, presenting low humidity, low rainfall and high solar radiation. The
climate is cold and dry, with extreme temperatures up to minus 15° C in winter
and annual average temperatures of 4-8° C. Frosts occur throughout the year, and
hail by the end of the rainy period, causing serious damage to the few crops and
native grasslands of the area.

6. Targeting and target groups. Implementation of the programme will be based
on geographical targeting in accordance with IFAD’s targeting policy. The
programme will be consistent with the definition adopted by IFAD for interventions
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which determines that the target population is
composed of small-scale producers, artisans, women and men microentrepreneurs,
rural populations living in extreme poverty and food insecurity, and marginalized
groups (indigenous peoples, women and youth). The target group includes: rural
populations (Quechua, Aymara) with moderate to extreme levels of poverty,
limited access to irrigation and water, lack of financial capital, difficulties in
accessing financial services, training and technology, limited employment
opportunities, poor or inadequate socio-economic organizational levels and
outmigration in areas with high environmental vulnerability. As part of the
targeting strategy, the programme will take into account the New State
Constitution, which explicitly recognizes the collective rights of indigenous peoples
and the right to consultation processes.

7. Target group. Using geographical targeting criteria, a typology of farm families,
and data from the 2012 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the
programme area comprises 106,571 rural families. Of this total, it is estimated that
63,942 families are engaged in breeding camelids.

8. Gender. The programme is consistent with the three strategic objectives of IFAD's
gender policy: (i) promote economic empowerment to give women and men an
equal opportunity to participate in profitable economic activities and benefit from
them; (ii) give women and men the opportunity to equally express themselves and
influence rural institutions and organizations; and (iii) achieve a more equitable
balance in workloads and the distribution of economic and social benefits for



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

3

women and men. It will ensure that these considerations are taken into account,
identifying inequalities and furthering affirmative action. The programme will
promote equitable leadership in productive organizations that contribute to the
economic empowerment of women’s associations and groups, taking into account
the workload these economic initiatives will entail. It will also systematize
experience by productive organizations in the implementation of measures for
gender equality and inclusion of youth, disseminating findings and
recommendations through events and publications.

B. Programme development objective
9. The main purpose of the programme is to improve living conditions of families and

productive economic organizations linked to the camelid production complex, while
ensuring sustainable management of natural resources. The programme will
contribute towards: (i) reducing rural poverty and child malnutrition; (ii) increasing
physical assets (productive infrastructure) and financial assets of programme
users; (iii) enhancing the integration of business initiatives of beneficiaries in
camelid value chains; (iv) increasing the incomes of participating families;
(v) furthering adoption of practices conducive to natural resource management;
and (vi) increasing the capacities of programme users (human and social assets)
based on the principle of social inclusion of women and youth.

C. Components/outcomes
10. Programme implementation includes three main components:

11. Component 1: Primary production and management of natural resources.
The objectives of this component are to strengthen access by poor families to
initiatives seeking to improve: primary production at the level of family production
units and communities, and sustainable management of natural resources.
Programme initiatives will improve the productive environment, increase resilience
to the effects of climate change, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
provide conditions for competitive entry into markets.

12. Implementation of this component will include two subcomponents:

(a) Improvement of primary production in nutrition, animal health and
management and support to small farm infrastructure. Implementation will
include the following activities: (a) programme information dissemination
workshops; (b) participatory territorial planning; (c) competitive financing of
household and community production unit initiatives; and (d) training in
gender equality, rural youth and experience-sharing.

(b) Sustainable use of natural resources. This subcomponent will be based on a
territorial management approach to implementation of natural resource
management, aimed at improving livelihoods ecosystems through the
following activities: (a) integrated community management of water
resources; (b) management and soil conservation; and (c) strengthening
local institutions for natural resource management and systematization of
experiences.

13. Component 2: Processing and marketing. The objective of this component is to
support families and their organizations in generating productive economic
infrastructure conditions to encourage private investment, improve transformation
processes for value creation and deepen competitive access to markets, while
increasing interaction among actors in the South American camelid production
complex. The component links the dynamics of improving production and
productivity of camelid breeders with transformation initiatives to generate added
value in the fibre, meat and hides value chains.

14. This component includes two subcomponents:



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

4

(a) Processing of fibre, meat and hides. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) training of programme teams in competitive allocation of
financial resources and financing of business plans; (b) strategic analysis of
the camelid production complex in its three value chains; and (c) financing of
business plans in processing and speciality export markets.

(b) Marketing of processed products. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) support to marketing processes and markets; and
(b) innovation and systematization in terms of gender equality and rural
youth.

15. Component 3: Access to financial services. The objective of this component is
to enhance knowledge, access to and inclusion of participating farmers,
organizations and business groups in the financial services and products offered by
financial entities. This component includes three subcomponents: (i) information
and financial education; (ii) mobilization of savings; and (iii) promotion of financial
services.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme will pursue a territorial development approach in the context of the

camelid production complex. lt will strengthen the capacities of families and local
organizations to improve camelid productivity, while enhancing the management of
natural resources and resilience in order to support livelihoods and food and
nutritional security, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Assistance
will be provided in developing the business skills of productive economic
organizations to help them gain access to markets through implementing business
plans and through strategic investments in the processing of intermediate products
of the camelid complex value chain. The programme will also promote and deepen
the provision of financial services, thus furthering financial inclusion. It will allocate
funds through competitive mechanisms for the implementation of various
production and business initiatives in accordance with existing public policies.

B. Organizational framework
17. Programme implementation will be the responsibility of a programme

implementation unit (PIU) within the MDRyT, and departmental technical units
(DTUs), located in the three departments in the programme area.

18. Implementation. The PIU will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of
the programme, with technical, administrative, financial and legal capacity. The
PIU will be staffed by a programme coordinator and by the professional, technical
and administrative staff required for the correct implementation of the programme.
Staff will be located in a central office in La Paz and in the three DTUs located in
the programme area.

19. Programme guidance. Overall guidance will be provided by a programme
steering committee (PSC). At the departmental level, the programme will establish
territorial rating committees, community juries and local productive initiatives
approval committees (LPIACs).

20. Programme steering committee. The PSC will be responsible for providing
strategic policy for interventions. It will be composed of five members,
representing the MDRyT – which will head the committee; ministries involved in
programme implementation; and programme users.

21. Territorial rating committees. These committees will assess proposed primary
production and food security and nutrition initiatives. They will be established at
the departmental level and composed of five members selected according to
custom. One of the members will be a subject-matter specialist or local expert.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

5

22. Community juries. Participating communities will select an expert in natural
resource management according to local customs, who will qualify the physical
results in each community, together with a local municipal facilitator.

23. Local productive initiatives approval committees. Three LPIACs will be
established in the programme area and entrusted with selection and approval of
business plans submitted by potential users or beneficiary groups. The composition
of the committees and the requirements for the submission and approval of
business plans will be detailed in the programme implementation manual.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. Operational planning will be based on annual workplans and budgets
(AWP/Bs) prepared through a participatory process. The PIU will submit quarterly
progress reports and an annual report to IFAD.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. M&E will be the responsibility of the PIU. Activities
will include preparation of a baseline survey, a midterm review (MTR) and a
programme completion report. The baseline survey will be prepared in parallel with
the collection and systematization of information under the Results and Impact
Management System (RIMS), which will be replicated at midterm and at
programme completion.

26. Learning and knowledge management. Programme implementation will involve
introduction of an effective knowledge management system involving all
stakeholders. The programme will develop activities to enable a process of
reflection to better understand what processes and programme outcomes are being
reached. Knowledge acquired will contribute towards lessons learned and towards
adjusting the implementation strategy of the programme if needed. The
programme will support systematization, exchanges of experiences, life stories and
the use of audiovisual techniques in evaluation. These will be disseminated through
information and communications technologies and will contribute greatly towards
knowledge-sharing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Financial management. The MDRyT, through the PIU, will be responsible for

overall financial management of the programme, including AWP/Bs, procurement,
flow of funds, disbursement, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and
audit. The programme will use the national Integrated System of Management and
Administrative Modernization software, in addition to programme-specific software
for budget and accounting to ensure compliance with IFAD requirements.

28. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Public Finance will open, in the
Central Bank of Bolivia, a designated account in United States dollars, within the
treasury single account system. The designated account will be operated by the
MDRyT and will be used exclusively for the proceeds of the loan.

29. Procurement. Procurement will follow national procurement procedures and
regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines.

30. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding,
IFAD, the Government, departmental and municipal governments and communities
of users. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the
end of each fiscal year.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

6

E. Supervision
31. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD, which will oversee compliance

with the programme financing agreement, including procurement and contractual
agreements, in collaboration with the PIU. Supervision missions will be scheduled
after consultation with the national authorities and the PIU.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs have been estimated at the equivalent of US$38.8 million.

The cost structure includes the three main components and programme
management: (i) primary production and management of natural resources,
US$18.3 million (47.2 per cent); (ii) processing and marketing, US$13.7 million
(35.9 per cent); (iii) access to financial services, US$1.4 million (35.4 per cent)
and; (iv) programme management, US$5.4 million (13.8 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Primary production

and management of
natural resources 5 361 29.3 4 221 23.1 2 351 12.9 1 154 6.3 5 204 28.5 18 291 47.2

2. Processing and
marketing 7 005 51.0 1 901 13.9 1 461 10.6 2 747 20.0 610 4.4 13 725 35.4

3. Access to financial
services 808 58.5 55 4.0 518 37.5 - - - - 1 381 3.6

4. Programme
management 4 717 87.9 648 12.1 - - - - - - 5 365 13.8

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 329 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

7

B. Programme financing
33. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of approximately US$17.9 million

(46.2 per cent); the Government contribution of US$16.5 million (49.7 per cent),
made up of the national government counterpart contribution of about
US$6.8 million (17.6 per cent), departmental governments US$3.9 million
(10.1 per cent), municipal governments US$5.8 million (15 per cent); and
contributions in cash from beneficiaries of about US$4.3 million (11.2 per cent).
Table 2
Indicative Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Grants and

subsidies 9 151 38.5 3 442 14.5 4 329 18.2 1 471 6.2 5 352 22.5 23 744 61.3
2. Training 2 299 48.6 2 407 50.9 - - - - 20 0.4 4 726 12.2
3. Works 150 4.9 29 0.9 - - 2 431 79.7 442 14.5 3 052 7.9
4. Consultancies 1 920 84.0 376 16.0 - - - - - - 2 287 5.9
5. Vehicles and

equipment 524 83.2 106 16.8 - - - - - - 630 1.6
6. Operating costs 3 848 89.0 475 11.0 - - - - - - 4 324 11.2

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 392 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Benefits and beneficiaries. Programme benefits will accrue as a result of

increased herd productivity, value addition in fibre, meat and leather, strengthened
partnerships with other actors in the value chain, better participatory territorial
management of the sustainable use of natural resources (water, soil and
grassland), and cofinancing of business plans, capacity-building of users and
greater participation by women and youth. It will benefit a total of 30,000 families;
equivalent to 47 per cent of the target population, encompassing a total of
1,996 rural communities.

35. Economic analysis. The programme’s financial feasibility was evaluated for
10 years, taking into account the opportunity cost relative to the bank rate
(11.5 per cent). For farm models, the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated
at 22-37 per cent. Net present value (NPV) was positive in all cases, ranging from
US$107 to US$543, with incomes above the poverty line. Microenterprise models
showed an IRR from 18 to 56 per cent, and NPV ranged from US$5,882 to
US$45,312 with increased employment levels – implying a reduction of wage
labour outside the farm and greater commitment to business development. The
economic evaluation was projected for 20 years in terms of contributing to
improving the national economy. The evaluation considered adjustments in cash
transfers to programme users (competitions for primary production, management
of natural resources, productive infrastructure for proposed business plans and
savings). Price contingencies were adjusted, considering that imported inflation is a
distortion of actual prices. Adjustments were also made regarding economic input
prices (farm labour) and shadow prices (for tradable goods) whose ratio is
equivalent to US$1.24. Indicators show that the programme is economically
feasible and a good investment for the Government. The IRR is 27 per cent, NPV
US$23.5 million and the cost-benefit ratio 2.3:1, considering a discount rate of
12.67 per cent.

36. Sensitivity analysis shows that in terms of economic feasibility the programme is
more sensitive to the reduction of benefits than to increased costs. With reduced
benefits, the programme withstands up to 37 per cent, and with increases in costs,
up to 84 per cent. Considering delays, the programme withstands two-year delays,
maintaining positive benefits.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

8

D. Sustainability
37. Sustainability of programme interventions is based on: (i) strengthened capacity of

families, communities and municipalities to undertake sustainable territorial
planning to manage their productive base – assuming the adoption of improved
management of natural resources; (ii) organizational strengthening of communities
and productive economic organizations, which will enable greater empowerment
and capacity for coordination in intervention areas and will generate public/private
partnerships; (iii) improved access by producers – as a result of technical and
business management training – and strategic investments in productive
infrastructure (jointly with municipal and provincial governments) will enable them
to fully participate in value chains, gaining access to local, regional, national and
international markets; and (iv) adoption of gender and generational approaches
will allow for greater participation by vulnerable groups such as women and youth.
All of the above will be reinforced through financial education supported by savings
mobilization, which will allow producers and productive economic organizations to
graduate from dependence on government funding and grants, allowing them to
grow independently. The MTR and M&E of the programme will facilitate design of
an exit strategy – considering progress made and prospects for sustainability of the
results in different dimensions (institutional/organizational, financial, technical and
environmental).

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The following risks have been identified: (i) possible duplication with upcoming

financing by the World Bank; (ii) delays in launching programme operations;
(iii) limitations on the processes of establishing or formalizing small- and medium-
sized enterprises; (iv) funding for new business ventures will require transfers to
producer organizations with low implementation capacity, including for fiduciary
duties, which may affect implementation of economic initiatives;
(v) implementation of infrastructure initiatives in conjunction with departmental
and municipal governments will require financial contributions that may not be
available; (vi) market acceptance, increased demand for diverse products in the
value chain, and reduced barriers resulting from measures designed to ensure food
safety, especially meat products; (vii) climate change events such as droughts,
frosts and hailstorms affecting agricultural primary production; (viii) increased
deforestation of native species in favour of the introduction of quinoa, based on
market demand; and (ix) difficulty in making progress in financial inclusion, owing
to geographical and cultural distance between financial institutions and potential
customers.

39. Mitigation measures will include: (i) coordination during the design of new projects
and leadership of national authorities in generating synergies in the
implementation stages and agreements between funders to avoid duplication of
efforts; (ii) IFAD and national authorities will facilitate the processes needed for
effectiveness, including prompt approvals and no objections; (iii) the programme
will facilitate establishment of new ventures through support to strengthening
corporate governance and compliance requirements; (iv) it will provide training to
programme users in managing trust mechanisms of the financial resources
transferred; (v) the programme will ensure that funding by departmental and
municipal governments is assured before the start of activities, and that
agreements have been signed to ensure compliance with the agreements made;
(vi) it will support producers’ groups in fulfilling food-safety certification
requirements when it begins sponsoring implementation of this type of initiative.
The programme will also follow up on ongoing measures designed to streamline the
obtaining of health certificates from the National Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Service (SENASAG) for infrastructure and meat products; (vii) it will provide
funding for initiatives by target groups to improve their environment and reduce
their vulnerability; (viii) the programme will implement awareness workshops on



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

9

environmental issues, keeping in mind the balance that must exist in the
man/nature relationship, and strengthening knowledge management activities
through learning routes and other mechanisms; and (ix) a strategy to reduce
geographical and cultural distances in accessing financial services will be adapted
to include financial education and temporary monetary savings incentives, which
have proved to be useful tools in stimulating demand for deposit-taking services.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The programme is aligned with IFAD policies regarding: (i) targeting, by supporting

activities that benefit the rural population living in poverty; (ii) gender equality, by
furthering empowerment and promoting greater participation by women;
(iii) indigenous peoples, by adopting an intervention strategy based on sustainable
land management, strengthening the traditional local organization of production
units through a participatory approach and recognition of the value of ancestral
knowledge; (iv) management of natural resources, through more productive and
resilient ecosystems and activities including soil conservation, integrated water
resource management, and institutional strengthening of local communities and
municipal governments; (v) rural finance, by supporting access to financial services
and deepening access to credit for productive enterprises; and (vi) private-sector
development, through strengthening the capacity of camelid breeders to establish
partnerships with diverse actors in the fibre, meat and leather value chains
generated.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The programme is aligned with the Agricultural Sector Development Plan

2014-2018, which includes technological development, agricultural innovation, use
and management of soil, water and vegetation cover for agricultural production,
health and food safety, sovereignty and territorial management by indigenous and
peasant farmers. The programme will generate synergies and strategic alliances
with public and private entities that operate in some municipalities in the
programme area, thus contributing to harmonization of activities in rural territories
(e.g. the World Bank’s Rural Alliances and Community Investment in Rural Areas
Projects).

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The programme will innovate by introducing participatory planning, and supporting

economic initiatives on a more continuous basis, including provision of diversified
technical assistance. It will scale up development approaches promoted by the
VALE, PROMARENA and PROSAT projects funded by IFAD in the country.1 The
scaling up process is possible in the context of a favourable regulatory framework
that supports innovation with a territorial perspective aimed at management of the
primary production base, an efficient management of natural resources, financial
inclusion and inclusion of women and youth.

D. Policy engagement
43. Policy dialogue will cover: governance of municipal territories and communities for

sustainable territorial management; strengthening of local institutions in natural
resource management; and capacity-building of communities and municipalities in
land-use planning and in natural resource and risk management, including
strengthening municipal productivity and risk management units. The programme
will further engage in analysing the policy approach of the MDRyT in the context of
its National Camelid Programme.

1 Enhancement of the Peasant Camelid Economy Support Project, Management of Natural Resources in the Chaco
and High Valleys Regions Project and Technical Assistance Services Project for Small Holders.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

10

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in the amount of twelve million eight hundred
seventy thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,870,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural
Actors in the Popular and Solidary Economy
(FAREPS)

Republic of Ecuador
Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

iv

Republic of Ecuador

Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: National Institute for Popular and Solidary Economy
(IEPS)

Total cost of the project: US$35.97 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 14.25 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million)

Amount of IFAD’s Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 2.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.00 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of the borrower/recipient: US$12.00 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.07 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in
the Popular and Solidary Economy (FAREPS), as contained in paragraph 41.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Ecuador, with GDP in 2013 of US$94,470 million, is currently classified as a middle-

income country. The economy is largely dependent on oil and export agriculture.
Following years of political and economic instability, a stable government was
democratically elected in 2009 and has since implemented a programme of far-
reaching change in the political, economic and social spheres. In 2013, GDP grew
4.6 per cent. In view of the current decline in the price of oil and mining products,
the projected rate of growth for 2015 is somewhat lower at 3.8 per cent, though
still above the regional average.

2. In recent years Ecuador has made significant strides in combating poverty.
Between 2009 and 2012, poverty fell from 36.0 per cent to 25.5 per cent, one of
the most notable achievements in the region. The Gini coefficient improved from
0.55 to 0.484 over the same period. Despite the recent progress on social
indicators, the poverty gap persists, particularly in rural areas where poverty runs
at 42 per cent, close to double the urban rate. The campesino population generally,
and particularly Afro-Ecuadorans, indigenous people and women, occupy the
poorest quintiles. In addition, 1.6 million Ecuadorans live in extreme poverty, 70
per cent of them in rural areas.

3. In view of the foregoing, eradicating extreme poverty and reducing the incidence of
poverty is one of the major objectives of the Government of Ecuador. A key
strategy for promoting social and economic inclusion has been to strengthen the so-
called popular and solidary economy (PSE), which seeks to promote economic
development on an associative and solidary basis.

4. The concept of PSE arises from the need to recognize the value of the informal or
popular economy, and the economy formed by association-based or solidary
economic organizations, and their contribution to GDP. Indeed, the popular and
solidary economy is the largest employer in the Ecuadoran labour force. Sales by
microenterprises represent an estimated 25.7 per cent of GDP, 10 per cent of total
net income and 90 per cent of the country’s production units, and generate
approximately 60 per cent of total employment.

5. Formalizing the informal economy within Ecuador’s new regulatory and
administrative frameworks is one way of promoting more equitable and democratic
economic relations, as well as greater inclusion of people living in conditions of
poverty and vulnerability. The prevailing legal framework requires economic
organizations to adopt best practices in management, such as regularizing
employees, democratizing decision-making processes and distributing any
dividends in an equitable manner. These best practices make the PSE attractive to
people living in poverty, who may decide either to join an existing organization or
set up a new one.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and with
the RB-COSOP

6. In 2014, Ecuador approved the National Strategy for Equality and Poverty
Eradication (ENIEP), which calls for mainstreaming poverty reduction into the
overall initiative for change in the production matrix. In the case of the rural sector,
the strategy promotes a shift from providing support for campesino production to
adopting a more complex value chain-based approach. In this way the project is
fully aligned with the Government of Ecuador’s priorities and strategies for
economic and social inclusion, thus contributing to rural poverty eradication.

7. In addition, the project is completely consistent with the strategic objectives set
forth in IFAD’s new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for Ecuador, as follows: (a) improve access to assets and resources to
support diversification of the Ecuadorian rural economy, promoting, among other
measures, associative enterprises and investments that generate employment and
income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (b) Increase the capacities of poor
rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to engage in, and benefit from, pro-
poor and inclusive productive policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will take place in the south-eastern part of Ecuador, in the Costa, Sierra

Sur and Amazonia regions. In the Costa r1egion, the project will cover the
provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos; in Sierra Sur the province of Azuay; and in
Amazonia the provinces of Morona Santiago and Zamora Chinchipe, which borders
on Peru. The population of Morona Santiago is largely indigenous (48.4 per cent),
while in the provinces located in Costa, more than half the population identify as
Montubio, a regional ethnic group.

9. The project will focus on areas with high levels of unmet basic needs (UBN) and a
high incidence of vulnerability. In a context of UBN-based poverty calculated on the
order of 60.1 per cent countrywide in 2010, the cantons where the project will be
implemented post indexes that are higher than both the national and the provincial
averages. The highest levels are found in Amazonia, where UBN-based poverty is
95.9 per cent. The population in these cantons is young, with an average age of
under 29.

10. The project will work with organizations and association-based enterprises that are
already registered with the Superintendency of Popular and Solidary Economy
(SPSE), or with other public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion (MIES). New associations may also be legalized. The project beneficiaries
will be smallholder farmer and rural worker families living in poverty as measured
by UBN and/or vulnerability but no longer receiving the human development bond,
who have both the interest and potential to undertake and manage business plans
on the terms outlined in the PSE framework. Two specific target groups have also
been identified: women and their families, and young people. At least 30 per cent
of the beneficiary families are to be headed by women (about 6,000 families), and
10 per cent by young people (about 2,000 families).

11. Within this framework, those wishing to become project beneficiaries will need to
belong to or join a legalized PSE organization, or set up a new organization and
legalize it – IEPS will assist the latter in the legalization process within the EPS
system. The project is expected to cover at least 200 organizations in this way.

B. Project development objective
12. The development objective of the project is to increase incomes and employment

among PSE rural families living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability within the



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

project area. Upon completion of the project, approximately 20,000 rural families
living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability – in social, economic and climate
change terms – are expected to have received benefits, with at least 80 per cent of
them having seen a sustainable increase in income derived from agricultural and
non-agricultural activities promoted by the project.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project is structured in three interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building (initial and preinvestment phase). The aim is to lower the
barriers limiting the development of organizations and association-based
enterprises and to strengthen PSE actors to develop and manage them
sustainably. The component is intended to: (i) build the capacities of the
target groups in fundamental PSE areas; and (ii) promote dialogue among
PSE actors and between these and local and national institutions. This
component will also contribute to improving public policies promoting the PSE,
to facilitate access by PSE actors to resources, services, and public and
private markets.

(b) Enterprise development and commercial exchange (investment phase).
To support the target groups in developing profitable and sustainable
initiatives, the component calls for two types of direct investment:
(i) investment in solidary business plans; support will be provided for
organizations included in implementation of the first component with
comprehensive strengthening plans (CSPs) prepared on a participatory basis
and being applied by their members. On this basis the project may make
investments in the form of nonreimbursable transfers to cofinance specific
aspects or all of a solidary business plan (SBP), in accordance with the criteria
stipulated in the project operating manual. The SBP will cover goods or
services for which the territorial area offers strengths and internal or external
markets; and (ii) funds for conditional incentives; PSE organizations will be
offered incentives to achieve two kinds of specific objectives: economic
integration and decent employment. In the first case, incentives will ensure
that a larger number of farmers are able to place their products on the market
and have access to transportation, collection or technical assistance services;
and that small association-based enterprises are able to join an existing entity
or create a new one. In the second case, incentives will be linked to an
increase in decent jobs for people living in conditions of poverty or
vulnerability: young people, handicapped people, the indigent, women,
indigenous people, Afro-Ecuadorans and Montubios. These incentives are
reserved for organizations that are already consolidated and have access to
stable markets, with installed capacity that is sufficient and timely.

(c) Knowledge management, management and administration (investment
phase). Covers essentially promotion of a participatory planning, monitoring
and evaluation system for the target population, as well as knowledge
management and project administration. This component also includes
strengthening other PSE actors, including IEPS and local service providers, in
key areas for PSE development, including participatory monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) and management of the knowledge generated.

14. The project also includes activities to be implemented with ASAP funding to
complement the overall project strategy. Organizations will be trained to be better
adapted to climate change, and specific activities will be identified, proposed and
financed to improve the resilience of the beneficiaries and investments funded. A
specialized service provider will provide training. As part of the CSP preparation
process, information will be included on climate risks and proposed mitigation
measures, as well as specific adaptation measures to be included in SBPs. The



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

ASAP funding will cover implementation of such specific adaptation measures in the
context of the SBP.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The project strategy is intended to create and consolidate the capacities of

association-based enterprises that are to form the economic fabric of the PSE at the
territorial level. To this end, three main avenues of action will be established,
following the operating structure of IEPS: (i) strengthening of actors; (ii) productive
development and market exchange; and (iii) M&E, including participatory
monitoring and knowledge management. The project will develop and apply
differentiated local strategies in a concerted and participatory manner with local
actors, involving a process of ongoing dialogue with the main PSE actors, local
offices of government institutions, decentralized autonomous governments and, in
the case of indigenous peoples, traditional authorities.

B. Organizational framework
16. IEPS will be responsible for implementing the project. IEPS headquarters is located

in Quito and it is present in the project area in the Zone 5 Directorate, covering the
provinces of Los Rios and Guayas, the Zone 6 Directorate covering the provinces of
Azuay and Morona Santiago, and the Zone 7 Directorate, covering the province of
Zamora Chinchipe.

17. The project will have a general contractor hired by IEPS in accordance with
prevailing legislation in the country by means of a selection process acceptable to
IFAD. The general coordinator will report to the IEPS Director General and will be
responsible for project administration and day-to-day operations, in accordance
with the zone directorates of the provinces where activities are located. Financial
administration will be done in coordination with the financial administration
department of IEPS. The general coordinator will be supported by the professional,
technical and administrative staff needed for proper implementation.

18. The project’s financial administration will be the responsibility of a team to be hired
by IEPS, reporting to the financial administration department of IEPS. Project
management at the provincial level will be done by technical teams reporting to the
zone directorates for the provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos, Azuay and Morona
Santiago, and Zamora Chinchipe, in close coordination with the general coordinator.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will apply a planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
system in accordance with national and IEPS directives and IFAD guidelines. This
system will be an integral part of project management and a management tool
generating updated relevant information on project results, with an emphasis on
results measurement – outputs, outcomes and impact – and will facilitate the
development of learning platforms, exchanges of experiences, best practices and
dissemination of results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. The IEPS financial administration department will be responsible for overall financial

management of the project, including the annual operating plan, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and auditing. The
project will used the national financial management information system (e-SIGEF),
together with an additional specific system meeting IFAD requirements.

21. Flow of funds. The borrower will open an account at the Central Bank of Ecuador
designated exclusively for the loan proceeds, and another account designated
exclusively for the ASAP grant. Both will be denominated in United States dollars.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

22. Audit. The consolidated annual financial statements will be audited each year by an
independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those
relating to national counterpart funding. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months before the end of each fiscal year.

23. Procurement and contracting. Procurement and contracting will take place in
accordance with the National Public Contracting System Organic Law and
Regulations, to the extent they are compatible with IFAD’s guidelines on the
procurement of goods, works and services.

E. Supervision
24. IFAD will supervise the project directly. Support will be provided from the outset of

design to prepare adequately for start-up. IFAD and the borrower/recipient will
jointly conduct a midterm review at the end of year three.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost will be approximately US$35.97 million, including

contingencies. The first component will cost US$4.27 million (equivalent to 11.9 per
cent), whereas the second component calls for an allocation of US$26.43 million,
representing 73.5 per cent of total investment. The third component will involve
spending of US$5.27 million (14.7 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-
building 2 913 68.3 840 19.7 - - 512 12.0 4 265 11.9
2. Enterprise
development and
commercial
exchange 12 213 46.2 3 160 12.0 4 073 15.4 6 988 26.4 26 434 73.,5
3. Knowledge,
management and
administration 774 14.7 - - - - 4 500 85.3 5 274 14.7

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973 100.0

B. Project financing
26. The combined project financing totals approximately US$35.97 million. The

borrower/recipient will contribute US$12 million (33.4 per cent), the IFAD loan will
provide US$15.90 million (44.2 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$4 million
(11.1 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute US$4.07 million
(11.3 per cent) in cash or in kind.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/recipient

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Training 2 913 83.0 312 8.9 - - 283 8.1 3 508
B. Consulting 2 445 72.4 528 15.6 - - 405 12.0 3 379
C. Grants 10 256 42.1 3 159 13.0 4 073 16.7 6 878 28.2 24 367
D. Goods,
services and
inputs - - - - - - 127 100.0 127
E. Vehicles 285 88.0 - - - - 39 12.0 324
F. Salaries - - - - 4 267 100.0 4 267

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973

C. Summary of benefit and economic analysis
27. The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 20,000 rural families. Most

of the beneficiary households are expected to engage in agricultural production with
value added, and the remaining households to other kinds of production or
provision of other services. Most of the subprojects will be cofinanced with
contributions in cash or in kind by beneficiaries.

28. The activities financed will generate income of between US$400 and US$1,000 per
annum by family, depending on the type of activity, level of specialization and
allocation of productive assets.

D. Sustainability
29. The design of simple but efficient and effective SBPs that show motivating results in

the short term will ensure the economic sustainability of initiatives. The
sustainability of the cultural changes to be introduced with the project, in terms of
valuing and assimilating association-based and business-oriented concepts and
practices, will essentially depend on the actual benefits accrued by PSE families.
Accordingly, awareness-raising and capacity-building are essential; at the same
time, opening up spaces for participation and leadership by young people will be
key to the sustainability of initiatives. Finally, environmental risk analysis from the
design of initiatives will reinforce the environmental sustainability of association-
based projects, introducing specific technologies and practices to attenuate the
effects of climate change.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. The risks associated with project implementation relate mainly to management

issues. Among possible mitigation measures are: (i) development of a
communication plan to facilitate effective coordination and linkages among the
various actors involved in project implementation; (ii) conduct of a market analysis
and participatory design of business plans to assess the market feasibility of each
enterprise prior to making the investments; (iii) ongoing monitoring of service
providers based on process indicators, to mitigate the risk of low local supply of
sufficiently qualified service providers; (iv) finally, to mitigate the effects of climate
change, adaptation and risk management technologies will be introduced and
support will be provided for, inter alia, crop diversification.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
31. The project proposal falls under the overarching objective of IFAD’s Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives relating
to improving access to services contributing to poverty reduction, as well as



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

developing economic and natural assets to improve the resilience of disadvantaged
rural people. In addition, the project approach and implementation strategies are
aligned with the rural poor targeting policy, the gender equality and women’s
empowerment policy, the policy on IFAD’s engagement with indigenous peoples,
including the requirement of free, prior and informed consent, the policy on natural
resources and environmental management, the climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, and the policies on rural finance,
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
32. The project falls squarely within the priorities of the Government of Ecuador as

stated in the National Plan on Living Well 2013-2017 (national development plan),
and contributes to the strategy of economic and social inclusion under the approach
of changing the MIES and IEPS production matrix to eradicate rural poverty by
developing the popular and solidary economy. It is also consistent with the second
component of the ENIEP, whose pillars are agrarian revolution for food sovereignty,
promoting dignified work and strengthening the popular and solidary economy. The
project will also directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-COSOP 2014-
2018.

C. Innovation and scaling up
33. The project will allow for replicating the PSE approach, which has had very good

results under the Central Corridor Ecuador Project (PDCC) implemented by IEPS
with IFAD funding and closed in 2014. Given the positive impact of PDCC, IEPS
requested IFAD support to prepare this new operation to continue supporting PSE
actors by scaling up to a new intervention area and including new approaches and
tools based on lessons learned.

34. Moreover, this proposal includes innovative measures to promote the economic
inclusion of vulnerable people. Among these will be scaling up association-based
enterprises with conditional incentives, to be used to cofinance the operating capital
of consolidated solidary enterprises. In this way the project will enable particularly
promising solidary enterprises to grow in size.

35. Finally, knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and
capitalize on knowledge accumulated during project implementation, in order to
disseminate best practices and practical knowledge available in the project areas.

D. Policy engagement
36. The compilation of experiences and lessons learned, and exchanges on them among

the actors responsible for the PSE and their partners, will contribute to improving
IEPS workings, and will also serve as practical information on the use and
functionality of PSE public policies, and contribute to reform as needed. In addition,
the project will provide training to build the capacities of these actors and the
leaders of beneficiary organizations in applying PSE instruments.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. The negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

38. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to fourteen million, two hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 14,250,000, (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to two million eight hundred fifty
special drawing rights (SDR 2,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups Empowerment and Livelihoods
Improvement Programme

Republic of India

Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department, Government of Odisha

Total programme cost: US$130.39 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 36.4 million (equivalent to approximately
US$51.20 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 25 years, including a grace period of five years, with
interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed
rate of 1.25 per cent per annum plus a service charge
of 0.75 per cent

Contribution of borrower: US$76.18 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.00 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme, as contained in
paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihoods Improvement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite its middle-income status, poverty reduction remains an important

challenge for India: 33 per cent of the world’s poor live in the country and poverty
has not fallen at the same pace as economic growth. Nutritional levels are
unacceptably low, with 42.5 per cent of children underweight for their age, being
one of the highest rates globally. Prevailing social inequality and the low
nutritional, educational and social status of women are considered key factors
contributing to the prevalence of malnutrition in children below the age of five.

2. India’s population is composed of several ethnic groups, speaking diverse
languages and more than 1,000 dialects. Poverty is particularly severe among
tribal populations. These groups identify themselves in more than 5,400 castes and
tribes and follow five major religions. India’s tribal populations are officially
registered as Scheduled Tribes (STs) according to distinct cultural and ethnic
features. STs, numbering 104.3 million in the 2011 census, constitute
approximately 8.6 per cent of India’s population. Unlike Scheduled Castes (SCs),
which are dispersed throughout the country, STs have traditionally been
concentrated in specific parts of the country characterized by forests, hills and
undulating inaccessible areas. This results in reduced access to basic services and
fewer opportunities for economic development. The decline in the poverty rate is
much slower for ST populations than for the general population. Of the total ST
populations, approximately 2.6 million (2.5 per cent) belong to Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). This classification is reserved for the most
disadvantaged of all ST communities. Currently, 75 identified PTGs are spread
across 17 Indian states and union territories.

3. The proposed Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP) will work in Odisha State, which has
one of the highest number of PTGs. Odisha is geographically the 8th largest state
and the 11th most populous among Indian states. Poverty rates of rural populations
are double those of their urban counterparts.

4. Odisha is home to 62 STs including 13 PTGs, which are concentrated in the Eastern
Ghats and the Northern Plateau. Both these regions are characterized by rugged
hilly terrain and high rainfall. Together they account for most of the state’s forests.
PTGs living in Odisha derive their livelihood mainly from shifting cultivation, rainfed
agriculture and the gathering of non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The incidence
of landlessness is high and farming practices have remained primitive, with rainfed
paddy and millets being the main crops.



EB 2015/114/R.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Several provisions in the Indian Constitution seek to ensure better quality of life for
PTGs. Yet their economic status has not improved. They rank poorly on all
development indicators, such as food and nutrition security, literacy and health.
Given their high dependence on an ecologically complex natural resource base,
they are also highly vulnerable to variability in weather and climate shocks. Owing
to poor farming systems and a lack of focus on the development of rainfed areas,
PTG areas have suffered widespread land degradation. Efforts are thus needed to
reverse this downward spiral of low productivity and a declining resource base.

6. To deliver services to the 17 PTG areas, the Government of India has established
microproject agencies (MPAs). However, a consolidated high-intensity, integrated
programme of support through these institutions – with clear targets and time
frames – is still missing. The OPELIP will deliver this by capitalizing on institutional
development that has already taken place, and will provide a range of services to
PTGs through appropriate development initiatives.

7. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the IFAD-supported Orissa Tribal
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme (OTELP), which has successfully
demonstrated an integrated development package in tribal areas. OTELP set up
village-level bodies and involved tribal groups in planning and implementation of
various development initiatives, especially development of the natural resources.
Encouraged by the success of OTELP, the Government of Odisha has requested
IFAD to scale up the approach into PTG areas. This is the first time an external
development partner has been asked to work in these most remote and difficult
areas of the state.

8. The programme is closely aligned with the priorities and strategies of both the
Government of India and the State Government of Odisha and will particularly
support the objective of achieving “faster and more inclusive growth”. It is
compatible with and supportive of other donor initiatives and will directly address
the strategic objectives of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP). The current RB-COSOP became effective in April 2011
and is jointly reviewed by IFAD and the Government of India annually to ensure full
alignment with national priorities and policies.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. OPELIP interventions will be implemented in 17 MPA areas located in 12 districts of

Odisha (Angul, Deogarh, Gajapati, Ganjam, Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keojhar,
Malkanagiri, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada, Rayagada,and Sundergarh). This will cover
13 PTGs living in some 1,019 villages and hamlets and 84 gram panchayats (the
local self-governing institution at the village level). Overall, the programme will
cover 62,356 households.

10. In line with IFAD’s policy on targeting, the OPELIP will target marginalized groups:
women, children, unemployed youth, hill-area cultivators, the landless among
PTGs, and other tribal peoples. Based on geographical targeting, it will work in a
predefined number of MPA gram panchayats. Some programme interventions –
such as village development planning and the associated village institutions, and
infrastructure such as rural roads – will benefit 100 per cent of the population living
in these gram panchayats. To ensure precise targeting of marginalized groups, a
specific targeting strategy has been developed for each component.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of the OPELIP is to achieve enhanced living conditions and reduced

poverty in target group households. It will support improved livelihoods and food



EB 2015/114/R.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and nutrition security for 32,090 PTG households, 13,970 other tribal households
and 10,810 other poor and 5,486 SC households. This will be achieved, in turn, by
building the capacity of target households, securing their entitlements to land and
forest, improving their agricultural practices to enhance production, promoting
income-generating microenterprises for alternate livelihoods, ensuring access to
services such as education and health, and improving community infrastructure. To
achieve the objective of empowerment, the programme will promote women’s self-
help groups (SHGs), organize village development committees (VDCs) for the
planning and implementation of programme interventions and train community
resource people (CRPs) to provide needed services in production, marketing and
legal assistance.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The OPELIP will have four components: community empowerment; natural

resource management (NRM) and livelihood improvement; community
infrastructure and drudgery reduction; and programme management.

13. Component 1: Community empowerment. Empowerment is the key
prerequisite to developing PTGs. It will be addressed through a series of capacity-
building initiatives, entry point activities and mobilization of community-based
organizations. Accordingly, the component will have two subcomponents:

(i) Community institutions. Promotion of village development associations
(VDAs) for the planning and execution of need-based community activities
that cover natural resource management, community-based paralegal
services, community-based health, hygiene and nutrition education, and
community infrastructure. Major activities will include: (a) engaging the
services of 17 NGOs supported by about 360 CRPs; (b) training of trainers
and capacity-building of CRPs; (c) mobilization of VDCs and capacity-building
of VDC members; (d) implementation of entry point activities in all 1,019
villages, as identified by VDCs; and (e) preparation of village development
plans (VDPs) and facilitation of VDCs in implementing activities identified in
VDPs.

(ii) Strengthening SHGs and rural finance. Promotion of SHGs and rural finance
services to enable social development of SHG members through facilitating
group savings and credit, and through building capacity. Key interventions
will include formation and strengthening of 3,800 SHGs, training of
microfinance CRPs, formation of 84 gram panchayat cluster-level forums
(GPLFs), provision of pro-poor and vulnerability reduction funds to SHGs and
community investment funds to GPLFs, and piloting of two cooperative
societies.

14. Component 2: Natural resource management and livelihood improvement.
Historically, PTGs have lived deeper inside forests than other STs, and some PTGs,
such as the Birhor and Mankirdia, were nomadic until recently. To support the
transition from hunting-gathering to shifting cultivation and eventually to settled
farming, this component will have three subcomponents:

(i) Natural resource management. Key interventions will include: (a) services of
an NGO specialized in land surveys and the issuing of land titles to PTGs;
(b) treatment of 20,000 hectares of arable land and construction of
900 irrigation structures; (c) capacity-building of 18,000 farmers in crop
development and horticulture; and (d) support to horticulture development
and cereal food crops, including oilseeds, pulses and tubers, in all villages.

(ii) Food and nutrition security. This will include: (a) training of school children
and SHG members in malnutrition, locally available nutritious foods,
preparation of nutritious food using local materials, sanitation and
alcoholism; (b) focus on cultivating locally available traditional food crops;



EB 2015/114/R.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

(c) nutrition-intensive interventions such as kitchen gardens, backyard
poultry- and goat-rearing; and (d) promotion of “convergence” to address
gaps in the areas of food availability, health, water and sanitation.

(iii) Livelihood improvement. The programme will support: (a) selection and
training of community service providers (CSPs); (b) household production
support; (c) market access support for producer collectives; (d) support for
NTFP marketing; and (e) vocational training and strengthening of PTG culture
and traditions.

15. Component 3: Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction. PTG
villages are characterized by poor housing, limited or no access to potable water
year round, absence of sanitation facilities, limited or no access to electricity and
limited or no road infrastructure. Some villages in the programme area have no
school buildings and, in those that do, in many cases the buildings are dilapidated
and without drinking water and sanitation facilities. Many villages do not have
paved roads or drainage inside the settlements, and children play in extremely
unhygienic conditions, especially during the rainy season. Though NTFPs constitute
a major livelihood source for PTGs, there are no platforms for drying and sorting
these commodities or for storage to facilitate collective marketing. This will be
addressed through two subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. The programme will support construction of:
(a) 300 drinking water schemes and 542 school toilets; (b) 4,000 housing
units and habitat development; (c) 500 km of roads and 50 km of
electrification; and (d) infrastructure for 542 drying yards, 84 market yards,
250 aggregation centres and 250 SHG worksheds; and will provide power
tiller units, 2,000 irrigation pump sets and 84 hydram units. Operation and
maintenance of these facilities will be through VDCs, and village volunteers
will be trained as community mechanics.

(ii) Drudgery reduction. Under this subcomponent, the programme will support:
(a) construction of 35,000 smokeless wood stoves; (b) installation of
20,000 solar lanterns; (c) maintenance of fuelwood reserves in 540 villages;
and (d) construction of 84 milling units for hulling rice, millet, etc.

16. Component 4: Programme management. This component will have three
subcomponents: (i) a programme management unit (PMU) will be set up within the
lead programme agency; (ii) the programme will strengthen the 17 existing MPAs
through staffing and facilities; and (iii) a programme monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and knowledge management (KM) unit will be set up within the PMU. The
programme will make an effort to strengthen existing systems within the MPAs,
rather than creating parallel ones.

17. Major outcomes of the OPELIP will include: 1,019 VDCs organized and functional;
3,800 SHGs and 84 GPLFs organized and functional; at least a 50 per cent
reduction in rural indebtedness; 100 per cent of PTG households holding
homestead titles and 75 per cent of them land titles; 43,000 households receiving
land and water management treatment measures; 19,000 households accessing
irrigation and an almost equal number of households planting fruit and spice crops;
31,000 households increasing cereal, millet, pulse and oilseed production;
9,000 households starting an income-generating activity; all households accessing
a water supply, and market and road connectivity; and 32,000 PTG households
having kitchen gardens, smokeless wood stoves and access to community fuelwood
reserves.



EB 2015/114/R.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
18. The OPELIP has been designed to follow the successful bottom-up planning

approach of OTELP. Success under OTELP was attributed to the fact that the
implementation process was owned by tribal peoples. With local community
institutions at the heart of the programme, the new design focuses on scaling up
activities that have already been tested and proven successful in Odisha. The
programme will adopt an integrated approach involving support for improved
access to land, natural resources, agricultural technologies, financial services,
markets, productive and social infrastructure, and essential social services. Gender
empowerment will be mainstreamed in all activities. Given the extremely severe
malnutrition situation in PTG villages, the design has also piloted an approach to
mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities across all components.

B. Organizational framework
19. At the national level, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance

will be the nodal agency for the programme. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be
involved in overall policy guidance.

20. At the state level, the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department (STSCDD) will be the lead programme agency. Overall policy guidance
will be provided through a programme steering committee under the Chief
Secretary. A PMU set up within STSCDD will have overall responsibility for day-to-
day management of the programme and the functions relating to planning, funds
flow, M&E, gender mainstreaming, policy dialogue and KM.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. The programme will follow the planning process undertaken by the
respective MPA, taking the specific objectives and purposes of the OPELIP into
account. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be drawn up by the
PMU, consolidating all microplans, in consultation with the respective MPAs and
partner NGOs.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will measure progress and
performance, and will be a learning and decision-making tool at various levels. The
PMU will establish an M&E unit, which will support progress monitoring by
programme field implementation units and partner NGOs. The M&E unit will also
monitor programme outcomes and impacts through, among other tools, annual
outcome surveys and by applying the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS) in accordance with IFAD guidelines. Semi-annual and annual reports will
also contain sections on analysis, interpretation and recommendations from
process monitoring, lessons learned and best practices.

23. Learning and knowledge management. Information generated by the
programme will be disseminated through IFAD websites, newsletters, thematic
reports and at learning events. The programme will develop a KM strategy and
appropriate action plans. KM will be used as a tool for internal learning by
programme stakeholders such as the staff of various implementing agencies, and
participating villagers and farmers, both women and men. Activities will include
regular review meetings at village/cluster, MPA and state levels and the production
of knowledge products such as newsletters (in local languages), briefs, training
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc.

24. The OPELIP will also use audio/video systems to disseminate information from
farmer to farmer and village to village. It will build on the KM culture and practices
of OTELP and on the Digital Green programme to amplify knowledge through
combining technology and social organizations for community transformation.



EB 2015/114/R.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the ongoing

OTELP. During implementation, the PMU will consolidate the AWP/B, including the
annual action plan for conservation-cum-development1 of microprojects, and
submit the consolidated AWP/B to the programme management committee for
approval. Financial accounting for the OPELIP will be done through computerized
accounting software at all levels. The software will be customized to generate
financial reports for the national and state governments and for IFAD according to
specific requirements. After programme start-up, the PMU will enter into a
subsidiary agreement with each MPA. Each MPA will submit a monthly progress
report to the PMU electronically. Strong internal control procedures will be
introduced, including adequate segregation of duties, especially at the MPA level.
Detailed procedures for recording, management and safeguarding of fixed
programme assets will be detailed in the programme implementation manual. An
internal auditor will be hired to provide continuous monitoring and review of
financial systems and procedures.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing of the programme will be routed through an
account designated to receive funds in advance (designated account), denominated
in United States dollars and maintained at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Controller, Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of
Finance, Government of India), will administer the designated account. Funds will
flow from STSCDD to the PMU bank account as non-lapsable funds in one or two
tranches, and funds from the PMU will be transferred to MPAs as grants-in-aid.
IFAD’s share of funds reimbursed to the Government of Odisha will flow to that
Government through the prescribed national procedures for budgetary support to
state governments. The PMU will release funds to the microprojects based on the
approved AWP/B for implementation of programme activities. The PMU will open a
separate bank account in a bank mutually acceptable to IFAD and STSCDD. Each
MPA will open a separate bank account, in any bank mutually acceptable to the
Government of Odisha and IFAD, to receive funds from the PMU and carry out
eligible expenditures.

27. Audit. The external auditing arrangements for the OPELIP will be established in
two tiers: (i) independent external audit; and (ii) compliance and performance
audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India. As the
OPELIP PMU will be a part of STSCDD, CAG will undertake compliance and
performance audit of the department, in addition to the independent external
audit.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines and procurement handbook, 2010. Procurement
will be undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted
by the PMU and approved by the programme management committee and IFAD.

29. Governance. An intregrated framework for good governance has been developed
to ensure: (i) information transparency in the public domain; (ii) accountability in
the use of resources; and (iii) participation of the communities in decisions that
may affect them. The involvement of affected communities at all stages of
programme implementation can simultaneously improve development of outcomes
and reduce the scope for fraud and corruption. Key features of this governance
framework include, among others, use of a computerized financial management
system; setting up of a complaints and remedies mechanism; rotation of group
leaders of VDC, SHG, GPLF and social audit of group programme accounts; and
regular IFAD implementation support and supervision missions.

1 From the “Conservation-cum-Development Plan for PTGs” (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India).



EB 2015/114/R.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
30. The OPELIP will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the programme’s start-up

phase, IFAD will attend the state-level start-up workshop and participate in
discussions on the programme’s approach and strategy. It will field annual
supervision missions, which will review progress with regard to physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations,
and will result in agreed actions to further enhance progress and performance.
Government of Odisha representatives will participate in these supervision
missions. IFAD will also field implementation support missions on specific technical
issues.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs are estimated at 7,954.15 million Indian rupees (Rs)

(US$130.39 million), including contingencies (US$6.30 million), over an eight-year
period. Key assumptions used in estimating programme costs include: (i) price
contingencies assumed at 5 per cent and applied on all items, except for grant and
subsidies categories and staff salaries financed by IFAD; (ii) an exchange rate of
Rs 61 per United States dollar; (iii) taxes and duties of 5 per cent on training, staff
and operating costs, of 15 per cent on service provider contracts and civil works,
and of 10 per cent on goods and equipment; (iv) all unit costs input in the local
currency unit (i.e. Rs); and (v) taxes excluded from IFAD financing.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Borrower/

counterpart IFAD Beneficiaries Total

1. Community empowerment
Community institutions 6 449 9 653 - 16 102
Strengthening SHGs and rural finance 602 5 654 - 6 256

Subtotal community empowerment 7 051 15 307 - 22 357

2. Natural resource management and livelihood improvement
Natural resource management 13 718 8 584 2 116 24 418
Food and nutrition security 961 4 574 - 5 534
Livelihood improvement 1 313 7 565 559 9 437

Subtotal natural resource management and livelihood
improvement

15 991 20 723 2 676 39 390

3. Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction
Community infrastructure 40 641 1 126 69 41 836
Drudgery reduction 826 4 333 257 5 416

Subtotal community infrastructure and drudgery reduction 41 467 5 459 327 47 253

4. Programme management
Programme management unit 1 861 2 547 - 4 408
Microproject agency unit 9 615 6 369 - 15 984
M&E and KM 201 803 - 1 004

Subtotal programme management 11 677 9 719 - 21 396

Total cost 76 185 51 209 3 002 130 396

B. Programme financing
32. The programme will be funded through IFAD financing and Government of Odisha

counterpart financing from state budgetary resources, from funds under article
275(1) Special Central Assistance to Tribal Peoples Sub Plan, from the
conservation-cum-development fund and through beneficiary contributions. IFAD
will provide a loan of about US$51.20 million. The Government will provide



EB 2015/114/R.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

US$76.18 million, including staff costs, operating costs and the annual budget
allocation for development of PTGs and other STs. Beneficiaries are expected to
make an in kind contribution of labour equivalent to US$3.00 million.
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure, category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
Borrower /

counterpart Percentage IFAD Percentage Beneficiaries Percentage Total

1. Civil work 47 043 84.9 7 131 12.9 1 246 2.2 55 420
2. Traininga 2 423 16.4 11 761 79.8 559 3.8 14 744
3. Goods, services
and inputs 15 978 43.9 19 187 52.8 1 197 3.3 36 362
4. Grants - - 7 149 100.0 - - 7 149
5. Operating costsb 10 741 64.2 5 981 35.8 - - 16 721

Total programme
costs

76 185 58.4 51 209 39.3 3 002 2.3 130 396

a Training and capacity-building.
b Includes staff salaries.

33. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring that the OPELIP start-up proceeds
smoothly, preparatory activities related to the NRM and livelihood improvement
component, certain staff costs, and preparation of a baseline survey and manuals
are proposed to be undertaken from April 2014 to entry-into-force of the financing
agreement. Accordingly, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing, approval for IFAD retroactive financing for expenditures up
to US$406,240 is recommended. These proposed expenditures will fall under two
expenditure categories: (i) goods, services and inputs; and (ii) training and
capacity-building (table 3). The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the programme enters into force.
Table 3
Indicative retroactive financing by component, cost category and financier
(United States dollars)

Component
Disbursement account
category

Estimated
expenditure

Amount to be
reimbursed by IFAD

1. Community empowerment
Wages to multipurpose workers Goods, services and inputs 72 000 36 000

2. NRM and livelihood improvement
Engaging the services of a rural
organization

Training and capacity-building 320 000 256 000

4. Programme management
Baseline survey Training and capacity-building 134 400 107 520
Preparation of finance manual Training and capacity-building 8 400 6 720

Total 534 800 406 240

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Programme investments have an overall internal rate of return of 23 per cent, with

a net present value of Rs 7,840 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.85. The
programme remains viable if costs increase and/or benefits decrease by
25 per cent. Farm model analysis shows significant increases in food production
from 510 kg to 1,020 kg per household, with net incomes increasing several fold
over existing levels.

35. A total of 62,356 households (comprising 32,090 PTGs; 13,970 other ST
households; 5,486 SC households; and 10,810 others) would benefit directly from
the programme.



EB 2015/114/R.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. Immediate benefits from the OPELIP include: (i) increased productivity through the
introduction of better management practices and improved farming practices;
(ii) minimized soil erosion; (iii) reduced runoff and increased infiltration;
(iv) enhancement of organic content of the soil; (v) greater social cohesion among
target group communities due to greater interaction with VDAs and SHGs;
(vi) security of land tenure due to recognition of the usufruct rights of PTGs and
restoration of alienated land; and (vii) increased recognition of and participation by
women.

D. Sustainability
37. The land survey and land allocation, with land title rights, provided to PTGs is

expected to trigger sustained improvements in land use and overall productivity.
Quality of the produce will be ensured through provision of quality seed and
seedlings by the programme and through capacity-building. Marketing could be a
constraint in the initial years, but would be overcome through the operations of
producers’ collectives and the provision of market infrastructure, as demand is
increasing for produce from the programme area. Increased capacity of the target
groups to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises through programme
support will enhance the sustainability of livelihoods.

38. The programme will contribute to environmental and NRM sustainability. Planting of
fruit trees in the current shifting cultivation areas will help protect soils and
improve productivity. The fruit trees and spice crops will provide PTGs and other
STs a regular and more reliable source of income and will reduce the temptation to
encroach on forest lands. In addition, programme participants will receive technical
training in good agricultural practices, improved soil fertility and soil health
management, eco-restoration techniques, planting along contour lines to prevent
erosion, and organic farming.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. There are a number of risks associated with the programme as detailed in the

logical framework. The goal-level risk of lack of support by the Government is
reduced by the Government commitment to continue tribal development
programmes and to enhance investment. The development-objective-level risk of
social instability is addressed by promoting and supporting local governments and
community institutions in building a coalition facilitating stability and economic
growth. The risk of a complex, challenging institutional setting involving 17 MPAs
will be reduced by additional, qualified staffing and staff incentives. Output-level
risks, such as crop production adversely affected by changing weather patterns,
will be reduced through a number of measures to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Other risk mitigation measures include: (i) promoting interventions that
are profitable for PTGs; (ii) enhancing communication links for better access to
markets and services; and (iii) ensuring community participation in programme
planning and implementation to ensure community support for the programme and
insulation from the left-wing insurgency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The OPELIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

supports both strategic objectives of the IFAD RB-COSOP for India. It is also
directed to one of the main target groups identified in the COSOP – indigenous
tribal groups. The programme design adheres to IFAD policies for poverty,
targeting and gender, indigenous peoples, climate change, scaling up, good
governance and the environment. The programme is classified as a category B
operation; thus no further environmental assessment is considered necessary.



EB 2015/114/R.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The State Government has been actively involved in formulation and appraisal of

the OPELIP. The programme is built on the success of OTELP as well as on lessons
learned from other IFAD-supported projects in India. The OPELIP is aligned with
the India COSOP 2010-2015 and is compatible with and supportive of other state
government initiatives. It is also in line with strategies and policies of the
Governments of India and Odisha for the development of tribal and vulnerable
communities. The programme goal and objective are aligned with the objective of
“faster and more inclusive growth” of the Governments of Odisha and India.

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The OPELIP represents a scaling up of the successful interventions of OTELP, and it

is expected that the OPELIP, itself, will be scaled up in time. As this is the first
externally funded development intervention targeted to PTGs, it offers an
opportunity to refine a model for PTG areas, which can then be scaled up to PTG
areas in other states with large PTG populations, such as Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh.

43. The OPELIP will undertake case studies of innovations and success stories on a
regular basis and will report on them through annual progress reports and in the
India country newsletters.

D. Policy engagement
44. The policy engagement of the programme will support the Government of Odisha’s

efforts to address a number of policy issues relating to the development of tribal
populations. The programme will also provide funding for studies on key policy
issues and dissemination of the findings, and will engage in dialogue with the State
Government on other unresolved policy areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to thirty-six million four hundred thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 36,400,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Indonesia for the
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

Republic of Indonesia

Integrated Participatory Development and Management
of the Irrigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institutions: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Borrower: Republic of Indonesia

Executing agency: Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR),
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH)

Total project cost: US$802.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 93.15 million
(equivalent to approximately US$98.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 1.41 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$600 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower: US$102.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Indonesia for the Integrated Participatory Development
and Management of the Irrigation Project, as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Indonesia for
the Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Indonesia has made significant progress in reducing poverty and promoting

economic growth. Agriculture remains an important sector as a pathway for rural
transformation and poverty reduction. Yet Indonesian farmers face new threats
from volatile food prices, erratic agricultural markets and policies, growing
insecurity of access to land, degradation of natural resources and the worsening
effects of climate change. Ensuring inclusive economic development through
strengthened agriculture-sector performance is a key priority for the Government of
Indonesia, which has recently prioritized issues of food sovereignty and rural
development. Food security is challenged by a declining rural infrastructure – a
consequence of inadequate financing and delivery of operations and maintenance
(O&M) that limits increased productivity for rice and other high-value crops. High
transport and logistics costs are a serious constraint on business operations and
undermine the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. In addition, increased
higher-value cropping and commercialized agriculture are needed to improve rural
livelihoods. Technical and administrative capacity constraints hamper effective
planning, management and development as Indonesia’s decentralized government
structure heightens capacity challenges. Climate change is expected to further
worsen water scarcity in some areas, result in more-frequent extreme weather
events and less-favourable rainfall patterns for agriculture. It is recognized that
improved integration of irrigation management and agricultural development is
needed if the country is to achieve the desired impact on food security and rural
livelihoods.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. As part of its National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019, the
Government aims at self-sufficiency in key staple foods, including rice, by 2017. In
support of this target, it has committed to rehabilitating 3.2 million hectares (ha) of
degraded irrigation systems to enhance rice and other food production. This has
placed considerable focus on agriculture and water, with calls for both the public
and private sectors to consider comprehensive and collaborative responses to
national development targets. Earlier attempts to enhance the productivity of
irrigated agriculture through a largely infrastructural focus have achieved
suboptimal longer-term results, mainly owing to: (i) failure to empower farmers
and strengthen a farming system response that maximized their opportunities to
capture sustainable economic benefits from infrastructure investments; and (ii)
failure to ensure that all parts of the new or rehabilitated irrigated schemes were
well maintained.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

2

3. The project builds on these lessons and on learning from previous and ongoing
investments in irrigated agriculture. It is strongly aligned with government policies
and expenditure plans.

4. The Integrated Participatory Development and Management of the Irrigation Project
(IPDMIP) will significantly contribute to achievement of government priorities to: (i)
increase rice production for food security; (ii) develop higher-value cropping to
improve rural nutrition and livelihoods; and (iii) promote more productive irrigation
infrastructure and its sustainable management through the delivery of an
integrated package of infrastructure, institutional reforms and capacity
development to catalyse sector advances. Importantly, the project will complement
– and provide a robust framework for promoting – more-effective public and private
investment in irrigated agriculture.

5. By integrating a focus on irrigation rehabilitation into strengthened support for
agricultural and farmer livelihood development, the project provides an innovative
approach to investing in irrigated agriculture. It will introduce strengthened
mechanisms to promote more-effective cross-sectoral coordination and institutional
and policy development.

6. IPDMIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, the current
interim country strategy and the forthcoming results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for Indonesia (April 2016), which will focus
on productivity enhancement, market access and institution- and capacity-building
for rural women and men.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Project area. The proposed project area will cover an initial 16 provinces

(5 in Sumatra, 4 in Java, 2 in Kalimantan, 3 in Sulawesi and 2 in Nusa Tenggara),
comprising 74 districts and up to 1,800 irrigation schemes, covering a total area of
some 450,000 ha (approximately 14 per cent of the 3.2 million ha national target).
Importantly, it will pursue a scaling-up strategy to promote the replication of
project activities in other villages in the targeted districts and in other districts and
provinces. It is estimated that the project model could be replicated in
approximately 10,000 subprojects covering some 2.2 million ha. This would
increase potential coverage to 6 million households or some 24 million individuals.

8. Target group. The project design adopts an inclusive targeting approach at the
irrigation scheme level to benefit all active farmers in the scheme. Within targeted
communities, categories of poor rural people consist of poor, near-poor and
better-off people. An explicit poverty and targeting strategy will be employed to
reach the most marginal households, including ‘poor people’ (i.e. moderately poor,
poor and very poor people), women, youth and those farmers at the tail end of the
irrigation schemes, who are normally the most vulnerable. The total number of
project beneficiaries is estimated at 900,000 households or 4 million individuals, of
whom approximately 50 per cent are women.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of the project is to improve food security and livelihoods in rural

Indonesia. Its outcome objective is to increase the value and sustainability of
irrigated agriculture.

C. Components
10. Component 1. Increased irrigated agriculture incomes will focus on improving

farm and market systems and on providing appropriate service support, including
financial services, mainly for rice and high-value irrigated crops.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

3

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Improved farm productivity and services focuses
on on-farm activities and comprises: support to improved farmer extension
services available to smallholder farmers; farmer-to-farmer knowledge
dissemination; access to and storage of sufficient good-quality seed and other
inputs; and mechanization, including support for enhancing on-farm systems
for crop intensification and diversification and ensuring that farmers acquire
the necessary knowledge, skills and confidence to adopt improved agronomy
and better risk-management practices.

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Improved market access and services focuses on
promoting better value addition and post-harvest activities and comprises
facilitating public and private investment through combined funding
instruments, supported by consultation platforms and capacity development
initiatives for rice, vegetables and technology access. For rice, support will be
provided to improve post-harvest activities and value addition. For
vegetables, support will build on existing and emerging production clusters,
following an iterative process to facilitate and develop links between buyers,
producers and service providers. It will prioritize innovation in local value
chains and actively promote development of local private-sector markets. As
with subcomponent 1.1, initiatives will be taken to encourage partnership
with private input suppliers.

(c) Subcomponent 1.3. Improved financial access and use of services is
based on facilitating better access to and leveraging mainstream financial
services. It will include savings, credit and, subsequently, other innovative
rural financial services (e.g. digital financial services and agriculture
microinsurance) by sustainable financial service providers, enabling seasonal
finance needs to be met through inclusive and pro-poor services. The
approach will build on existing structures and will develop partnerships with a
small number of existing financial service providers that demonstrate a clear
social inclusion performance and business strategy in expanding their
smallholder agricultural portfolio, and that have existing, proven financial
service schemes broadly aligned with the project’s objectives and aspirations
for rural financial services.

11. Component 2. Improved irrigation systems infrastructure will focus on
support to rehabilitation or upgrading of primary and secondary irrigation systems
and drainage infrastructure, and will include modernization of these systems for
one or several larger schemes.

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Preparatory assessments comprises: activities to
provide reliable information regarding water availability in the basin, in
relation to the needs of the irrigation scheme – to be taken into account to
ensure that the scheme has adequate water to meet irrigation requirements;
and participatory rapid rural assessments, pre-design and drafting of overall
scheme intervention plans. Hydrological assessments will also take into
account the possible impacts of climate change.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Irrigation systems rehabilitation, upgrading
and/or modernization comprises activities to design and implement civil
works with respect to irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Detailed
engineering designs for civil works will cover primary and secondary irrigation
infrastructure, tertiary irrigation infrastructure and drainage works. To
address the water/food/energy nexus, the project will equip irrigation canals
with hydropower turbines – on a pilot basis – for management by WUAs
where technically, economically and institutionally feasible.

12. Component 3. Improved irrigation systems management will focus on
strengthening irrigation water delivery at the scheme level.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

4

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Empowerment of WUAs comprises activities to
facilitate the organization of irrigating farmers into empowered WUAs/WUAFs
capable of investing in and managing tertiary irrigation infrastructure, to
ensure adequate water supply and access to all farmers in the tertiary
irrigation scheme. Specifically, this will support training and capacity-building
of WUAs/WUAFs at the institutional level. Institutional support activities will
establish, reorganize and complete the WUA organizational structures in the
targeted irrigation systems, following government policy and procedure and
introducing the lessons of international experiences. This will also include
legal registration of WUAs/WUAFs, development of by-laws by their members,
appointment of board members and assignment of roles and responsibilities
in agreement with all involved farmers.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Improvement of irrigation systems field
management comprises activities to support central, provincial and district
governments in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water
management through activities such as: irrigation system performance
assessments; preparation of irrigation management plans and irrigation
service plans; volumetric discharge measurement and water accounting;
improvement of irrigation service performance; needs-based planning and
budgeting; and refurbishment of existing offices, equipment and facilities
within the context of the preparation of O&M. To achieve sustainable
improvement of irrigation system performance, this will include establishment
and start-up assistance to irrigation management units (IMUs) for selected
irrigation schemes under the project.

(c) Subcomponent 3.3. Operationalization of a national asset
management system comprises activities in support of operationalizing
such a system, including aerial surveys – using remote sensing technology –
of primary, secondary, tertiary and other infrastructure, as well as
hydrological and agricultural data. These data will also be used to further
inform hydrological assessments under subcomponent 2.1 and to assist
project management and implementation under subcomponent 4.4.

13. Component 4. Strengthened policy and institutional frameworks for
irrigated agriculture will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacity of government
institutions and staff; and (b) supporting executing and implementing institutions at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision. Improving
coordination among the different government institutions will be an important
element of these aspects.

(a) Subcomponent 4.1. Strengthened local-level policy, regulatory and
institutional framework comprises: supporting government line agencies
at provincial and district levels in identifying specific policy issues and
reflecting on how these could be tackled; supporting Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (BAPPEDA), the provincial and district planning agency,
in undertaking analysis and synthesis of knowledge from various sources and
in informing policy dialogue; and supporting both the line agencies and
BAPPEDAs in identifying policy options and actions.

(b) Subcomponent 4.2. Establishment of water resource management
and knowledge centres. Sixteen such centres will be established or
strengthened at the provincial level – including through recruitment of
personnel and procurement of office and training equipment and facilities –
for training on technical and institutional aspects of irrigation planning,
development and management.

(c) Subcomponent 4.3. Improved policy coordination for irrigated
agriculture comprises support for establishing and supporting a knowledge
management centre (KMC) in the National Development Planning Agency



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

5

(BAPPENAS), which will coordinate support for smallholder irrigated
agriculture, promote policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and
strengthen national and local policy processes. The KMC’s remit would be
related to knowledge management and policy development, enabling the
Government to: foster continuity between development projects and policies
for smallholder irrigated agriculture by drawing out lessons; unify knowledge
from diverse initiatives; promote coordinated approaches to policy dialogue
among domestic stakeholders; and support national and local policy
processes.

(d) Subcomponent 4.4. Project management and implementation support
comprises support to executing and implementing agencies (EA and IAs) at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision and
strengthening the planning, implementation and management capacities of
IAs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project adopts a menu-based programmatic approach: identifying and
packaging a strategic set of interventions in order to achieve the desired outcomes
and development objectives. Menu items will essentially consist of the
subcomponents and activities attributed to each output.

15. The implementation approach builds on the recently completed Asian Development
Bank (ADB) supported Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Adjustments have
been made based on lessons learned from ADB’s and IFAD’s project implementation
experiences in Indonesia. These seek to strengthen linkages between agriculture
and the irrigation rehabilitation interventions, to strengthen poverty targeting, and
to respond to the need to expedite project implementation, with a view towards
contributing to national development targets for agriculture and for irrigation
rehabilitation.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Steering Committee on Water Resources (NSCWR), chaired by the

Deputy Minister of Maritime and Natural Resources, Ministry of National
Development Planning/BAPPENAS, will be responsible for the overall coordination of
the project. The Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR) in the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) will be the executing agency. A national project
management unit (NPMU) will be established under the Directorate of Irrigation and
Lowland in DGWR to ensure overall coordination of implementation of the project. A
total of four national project implementation units (NPIUs) will be established: one
in the Directorate of Irrigation and Swamps (DoIS) in DGWR, responsible for
implementation of the irrigation infrastructure systems and related activities; one in
DoIS, responsible for implementation of O&M-related activities; one in the
Directorate General of Regional Development in the Ministry of Home Affairs
(MoHA), responsible for overall guidance of the BAPPEDAs; and one in the Agency
for Agricultural Extension and Human Resources Development (AAEHRD) in the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), responsible for implementation of agricultural and
related activities, in cooperation with provincial and district agriculture agencies.
The IFAD grant will be administered by the Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

17. Planning. The NPMU, in consultation with the NPIUs, will prepare and submit an
overall annual workplan, showing supporting (general) and subproject activities, to



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

6

ADB and IFAD for review and no objection. In addition, each participating district
and province will prepare an overall work plan and budget.

18. Monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will serve three
distinct functions strengthening management, accountability and learning. A project
performance monitoring system will consolidate the M&E functions into a unified
system. Building on lessons learned under the IFAD-supported Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP), it will comprise both a comprehensive list of
performance indicators at impact, outcome, output and suboutput levels, derived
from the project Design and Monitoring Framework (appendix II), and impact and
post-completion performance data. Data will be disaggregated by component and,
where possible, by district, gender and other dimensions. The indicators used will
include those contributing to IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The project will undertake baseline, midterm and impact studies and
conduct annual outcome surveys.

19. Learning. The M&E system will also seek to inform on issues that can improve the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the project. The M&E unit, in collaboration
with the NPMU and other key project stakeholders, will identify specific topics that
need particular analysis – technical, institutional and policy-derived – and will
conduct snapshot studies. For each study topic, a learning plan will be developed to
ensure that the study feeds into a larger process of reflection at the project level
and, where appropriate, beyond.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The NPMU will be responsible for the overall consolidation

and coordination of project financial reporting and audit. The four NPIUs will be
responsible for financial management of expenditures under the respective project
components and/or activities. The roles and responsibilities of the implementing
entities will be clearly defined in the project implementation manual.

21. Financial management implementation arrangements will be aligned to national
public financial management (PFM) systems, which have been strengthened in
recent years. PFM modernization initiatives include an integrated financial
management information system, consolidation of the Treasury single account,
government accounting and reporting, strengthened audit institutions, accrual
accounting and adoption of international accounting and auditing standards. A
financial management assessment of the project has been prepared in accordance
with IFAD and ADB’s guidelines for financial management of projects. This
assessment finds that the overall project financial management risk is moderate,
and identifies mitigating actions, including strengthening financial management
capacity at all levels (EA, IAs and PIUs) in terms of staff training and technical
assistance, automated accounting systems, and internal and external audits.

22. Flow of funds. Donor funding will flow through three designated accounts
managed by the Ministry of Finance for the IFAD loan, IFAD grant and ADB loan
respectively. Three types of disbursement mechanisms will be adopted for the
project, consisting of: (i) replenishments of both the IFAD and ADB designated
accounts; (ii) reimbursement of prefinanced expenditures by both IFAD and ADB;
and (iii) direct payments.

23. Flow of funds for the project will be determined by the implementation strategies
adopted by IAs. These will consist of a combination of: (i) reimbursement from
Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (the national revenue and budget
agency) funded activities, which would then be passed on to local governments
through the deconcentration mechanism (Dekonsentrasi/Tugas Pembantuan); and
(ii) reimbursement for activities implemented under prefinancing agreements.

24. Audit. Internal audits will be conducted by the internal audit units of IAs, in
accordance with their mandate and annual workplans. As regards external audit



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

7

arrangements, the consolidated project accounts, prepared by the NPMU, will be
audited by the national auditor, in accordance with international standards for
these institutions. Audited project financial statements will be submitted to IFAD
and ADB within six months of the end of each fiscal year, in line with IFAD and ADB
audit guidelines. The audit reports will provide opinions, for IFAD and ADB funding
respectively, on the financial statements, use of designated accounts, statements of
expenditure and financing agreement covenants. The audit report will include a
management letter assessing the project’s internal control framework at diverse
implementing levels and making recommendations for improvement. The resolution
of audit observations will be monitored by the NPMU, the NPIUs and the national
auditor.

25. Procurement. The procurement of goods and works for IFAD financing will be
undertaken in accordance with the borrower/recipient procurement regulations to
the extent they are consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.

26. Governance. In line with their respective policies, IFAD and ADB will investigate,
directly or through their agents, any violations of the anticorruption policy relating
to the project. All contracts shall include provisions specifying the right of ADB and
IFAD to audit and examine the records and accounts of the EA and all project
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.

27. In addition, ADB’s accountability mechanism and IFAD's complaints procedure
provide independent processes through which people adversely affected by
ADB- and IFAD-assisted projects can voice and seek resolution of their problems,
as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s and IFAD's operational policies and
procedures.

28. Supervision. Supervision will be undertaken by IFAD in collaboration with ADB. A
formal supervision plan covering the period up to the midterm review will be agreed
upon at project start-up. In addition, IFAD will adopt a continuous supervision and
implementation support approach through the newly opened country office. An
extensive review will be carried out after two years of project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The project is estimated to cost US$802.4 million, including physical and price

contingencies of US$49.17 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

1. Increased irrigated agriculture
incomes 97 473 97 473

2. Improved irrigation systems
infrastructure 434 592 434 592

3. Improved irrigation systems
management 1 038 85 448 156 86 642

4. Strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for irrigated agriculture 1 489 79 960 102 265 183 714

Total project cost 98 511 1 489 600 000 102 421 802 421

Interest during implementation 49 917 49 917

Commitment charges 524 524

Total disbursement 98 511 1 489 600 000 152 862 852 862



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

8

B. Project financing
30. The Government has requested financing of US$100 million from IFAD, consisting

of a loan of US$98.5 million and a grant of US$1.5 million. The IFAD loan and grant
will finance component 1 and some activities under components 3 and 4. The
Government has further requested a loan of US$600 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources. The ADB loan will finance components 2, 3 and 4. The
Government contribution to project costs is estimated at US$102.4 million.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 362 805 100 362 805
2. Vehicles and equipment 4 663 5 150 10 14 991 3 19 804
3. Consulting services - international 2 709 3 3 798 1 6 374
4. Consulting services - national 18 154 19 361 24 44 586 7 63 231
5. Term staff 5 342 5 5 342
6. Service contract 1 038 1 10 141 2 11 179
7. Workshop, training, socialization 29 014 30 271 18 36 956 6 66 243
8. Survey and studies 777 1 327 22 101 032 17 102 136
9. Institutional capacity-building 13 293 2 13 293
10. Safeguard/land

acquisition/resettlement 1 260 0.2 1 260
11. Incremental administration cost 380 26 11 139 2 102 421 100 113 940
12. Materials 15 297 16 15 297
13. Finance and credit 21 516 22 21 516

Total project cost 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 75 102 421 13 802 421
Interest during implementation 49 917 100 49 917
Commitment charges 524 100 524

Total disbursement 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 70 152 862 18 852 862

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. Benefits. Benefits would accrue from: (i) improved extension delivery; (ii) use of

improved seed; (iii) adoption of better water management techniques; (iv) access
to mechanization; (v) access to finance; (vi) enhanced access to and more-reliable
irrigation; and (vii) enhanced productivity in agriculture. Yet, in addition to on-farm
investments, higher returns are also generated by other important factors,
including: (i) an improved tertiary irrigation system; (ii) more-functional WUAs;
(iii) improved access to farm roads; and (iv) farmer training in water budgeting and
in financial literacy.

32. Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
project is estimated at 17 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the
net benefit stream, discounted at 10 per cent, is 4,944 billion Indonesian rupiah.
The EIRR was subject to sensitivity analysis to measure the impact variations in key
variables due to unforeseen factors. The results indicate that the most significant of
these risks would be overestimation of the achievable with-project rice yields or a
two-year (or more) delay in achieving project benefits. The former is considered a
low risk, as the yield potential is well known for available rice varieties genetically
superior to the varieties normally used by farmers at present. The latter will only be
a risk if there are delays once the project has started, and mitigation measures are
already being implemented to ensure a timely achievement of project benefits.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) impact of capacity-building

activities on the formation of social and human capital among the identified target



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

9

groups (farmer groups and government officials); (ii) impact on relevant policy
frameworks and compilation of knowledge stock within the Government; (iii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iv) linkages built among different
actors within the value chain.

34. Moreover, the project has an explicit scaling-up strategy to enhance the impact and
sustainability of achieved results.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Although this is a very large and geographically dispersed project, its overall

premise is simple. The main risk of lack of support by the Government is reduced,
given the close alignment of project activities with national development priorities.
Already, prior to implementation, stakeholders across government agencies are
collaborating closely in preparing project implementation. The risk of lack of
coordination among stakeholders and limited understanding of project activities is
thus considered manageable. Assessments with regard to risks related to financial
management and procurement have been conducted and mitigation measures
identified. Environmental risks have been identified as manageable. The project
approach includes an additional mechanism to assess and mitigate risks at the
localized, subproject level.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The project design adheres to relevant IFAD policies for microfinance,
private-sector participation, the environment, targeting and gender. The project is
categorized as environmental category B, in accordance with ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement 2009.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The project is set within a number of key government policy documents. The

National Long-Term Development Plan 2005-2025 and the related National
Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019 give prominence to: agriculture-sector
development, in particular ensuring food security, self-sufficiency and food
sovereignty through increased domestic production capacity; and the improved
provision of food which is sufficient in quantity and diversity, and which meets the
requirements of food safety, quality and nutrient content at an affordable price. The
project will support implementation of the participating ministries’ strategic plans
and priorities.

38. The project will complement and provide a robust framework for government
expenditure plans: MoPWH will invest almost US$25 billion over the period
2015-2019, including more than US$5 billion for irrigation rehabilitation works. MoA
has allocated US$219 million in 2015 through UPSUS for nationwide investments in
priority areas (i.e. agricultural infrastructure, seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery
and extension services). Overall investments of almost US$15 billion are foreseen
for 2015-2019, including more than US$3 billion for improvements in agricultural
irrigation infrastructure and almost US$3 billion for improvements in productivity
and production. Both investments are for rice and food crops and are intended to
contribute to achieving food self-sufficiency by 2017. Thus the project enables more
effective and more efficient coordination of public investment in irrigated
agriculture.

Innovations and scaling upC.
39. The project adopts an innovation and scaling-up agenda responding to the

Government’s expectation that externally financed projects offer innovative
solutions that can be scaled up and that they assist learning through
implementation experience and the development of new policies, institutional
arrangements and programmes at the national level. The project will: (i) facilitate



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

10

piloting of innovations through subprojects, as well as at the overall project
management level; (ii) conduct evaluations or studies to review experiences gained
with the innovations promoted; (iii) analyse evidence, discuss findings with
stakeholders and synthesize conclusions; and (iv) support the scaling up of
successful approaches, methods and technologies – both within the project and
beyond it, through public policies, institutions and practices.

Policy engagementD.
40. In response to the Government’s request for strengthened policy-level support for

irrigated agriculture, the project will focus on strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff at national, provincial and district levels to
conduct consultative policy dialogue and design and to implement evidence-based
policies, regulations and strategies for participatory irrigation management and
irrigated smallholder agriculture. It will strengthen the local-level policy and
regulatory framework for supporting smallholder irrigated agriculture, building on
the participatory irrigation principles of the Government and ensuring that these
are operationalized. It will also strengthen the capacity of those institutions
responsible for coordinating irrigation development and delivering services, and will
build farmers’ understanding of their rights and responsibilities under national/local
policies. Moreover, the project will support the establishment and initial operation
of irrigation knowledge and training centres at the provincial level and will establish
a KMC within BAPPENAS to coordinate support for irrigated agriculture, promote
policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and strengthen national and local
policy processes.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as
appendix I.

42. The Republic of Indonesia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Indonesia in an amount equivalent to ninety-three million one
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 93,150,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Indonesia in an amount equivalent to one million four hundred and ten
thousand euros (EUR 1,410,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya
and proposed grant under the country-specific
grants window to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the Kenya
Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)

Republic of Kenya

Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Kenya

Recipient: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)

Executing agency: State Department of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries

Total KCEP-CRAL cost: US$118.0 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 43.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$61.8 million)

Amount of Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 7.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Amount of IFAD grant to FAO: US$2.0 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier: European Union

Amount of cofinancing: European Union: EUR 9.5 million (equivalent to
US$11.7 million)

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$1.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: Beneficiaries: US$29.1 million
Financial institutions: US$1.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Kenya and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL), as contained in
paragraph 51.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya and
grant under the country-specific window to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
Country and rural development and poverty contextA.

1. Socio-economic background. Kenya has a total land area of 582,646 km2 and
an estimated population of 43 million people. High fertility combined with declining
mortality has contributed to a population growth rate estimated at 2.6 per cent.
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) make up more than 80 per cent of the
country’s land mass and are home to approximately 36 per cent of its population.
The remaining 64 per cent of the population lives in medium- and high-potential
areas in the central and western parts of the country, where the population density
is up to ten times the national average of 69 people/km2. In October 2014, Kenya
became a low-middle-income country. Despite uncertainties in the period leading
up to elections, rising insecurity and erratic weather, growth is expected to
continue in the next five years at an annual average of 5.9 per cent, facilitated by
ongoing infrastructure development. However, the challenges of poverty and
income inequality remain.

2. Agriculture and smallholder farming. The agriculture sector is the backbone of
Kenya’s economy, employing 70 per cent of the rural population and accounting for
65 per cent of export earnings. However, its share of GDP has declined from nearly
40 per cent in the 1970s to 25.3 per cent in 2013. Production of industrial and food
crops and horticulture accounts for 82 per cent of agricultural GDP and 94 per cent
of export earnings from agriculture. The remaining three subsectors of agriculture
– livestock, fisheries and forestry – account for the remaining 18 per cent of
agricultural GDP and 8 per cent of export earnings from agriculture, with significant
potential for added growth.

3. Rural poverty. The poverty rate in Kenya dropped from 52.2 per cent in 1997 to
45.2 per cent in 2009,1 and the Human Development Report 2013 ranked the
country 145th of 186 rated, with a human development index of 0.519.2 Over
75 per cent of Kenya’s population lives in rural areas, where, in 2009, poverty was
estimated at 50 per cent of the population. ASALs have the lowest development
indicators and the highest incidence of poverty in the country.

1 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey (KIHBS), 2005/06; Exploring Kenya’s Inequality (Kenya National Bureau of
Statistics and Society for International Development, 2013).
2 Human Development Report 2013 (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2013), p. 146.



EB 2015/114/R.9

2

4. Food security and nutrition. Food security remains a major challenge for the
Government of Kenya. According to the Global Hunger Index,3 Kenya remains a
food-insecure country despite a slight reduction in hunger. Approximately 10
million Kenyans suffer from chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition.

5. Vulnerability to climate change. According to the Stockholm Environment
Institute,4 if climate change in Kenya is not addressed, the economic costs of its
impact are estimated at 3 per cent of GDP per year by 2030, and could reach
5 per cent by 2050. The agriculture sector, which contributes over 25 per cent of
annual GDP, is particularly affected by changing climatic conditions. Nearly
98 per cent of crop production is rainfed,5 and almost 50 per cent of animal
production occurs in ASALs. The increased incidence of drought and unreliable
rainfall are expected to significantly affect the sector.

Rationale and alignment with government priorities andB.
RB-COSOP

6. Programme rationale. Kenya is a food-deficit country that imports up to
20 per cent of its annual cereal requirements. Improvement in cereal production,
including maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, is constrained by the
limited adoption of improved crop technologies and practices. ASALs are an
important producing area: they account for 30 per cent of cereal production and
54 per cent of pulses produced in the country. Semi-arid areas have a comparative
advantage in the production of pulses, accounting for 99 per cent of the production
of pigeon pea, 95 per cent of green gram, 93 per cent of cowpea and 60 per cent
of millet. Semi-arid areas are also central to the production of sorghum, accounting
for 48 per cent of the total. In addition, 37 per cent of beans and 26 per cent of
maize are produced in semi-arid lands.

7. Alignment with government priorities and IFAD RB-COSOP. The KCEP-CRAL
is consistent with the country’s agriculture-sector development strategy 2010-
2020. The strategy’s main objectives are to achieve an agricultural growth rate of
7 per cent per year and reduce food insecurity by 30 per cent by promoting
innovative, commercially oriented and climate-smart modern agriculture. The
programme is also aligned with IFAD’s results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 2013-2018, which recognizes that Kenya’s
food requirements go beyond increased food production in high- and medium-
potential areas, and calls for increased production in ASALs. Finally, IFAD’s support
in ASALs is guided by its Climate Change Strategy and Environment and Natural
Resource Management Policy. IFAD will mobilize resources from its Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to assist smallholders in improving
their livelihoods and becoming more resilient to climate change in the fragile ASAL
ecosystem.

II. Programme description
Programme area and target groupA.

8. Programme area. The programme area covers eight semi-arid counties in the
eastern and coastal regions of Kenya, with a combined population of over 5 million
people: Embu, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, Machakos, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale and
Kilifi. These counties were included based on: (i) agroecological suitability and
production potential of maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, which are
important to Kenya’s food security; (ii) incidence of poverty; (iii) vulnerability to
climate change; (iv) geographical concentration to maximize impact; and
(v) presence of similar development programmes (to avoid duplication). Within
these counties, 25 subcounties will be selected at start-up using the same criteria.

3 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2014.
4 Stockholm Environment Institute, 2009.
5 World Resources Institute et al., 2007.



EB 2015/114/R.9

3

9. Target group. The KCEP-CRAL will reach 100,000 smallholder farmers whose
livelihoods depend on maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, including:

(a) 60,000 food-insecure smallholder farmers, who will be supported in
graduating from recurring food insecurity and climate vulnerability to food
security and then to market-oriented commercial farming; and

(b) 40,000 smallholder subsistence farmers, who will be supported in graduating
into commercial farming.

10. Of these 100,000 smallholder farmers, the programme aims to sustainably lift
80,000 out of poverty (80 per cent of targeted farmers). There will be a special
focus on woman-headed households and on youth, given the constraints they face
in accessing agricultural services and inputs. The programme will also empower
county governments and communities to manage their natural resources more
sustainably and consensually, and will build their resilience to climate change
through community investments. A secondary target group will consist of
stakeholders along agricultural value chains – such as agro-dealers, private
extension services, buyers, processors and lead farmers providing support services
to smallholders – and who will facilitate smallholder access to enhanced agricultural
services.

Programme development objectiveB.
11. The overall development goal of the KCEP-CRAL is to reduce rural poverty and food

insecurity among smallholders in Kenya’s ASALs by developing their economic
potential, while improving their natural resource management capacity and
resilience to climate change in an increasingly fragile ecosystem. This goal will be
pursued through: (i) graduation of smallholder farmers to commercially oriented,
climate-resilient agricultural practices through improvements in productivity, post-
production management practices and market linkages for targeted value chains;
and (ii) empowerment of county governments and communities to sustainably and
consensually manage their natural resources and build resilience to climate change.

Components/outcomesC.
12. Programme components. The KCEP-CRAL is structured around three technical

components, supported by programme management:

13. Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management. Through an e-voucher
platform giving smallholder farmers access to improved agricultural inputs and
technologies, the programme will enhance farmers’ productivity with a view to
commercialization. Activities in this component will support farmers in establishing
productive and climate-resilient crop enterprises suited to ASALs, and in improving
productivity through the adoption of good agricultural practices, such as
conservation agriculture and associated water conservation practices. The
programme will also support targeted counties in planning adaptation strategies,
adopting sustainable natural resource management practices and building
resilience to climate change.

14. Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages. The
programme aims to support farmers in capitalizing on productivity gains by
promoting improved on-farm grain handling and management, access to storage,
and warehouse receipt systems. These activities are expected to increase
smallholders’ access to markets and build their capacity to sell their produce at
more favourable prices.

15. Component 3. Financial services. This component is designed to: link farmers
to financial services in order to boost yields and income for reinvestment in their
farming businesses; and build the capacity of value-chain stakeholders, including
youth, to profitably engage in the provision of agricultural services.



EB 2015/114/R.9

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

16. The KCEP-CRAL is an expansion to ASALs of the Kenya Cereal Enhancement
Programme (KCEP), which began in April 2014 through a partnership involving the
Government, the European Union and IFAD. Its programme approach is based on
an expanded strategic partnership of the Government, the European Union and the
United Nations Rome-based agencies (RBAs): IFAD, FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). This partnership builds on each partners’ comparative
advantage in supporting farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to market-
oriented farming.

17. Within the partnership, WFP will provide support to food- and nutrition-insecure
farmers. With this support, households can gradually build productive assets and
acquire agricultural production and risk management skills to meet basic food
needs. IFAD will support subsistence farmers in graduating to market-oriented
farming by addressing constraints on production, post-harvest management,
processing and marketing. Through the ASAP Trust Fund, IFAD will also support
farmers’ investments in improved natural resource management and resilience to
climate change. Throughout this process, FAO will support farmer groups and
county governments in adopting good agricultural practices, including conservation
agriculture, while the European Union will sustain the achievement of programme
objectives by providing additional funding for implementation through IFAD and
FAO.

18. The programme approach encompasses an innovative public/private partnership
with financial institutions that aims to expand access to financial services as
beneficiaries graduate from subsidized support to market-oriented farming. Natural
resource management and climate change adaptation are mainstreamed in each
component to ensure that programme interventions are sustainable and improve
the resilience of targeted smallholders. Finally, while the programme will support
targeted households in meeting their cereal needs and in producing a surplus for
markets, WFP will support the transfer of good nutrition practices to households
through its protracted relief and recovery operation.

B. Organizational framework
19. Implementation framework. The lead agency for programme implementation is

the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. This agency will be responsible
for coordinating programme implementation, supported by a programme
coordination unit (PCU) for IFAD-funded activities, and liaising with FAO and WFP
focal points for activities carried out by these agencies. A steering committee
chaired by the Principal Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture will be set
up at the national level to provide oversight and strategic guidance of
implementation. To operationalize the RBA partnership, an RBA technical
coordination group will comprise the PCU coordinator and FAO and WFP
representatives. The group will be responsible for annual planning, budgeting,
mobilizing RBA contributions to the programme and identifying opportunities for
collaboration with other donor-funded activities in target counties.

20. Grant to FAO for capacity-building of county structures. At the local level,
programme implementation will be aligned to Kenya’s devolution framework, with
the counties as primary implementers. Given the limited capacity of newly set up
county government structures, IFAD will provide FAO with a grant to build the
capacity of county agricultural offices to plan, execute and monitor agricultural
services and investments within the County Integrated Development Plan:

(i) A dedicated RBA implementation support team in each target county will
plan, execute and monitor agricultural services in the context of the KCEP-
CRAL. Each county’s support team will be composed of a lead technical



EB 2015/114/R.9

5

support officer and a national United Nations volunteer – both with an
agribusiness and programme management background. These experts will
work with FAO and WFP programme officers, and with the National Drought
Management Authority coordinator at the county level.

(ii) Capacity-building of county agricultural offices will strengthen the outreach of
agricultural extension agents in delivering agricultural services to farmers.
This includes training packages and cost provisions for agricultural services to
farmers in the context of programme implementation.

21. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with WFP to define roles and
responsibilities in programme execution. The agreement between the European
Union and IFAD will be revised to reflect the European Union’s increased KCEP
contribution to cover the CRAL window. The Union has also entered into a
contribution agreement with FAO to disseminate good agricultural practices,
including conservation agriculture, in the framework of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Programme planning. Programme planning will follow a bottom-up and gender-
and-youth sensitive approach at the county level. Throughout the programme’s
seven-year implementation period, the PCU will support counties in sensitizing and
mobilizing stakeholders, and in requesting support. Eligible farmer and county
requests for programme support will be included in the KCEP-CRAL annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B), which will conform to the Government’s planning
cycle. For community-level investments, participatory rural appraisals will be
carried out to facilitate the formation of community-based organizations, which will
oversee implementation. Planning at the county level will be reflected in the County
Integrated Development Plan.

23. Monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. The programme’s
development goals will be monitored by a robust system, which will be aligned with
Kenya’s National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System and in compliance
with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). RIMS is capable of
measuring results in terms of climate-change resilience, natural resource
management and the graduation of smallholders.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. To ensure effective financial oversight, a programme

finance team will be set up at the lead national agency. In addition, there will be an
accountant in each of the three regions covered by the programme. At the county
level, an accountant from the National Treasury will be responsible for programme
financial management.

25. Internal controls. To complement government mechanisms, the following
internal controls will be instituted: (i) the PCU finance/administration manager will
be an agent (non-transacting) on all programme county and regional bank
accounts; (ii) at the county level, the national treasury accountant will be a
signatory to the programme bank account, together with the designated county
programme coordinator; and (iii) budget control will be supported through the
programme accounting software and the use of commitment ledgers (sometimes
called vote books) at the county level.

26. Accounting systems, policies and procedures. An off-the-shelf accounting
package with the ability to generate expenditure trends by component, category,
and activities in United States dollars, euro and Kenyan shillings will be used.
Development of programme uniform coding (chart of accounts) will be a joint effort
by the PCU finance team, those responsible for monitoring and evaluation, and
technical officers.



EB 2015/114/R.9

6

27. Financial reporting and monitoring will be conducted in accordance with
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards on a cash basis. In addition to
annual audited financial statements, IFAD will require semi-annual interim financial
reports.

28. The grant to FAO will be disbursed based on AWP/Bs. In addition, FAO will submit
statements of expenditure with respect to the use of at least 75 per cent of the
immediately preceding advance (and 100 per cent of previous advances). FAO will
provide regular reports to IFAD, including six-month unaudited financial reports,
and will submit a copy of FAO audited financial statements that cover any part of
the grant proceeds within six months following the official publication of FAO’s
audited statements.

29. Procurement. With the enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Assets Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, Kenya has
established a sound legal framework for public procurement with clear hierarchical
distinctions. The legal and regulatory framework of the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Assets Act will be used in programme procurement. KCEP-CRAL
procurement provisions will build on the Ministerial Tender Committee of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Items common across more than
one county will be procured nationally in bulk; contract award decisions will be
made by that committee. For activities such as spot road improvements and
construction of storage facilities that cannot be bulked and procured nationally, the
KCEP-CRAL will rely on the County Service Delivery Coordinating Unit Tender
Committee, as the legal authority to approve contract awards, and on the County
Governments Procurement Regulations.

E. Supervision
30. The programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the lead agency, with the

participation of FAO, WFP and the European Union. One supervision mission and
one follow-up mission will be conducted each year to review the programme
approach and its effectiveness. Special attention will be given to reviewing the
effectiveness of the RBA partnership in the graduation of farmers.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs of the KCEP-CRAL are

estimated at US$118.0 million, including physical and price contingencies.
Programme investments by component are:

 Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management accounts for
US$11.1 million, representing 9.4 per cent of total base costs.

 Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages accounts
for US$8.8 million, representing 7.5 per cent of total base costs;

 Component 3. Financial services, including the e-voucher scheme, accounts
for US$77.7 million, representing 65.8 per cent of total base costs; and

 Programme management accounts for US$11.7 million, representing
9.9 per cent of total base costs.

32. In addition, preparatory activities and implementation support at the county level
accounts for US$8.7 million (7.4 per cent of total base costs).



EB 2015/114/R.9

7

Table 1
Components by Financiers

(US$ '000) GoK
IFAD
Loan

ASAP
Grant

IFAD
Grant EU add-on

Financial
Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

462 5 124 - 2 000 1 134 - - 8 719

Adoption of  improved f arming practices including GAP and CA 24 - - - 1 086 - - 1 110
Community-based sustainable NRM and adaptation to Climate
Change - - 10 000 - - - - 10 000

24 - 10 000 - 1 086 - - 11 109

Strengthening of  f armer organizations and post-harvest
management 282 3 360 - - - - 173 3 815
Market Linkages and value addition 37 3 361 - - - - 1 579 4 977

320 6 721 - - - - 1 752 8 793

E-voucher platf orm f or productivity enhancement - 37 237 - - 7 142 1 860 26 212 72 451
Value Chain Financing 246 3 295 - - 543 - 1 172 5 255

246 40 532 - - 7 685 1 860 27 384 77 706
500 9 400 - - 1 781 - - 11 680

Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

A. Capacity building for clim ate-resilient productivity
enhancem ent and NRM

Preparatory activities/ Implementation Support and Capacity-
building at county-level
Com ponents

E. Programme Management
Subtotal

C. Financial Services
Subtotal

Subtotal
B. Post-Production Managem ent and Market Linkages

Notes: GAP - good agricultural practice CA- conservation agriculture

Table 2
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Financial
(US$ '000) GoK IFAD Loan ASAP Grant IFAD Grant EU add-on Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works 231 4 119 - - - - 983 5 334
B. Vehicles 214 905 - 187 291 - - 1 597
C. Equipments & Materials 274 2 544 521 61 606 - 390 4 395
D. Consultancies 316 3 939 2 754 1 475 - 66 8 550
E. Trainings 516 4 657 3 125 - - 1 030 71 9 399
F. Grants and Subsidies - 36 299 3 600 - 7 111 829 27 626 75 465

Total Investm ent Costs 1 551 52 463 10 000 248 9 482 1 860 29 136 104 739
II. Recurrent Costs

A. Salaries and Allow ances - 6 671 - 1 752 1 427 - - 9 850
B. Operating Costs - 2 642 - - 777 - - 3 419

Total Recurrent Costs - 9 313 - 1 752 2 204 - - 13 269
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

B. Programme financing
33. The total costs of the KCEP-CRAL window will be financed by the Government, an

IFAD loan, an ASAP grant, an IFAD grant under the country-specific window to
FAO, a European Union contribution through IFAD, financial institutions and
beneficiaries as follows:

 The Government will finance taxes and duties valued at US$1.5 million
(representing 1.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

 The IFAD loan to the Republic of Kenya, estimated at US$61.8 million
(52.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window), will finance start-up activities,
capacity-building of farmer organizations, post-harvest management
activities, market linkage and value chain strengthening, and programme
management costs.

 The ASAP grant, estimated at US$10.0 million (8.5 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window), will finance mainstreaming of natural resource management
and climate resilience throughout the programme.

 The IFAD grant to FAO, estimated at US$2.0 million (1.7 per cent of the
KCEP-CRAL window), will be dedicated to capacity-building and the costs



EB 2015/114/R.9

8

incurred by county agriculture offices delivering agricultural services to
farming communities.

 The European Union additional contribution through IFAD is valued at
US$11.7 million, corresponding to EUR 9.5 million (9.9 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window).

 Finally, the contribution of financial institutions to the programme’s e-voucher
scheme and related financial services is estimated at US$1.9 million
(1.6 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window). The beneficiary contribution is
assessed at US$29.1 million (24.7 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Overall, the KCEP and its CRAL window will support 140,000 smallholder farmers in

attaining food security and graduating into market-oriented commercial farming.
Through the CRAL window, 100,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya’s ASALs have
been targeted. The KCEP-CRAL will provide opportunities for increased returns on
smallholder agricultural production and marketing, with direct benefits including:

 Increased yields from improved agricultural technologies – including
conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices – and strengthened
extension systems;

 Increased climate resilience through adapted varieties and technologies,
better climate information and community resilience investments;

 Increased quality of marketable produce from post-harvest management,
training and access to equipment;

 Higher prices as a result of aggregation from village storage facilities and
other grain-bulking structures;

 Labour-saving technologies such as the use of herbicides (compared with
conventional weeding) and minimum tillage/direct seeding;

 Value addition through demonstrations of novel processing opportunities and
facilitation of linkages between business owners and financial institutions;

 Efficiency gains as a result of road spot improvements; and

 Incremental tax revenues generated for the central Government and county
governments from increased volumes of taxable production.

35. Economic analysis shows that the programme has the potential to generate an
economic rate of return of 15 per cent over a 20-year period. Benefits will accrue
to a range of stakeholders across many value chains, making the entire investment
even more viable and spreading its impact across the entire nation through
increased employment and tax revenues. Thus the actual economic rate of return
will likely be higher than the 15 per cent reported. Sensitivity analysis concluded
that the programme’s economic rate of return is relatively stable. It is estimated at
8.3 per cent if costs increase by 10 per cent, and at 13.3 per cent if benefits
decrease by 10 per cent.

D. Sustainability
36. The sustainability of programme investments and development results will be

ensured by:

 Mainstreaming natural resource management and climate-change adaptation;

 Promoting conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices;

 Empowering county governments and communities for sustainable natural
resource management and resilience to climate change;



EB 2015/114/R.9

9

 Building the capacity of stakeholders; and

 The e-voucher scheme and inclusive financial services.

37. At the institutional level, financial services, managed by financial institutions, will
be provided to stakeholders through a public/private partnership. This will enable
these institutions to expand their client base while they contribute to the
sustainable financial inclusion of ASAL smallholders. Investments by financial
institutions as programme partners are good indications of financial sustainability.
The relationship established between financial institutions and programme
beneficiaries will endure beyond the programme’s lifespan as these institutions
continue to provide beneficiaries with improved financial services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Risks Mitigation measures
Droughts or floods affect expression of
demand among target communities.

 Mainstream resilience packages in
programme activities

Climate-related risks hinder attainment
of programme objectives.

 Strengthen community-based resilience
systemsMainstream climate resilience in
programmes, plans and policies

Weather variability and crop failure
discourage financial providers from
participating in the programme.

 Assess feasibility of crop insurance
schemes. Strengthen climate information
services and climate-based extension
messages for smallholders

Low penetration of financial service
providers and cultural beliefs hinder
participation by target groups.

 Raise awareness
 Link target groups to contract farming and

outgrower schemes

Capacity of devolved structures to
manage implementation of activities is
weak.

 Embed capacity-building and
implementation support to county
structures for the programme’s
implementation organizational framework
and activities

 Empower county-level authorities with
resources for close monitoring,
supervision, timely updates and feedback

RBA coordination for mobilizing technical
and financial contributions to the
programme is weak.

 Embed RBA joint technical coordination
mechanisms at national and county levels
in the programme organizational
framework

Technical capacity for operationalizing
programme strategies and executing
programme activities is weak.

 Provide counties (PCU) with operational
strategies and technical tools for
programme execution under each
component

 Carry out activities requiring specific
technical competences through specialized
partners or service providers in
collaboration with counties. Identify
partners with specialized expertise for
each component

Exchange rate fluctuates  Conduct regular multi-currency monitoring
and reporting of programme costs

Fiduciary risks: Kenya’s Transparency
International 2014 Corruption
Perceptions Index was 2.5, which is an

 Specify external audit terms of reference,
conduct rolling internal audits, utilize off-
the-shelf accounting software and



EB 2015/114/R.9

10

Risks Mitigation measures
indication of high risk. disaggregate reporting by category,

component and financier

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The programme responds directly to the following objectives of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015: improved natural resources and the economic asset base;
improved access to services; capacity-building of rural people to manage profitable
and sustainable enterprises; opportunities for women and youth; sustainable
natural resource management; and adaptation to climate change.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. Support to developing the economic potential of ASALs is a priority in Kenya’s

Constitution and Vision 2030. The main goal is to fast-track their sustainable
development by increasing investment and ensuring that the use of resources is
reconciled with the realities of people’s lives. The National Policy for the
Development of ASALs recognizes that sorghum and millet are the most suitable
cereals for the environment, while maize continues to be cultivated by most
smallholder farmers as the primary cereal of choice.

40. The KCEP-CRAL is fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for ASALs and
harmonizes the efforts of major development partners – the Government, the
European Union and RBAs – in support of agricultural and rural development. In
line with national policies, the programme approach is adapted to the socio-
economic and biophysical characteristics of ASALs: (i) frequent drought; (ii) low
and unreliable rainfall; (iii) high vulnerability to climate change; (iv) fragile
ecosystems; and (v) high food insecurity and poverty.

41. The programme is also fully integrated into Kenya’s development partner
frameworks for agricultural and rural development. It directly contributes to
advancing the development results agreed by the Government and the United
Nations in Kenya under Kenya’s United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2014-2018: strategic result 1 – inclusive and sustainable economic
growth; and strategic result 2 – environmental sustainability, land management
and human security. It will also generate knowledge products on food security,
approaches to graduation of smallholders to commercial farming, and climate
resilience in semi-arid areas. These products will be disseminated in development
partner working groups such as the Agricultural and Rural Development Donor
Group and the ASALs Donor Group, in order to inform policies and programming for
ASALs.

42. The programme’s organizational framework for implementation is aligned with
national systems. At the local level, programme implementation and RBA
coordination will be aligned with Kenya’s devolution framework. Counties will be
the primary implementers of the programme using community-based approaches.
Given the capacity gaps faced by the newly established county structures, the
programme’s organizational framework includes dedicated implementation support
to the counties for programme execution, coordination of RBA contributions and
the promotion of synergies with other donor-funded initiatives.



EB 2015/114/R.9

11

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The programme incorporates innovative features such as:

 A partnership involving the Government, the three RBAs and the European
Union to steer farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to commercial
farming, with a focus on good agricultural practices, natural resource
management and resilience;

 A partnership with Equity Bank to set up an electronic platform combining
debit cards with e-vouchers to support smallholder access to new
technologies and financial services;

 Weather-based crop insurance, which will be piloted in the programme areas;

 Technical packages that introduce farmers to innovative combinations of
adapted inputs and practices for managing natural resources, which have
been tested by the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization.

44. Moreover, the KCEP-CRAL will promote business models, including new business
partnerships between smallholders and buyers, governance structures and financial
mechanisms for storage and processing facilities. The innovative features described
above, if successfully implemented, will generate significant knowledge and the
potential for replication and scaling up in Kenya and the region. Monitoring and
knowledge management will thus be important in assessing and comparing
performance, learning from experience and documenting achievements and good
practices.

Policy engagementD.
45. The programme will generate lessons learned, good practices and innovations that

inform policy dialogue on agricultural development in semi-arid areas. Specific
areas of interest include: (i) adapted technical packages; (ii) inclusive business
models for farmers’ access to services and markets; (iii) innovative financial
instruments; (iv) approaches for graduating smallholder farmers from food
insecurity to commercial agriculture; and (v) increasing resilience to climate
change and natural resource management. Special attention will be given to
documenting the impact of synergies among the Government, RBAs, the European
Union and the private sector – each of which brings comparative advantages to
addressing complex agricultural and rural development challenges in ASALs.

46. Capitalizing on these synergies, as mentioned previously, the programme will
generate knowledge products on food security, graduation approaches, commercial
farming and resilience in semi-arid areas that will inform policy and programming
in ASALs.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
47. A financing agreement between the Republic of Kenya and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

48. A grant agreement between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
grant under the country-specific window to FAO.

49. The Republic of Kenya is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD
and from IFAD’s Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund,
acting through IFAD in its capacity as trustee of the trust fund.

50. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/114/R.9

12

VII. Recommendation
51. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Kenya in an amount equivalent to forty-three million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 43,850,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund grant to the Republic of Kenya
in an amount equivalent to seven million one hundred thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 7,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant not exceeding two
million United States dollars (US$2,000,000) to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project
(TCEP)

Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$30.73 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 9.48 million (equivalent to approximately
US$13 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.28 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$1.86 million

Contribution of beneficiaries/private
sector:

US$2.31 million

Cofinancier/financing gap: US$9.06 million

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project, as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for
the Tree Crops Extension Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of the civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity
and impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a
Least Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies
heavily on foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in
20142 and, according to the 2014 Human Development Index (HDI), increased by
68.2 per cent from 2000 to 2013. With a 2013 HDI value of 0.412, Liberia ranked
175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million,
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be under 14 years of age.
The agriculture sector is the primary source of livelihoods for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. Liberia signed
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) compact
and has thus committed to the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security
and of a 10 per cent budget expenditure on agriculture, though it currently commits
only 3 per cent.

3. The tree crop sector was traditionally one of Liberia’s biggest employment sectors
and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. Primary cash crops included
cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber. During the Liberian civil war, the tree crop
sector was devastated and many farmers displaced from their land. The abandoned
farms and plantations degenerated into forest and their associated support
structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished, while exports
dropped to near-zero levels. Rehabilitation and growth in the tree crop sector can
do much to increase farmers’ incomes, revive the rural economy and contribute to
consolidating peace. This section focuses on the rationale and underlying
development hypothesis for IFAD involvement. It briefly explains how the project’s
development objective contributes to specific objectives of the Government of
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the CAADP and to the relevant
objectives of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP). Moreover, it shows how the project links with ongoing IFAD
projects/grants (e.g. synergies/complementarities) and with the activities and
policies of other international agencies (harmonization) and major stakeholders.
Similarly, the country's forest, soil and water resources require effective and
sustainable management practices to improve agricultural productivity and
increased resilience in the face of climate change.

1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, list of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries for 2014.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas method (current US$).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government is prioritizing both structural investments for long-term economic
growth and the post-Ebola recovery process. The Liberia RB-COSOP reached its
midterm in 2013, and was reviewed to identify the way forward for IFAD support
under the 2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle and
beyond. Overall, the midterm review revealed that strategic objectives under the
RB-COSOP were still relevant, but the transition from emergency to development
approach should be acknowledged more, which justifies a stronger focus on support
to the cocoa subsector.

5. The proposed Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP) is part of the Government’s
strategy to promote export-oriented growth, with deep engagement by private
stakeholders in the cocoa value chain. Liberia became a member of the International
Cocoa Organization (ICCO), and IFAD contributed to its first membership fees. The
TCEP is aligned with government policies, in particular: (a) the Agenda for
Transformation (AfT), which was launched in 2012; (b) the Cocoa Export Strategy
2014-2018, 3 which is a blueprint for increased competitiveness of Liberian cocoa in
the global market; (c) the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan (2015-2017);
(d) the new Land Rights Act, to be enacted in 2015; (e) the restructuring process of
the Liberia Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Act, which will
regulate the cocoa subsector; and (f) the National Adaptation Programme of Action
for climate change resilience.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The TCEP will intervene in approximately eight statutory districts in Nimba County.

This geographical expansion will complement the ongoing Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project (STCRSP) in Lofa County.

7. The TCEP will benefit 11,000 stakeholders of the cocoa value chain, including:
(i) 8,000 cocoa smallholder members of kuu groups4 and farmer field schools
(FFS); (ii) approximately 2,400 additional farmers, who will benefit from the
rehabilitation of roads, input supply and market linkages; and (iii) 600 people
through job creation along the value chain. To select the 8,000 cocoa smallholders,
the TCEP will combine a self-targeting approach with tools to ensure inclusiveness.
Priority will be given to women, youth (18-35) and survivors of the Ebola outbreak.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall development goal of the TCEP is “to improve the livelihoods and climate

change resilience of rural households in Nimba County". The development objective
is to improve the incomes and climate change resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in the county.

9. Some key impact and outcome indicators are: (i) 8,000 smallholder farmers have
increased the quantity of cocoa sold; (ii) 4,000 smallholder farmers have increased
their resilience to climate change; (iii) gross sales of cocoa per farm have increased
from US$178 in year 1 (Y1) to US$1,718 in Y6; (iv) at least 90 per cent of cocoa is
paid as grade 1 and receives 75 per cent of the ICCO reference price in Y6;
(v) 200 kilometres (km) of roads made passable all year round by end-Y3; and
(vi) 9,800 tonnes of cocoa sold through cooperatives and private-sector partners
(PSPs).

3 Developed with the support of the International Trade Centre.
4 Kuu is a traditional community-based cooperative work group that carries out brushing and cleaning of agricultural plots.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
10. Component A: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. Basic revitalization and

replanting will take place in Y1-Y4 and will follow these phases: 1,000 hectares (ha)
in Y1, 2,500 in Y2, 3,000 in Y3 and 3,500 in Y4. Starting in Y2, 2,000 ha will be
targeted for replanting. Value chain linkage development, and greater focus on crop
husbandry and post-harvest handling, will be undertaken in Y1-Y6. Establishment
and operation of a seed station in Nimba County will also be supported to
guarantee the availability of improved planting material for farmers, village
nurseries and privately owned nurseries. Diversification of cocoa farms with banana
and plantain will be pursued for food security, climate resilience and smoothing of
cash flow, while simultaneously increasing the role of women in the farm economy.

11. Component B: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Approximately
200 km of farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated in Nimba County, using the
implementation methodology developed under the STCRSP. Regarding
maintenance, the TCEP will have a three-pronged approach: (i) capacity-building in
road maintenance; (ii) improvement of the road maintenance strategy, including
development of a financing mechanism; and (iii) transition financing of
maintenance on a cash-for-work basis.

12. Component C: Service provision for value chain development. This
component aims to: (i) strengthen the capacity of farmers’ cooperatives at the
district level; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and
Cooperative Development Agency (CDA) at decentralized levels; (iii) ensure that
climate change adaptation is mainstreamed in the technical support systems for
value chain development; and (iv) monitor deforestation in the tree crop sector.
The main innovation under the TCEP is the use of a long-term growth path for
institutional capacity-building of cooperatives.

13. Component D: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The
objective of this component is to ensure effective, efficient operational planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. Approaches and manuals developed under the STCRSP will be updated, and
STCRSP implementation arrangements harmonized with those of the TCEP. The
TCEP will build on the existing expertise and human resources of the STCRSP.
Moreover, the project will adopt a value chain approach to link cocoa farmers,
organized at the grass-roots level in kuu groups and FFS, with cooperatives and
PSPs.

15. Cocoa revitalization of farms will take place in Y1-Y4. Rehabilitation of roads will
take place in Y2 and Y3 and preparatory works will start in Y1. Finally, with regard
to the provision of services for value chain development, the approach to enhancing
the institutional capacity of cooperatives will be less supply-driven and more
bottom-up, while also clearly defining the responsibilities of the cooperatives in
their partnerships with the project and with grass-roots groups. Previous mapping
and capacity assessments of farmers’ cooperatives in Liberia have lacked sufficient
discrimination on which to base the selection for project inclusion.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. MOA is designated as lead project agency for the TCEP. It will have overall

responsibility for implementation and will ensure linkages to other relevant
ministries and agencies. MOA will also work closely with the CDA and LACRA.

17. The national steering committee (NSC) of the STCRSP will also serve the TCEP. The
NSC will orient the project strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact,



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value
chain stakeholders. The programme management unit (PMU) will be the secretariat
of the NSC.

18. The PMU, which is anchored in the Planning and Development Department of MOA,
is in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in agriculture. Within the
PMU, coordination, management and M&E of the TCEP will be the responsibility of
the project implementation unit (PIU) in Monrovia, which has responsibility for all
IFAD-funded projects in Liberia. The IFAD-PIU will ensure day-to-day management
of the TCEP. In addition, the TCEP will establish a county PIU in Sanniquellie, Nimba
County.

19. The main implementing partners of the TCEP will be: (a) selected cooperatives
engaging in business agreements with the kuu groups and FFS; (b) at least two
PSPs, who will engage in procurement plans with the project and the cooperatives;
(c) the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI); and (d) other specialized
service providers, including national and international consulting firms,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), commercial financial institutions and
others.

20. At the county level, the TCEP will liaise with the decentralized functions of MOA and
CDA. The county agricultural coordinator (CAC) and district agricultural officers
(DAOs) will monitor implementation of components A and C. The county resident
engineer (CRE) will liaise with the project on implementation and monitoring of
component B. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with the project to
define roles and responsibilities.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. Planning. The Monrovia PIU will consolidate an annual workplan and budget
(AWP/B) for each project year, on the basis of proposals from the county PIU. The
AWP/B will include: (i) a detailed description of planned project activities for the
coming project year, and the sources and uses of the related funds; (ii) an
18-month procurement plan for items to be procured with IFAD financing; and
(iii) indicators and associated targets extracted from the logical framework. The
draft AWP/B will be submitted to the NSC for clearance and then to IFAD for
comments and final non-objection.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The logical framework of the TCEP will form the basis
for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts of the project. The results of the
TCEP will then feed into the MOA subsector contribution to the national AfT M&E
system. The TCEP M&E system will take targeting of women and youth into account
– as a minimum, disaggregating data by gender and age. Moreover, indicators will
be developed to measure the results of specific activities targeting the most
vulnerable segments of the target population.

23. Baseline data will be collected prior to project implementation to ensure that results
are closely monitored to continuously improve the outreach, relevance and
effectiveness of interventions. To this end, in June 2015 SCOPEinsight5 carried out
an assessment of 15 cocoa cooperatives in Nimba and Bong counties in order to
diagnose capacity to enable the project to better tailor training curricula to the
specific needs identified. This exercise will be repeated in TCEP Y3 and Y6. In
addition, the PMU has contacted CARI to conduct a mapping exercise of
cocoa/coffee farms in Nimba County with which the project will potentially work.6

5 SCOPEinsight is an independent rating agency based in the Netherlands that assesses the business potential of
farmer organizations in agriculture, dairy, forestry and aquaculture in developing countries.

6 MOA/PMU is exploring other partnerships that could support the implementation of M&E activities under TCEP
(i.e. young professionals, the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), and county
community colleges).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Finally, the TCEP will apply IFAD standard reporting procedures during
implementation.

24. M&E will be undertaken at multiple levels and by multiple stakeholders to support
effective implementation. Indicators have been developed during project design and
will be further refined as project activities become more detailed.

25. Forest cover and deforestation risks will be monitored in TCEP target areas through
a geo-information service (under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme [ASAP] grant).

26. Knowledge management plays a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda, and
the knowledge management strategy of IFAD-supported projects in Liberia will be
strengthened beginning with the TCEP. An action plan will be developed at start up.
This plan will outline activities to be undertaken, as well as roles and responsibilities
of project staff and implementing partners, to ensure the collection of high-quality
data, in-depth analysis, and creation of knowledge products for evidence-based
decision-making and to contribute to policy dialogue on the cocoa subsector.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
27. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. The Corruption Perceptions Index score for Liberia has slightly
deteriorated from 41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and 37 in 2014. According to the latest
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, conducted in 2012, the
Government has made significant improvements since the last assessment (2007),
but the overall state of public financial management remains moderately weak.

28. Responsibility for financial management of the project will rest with the PIU that is
responsible for implementing other ongoing IFAD projects. As part of the project
design process, a financial management assessment was undertaken. Financial
management arrangements and the capacity of the PIU were assessed as mostly
adequate to meet IFAD requirements; thus initial risk is considered medium. The
PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project financial
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual to be approved by the Fund.

29. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts (in United States
dollars) opened in the Central Bank of Liberia, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the ASAP grant. IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified
further in the letter to the borrower.

30. Audit arrangements. The borrower, through the PIU, will appoint independent
auditors acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD, and in line
with the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial
statement for the entire project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six months
of the end of the fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
31. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions when needed, will be organized with the participation
of MOA, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, CDA, LACRA,
cooperatives and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be conducted as general
inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and lessons learned, and
to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact. Missions will be an
integral part of the knowledge management cycle.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
32. Total project costs over six years, including contingencies, taxes and duties, are

estimated at US$30.73 million. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS
allocation of US$13 million for Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as
well as US$4.5 million in ASAP grant funding for climate change resilience activities.
The Government will finance taxes and duties on imported goods and the value
added tax (VAT) for a total of US$1.86 million. PSPs are expected to provide credit
of at least US$0.96 million. This amount includes PSP investments in the marketing
chain, as well as working capital that could be provided to cooperatives to buy
cocoa. The contribution of farmers totals US$1.35 million and consists of a
40 per cent contribution of own labour to the revitalization and replanting of cocoa
plantations and management of village nurseries, as well as to solar dryers. A
financing gap of US$9.06 million remains.

33. The ASAP grant will be used to finance: (a) in-country production of high-quality,
climate-adapted and disease-free planting material (seeds and grafting), including
through international partnerships; (b) promotion of farming practices that serve as
a buffer against increased climate pressures (higher shade, more-intensive plant
management including grafting and pruning, and income diversification through
various tree crops); (c) corresponding training of technicians and farmers;
(d) provision of solar dryers and training in their use; (e) participatory land-use
planning and monitoring based on satellite imagery, to ensure that increased
profitability of the tree crop sector and improved road access to remote areas do
not lead to deforestation; and (f) institutional capacity-building, policy dialogue and
knowledge management in the field of climate change resilience.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015

PBAS
Financing

gap
IFAD grant

(ASAP) Government

Private-
sector

partners Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
A. Revitalization of

cocoa plantations 3.49 34.8 0.16 1.6 3.43 34.2 0.64 6.4 0.96 9.6 1.35 13.5 10.03 32.6
B. Rehabilitation and

maintenance of
roads 0.64 6.3 8.9 87.1 - - 0.68 6.6 - - - - 10.22 33.3

C. Service provision for
value chain
development 4.62 76.0 - - 1.07 17.6 0.39 6.3 - - - - 6.08 19.8

D. Project coordination,
monitoring and
evaluation 4.25 96.5 - - - - 0.15 3.5 - - - - 4.4 14.3

Total 13 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS allocation of US$13 million for

Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as well as US$4.5 million in ASAP
grant funding for climate change resilience activities. The financing gap of
US$9.06 million – mainly to finance rehabilitation of roads (component B) – could
be financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 allocation (modalities to be confirmed). The
Government and IFAD will explore further cofinancing opportunities.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

8
/R

ev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015 PBAS Financing gap

IFAD grant
(ASAP) Government

Private-sector
partners Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment cost 9.3 35.1 9.0 34.1 4.1 15.4 1.78 6.6 0.96 3.7 1.35 5.1 26.49 85.8
A. Works 99 1.1 8.5 90.9 99 1.1 0.7 7.0 - - - - 9.4 30.5
B. Goods, services

and inputs 2.1 49.7 0.1 2.5 0.6 13.8 0.3 7.0 - - 1.15 27.0 4.3 14.0
C. Vehicles 0.8 84.9 - - 0.07 8.1 0.07 7.0 - - - - 0.9 3.1
D. Equipment and

materials 1.1 24.6 0.04 0.9 1.9 42.0 0.3 7.0 0.96 21.2 0.2 4.3 4.5 14.8
E. Consultancies 1.9 67.8 - - 0.7 25.7 0.2 6.5 - - - - 2.8 9.3
F. Training 2.6 82.3 0.04 1.1 0.3 10.2 0.2 6.4 - - - - 3.1 10.1
G. Workshops 0.1 81.8 0.02 11.2 - - 0.009 7.0 - - - - 0.1 0.4
H. Services 0.5 45.4 0.3 24.5 0.3 30.2 - - - - - - 1.1 3.7

II. Recurrent costs 3.7 86.0 0.06 1.2 0.4 9.9 0. 08 2.8 - - - - 4.24 14.2
A. Salaries and

allowances * 2.5 95.2 - - 0.1 4.8 - - - - - - 2.6 8.5
B. Operational

costs 1.2 72.2 0.06 3.1 0.3 17.7 0. 08 7.0 - - - - 1.64 5.6

Total 13.0 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100
*

Institutional capacity in Liberia is very weak and few service providers are available. Hence the required expertise needs to be internalized in the project. About 44 per cent of recurrent costs are
for staff salaries at the centralized level; 16 per cent for allowances to conduct field visits; 10 per cent for support to decentralized functions of MOA, CDA and young professionals; 9 per cent for
staff salaries at the local level; 8 per cent for salaries of staff tree crop experts; and the remainder for equipment and vehicles.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. Project benefits. The TCEP will have 11,000 beneficiaries: 8,000 cocoa

smallholder farmers, 2,400 additional farmers (who will benefit from spillover
effects) and approximately 600 people through job creation along the value chain.
Considering an average household size of 5.9 in the project area, this adds up to
64,900 household members. The project is expected to lead to increases in cocoa
production, marketing and exports as a result of: (a) revitalization of abandoned
plantations; (b) replanting of new trees on existing plantations; (c) higher yields at
the smallholder level, owing to improved production practices promoted through
dedicated extension systems; and (d) higher quality of cocoa as a result of
improved post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of component B, the
rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads will procure access to markets, reduce time
and costs to reach local markets and limit the post-harvest losses caused by bad
transportation conditions. Regarding component C, the strengthening of
cooperatives will contribute to increasing their bargaining power in price-setting
when negotiating with buyers. It will also contribute to delivery of quality services
to cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability of the approach, in particular,
dissemination of improved planting material, extension services, and access to
inputs and to output markets.

36. Financial analysis. The four financial models developed to simulate interventions
of the TCEP are based on information collected by the ongoing STCRSP and the
TCEP design team in April and July 2015. The financial crop models capture:
(i) increases in cocoa yield; (ii) increases in quality; and (iii) increases in prices for
higher quality, as well as better bargaining power for farmers. The yield
assumptions are based on information from other projects in Liberia and the region.
Cocoa price assumptions are based on World Bank price information and
projections (constant 2015 prices). Assumptions regarding grades are based on the
experiences of ongoing projects.

37. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) of 37.2 per cent over
20 years is profitable from an economic standpoint and generates a total of
US$108.8 million in the same period (social discount factor: 4.3 per cent). The
sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to: (i) increases in costs due to a
combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates; (ii) lower
adoption rates due to a limited outreach of extension services; and (iii) increases in
project costs due to higher prices of service providers, road construction and
inputs.

D. Sustainability
38. It is proposed to classify the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks

– category B – in view of: targeting of existing plantations and rehabilitation of
existing roads; safeguards against indirect deforestation; measures against
environmental risks of the application of agrochemicals; and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) note has been prepared. In terms of climate risks, a
preliminary classification of moderate climate risk is proposed at this stage.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks and mitigation measures to be adopted are: (i) weak governance

and institutional capacities – the TCEP will adopt direct contracting procedures,
follow IFAD procurement guidelines, and strengthen training and control systems
related to financial management; (ii) weak cooperatives and market linkages – kuu
groups and FFS will enhance the capacity and bargaining power of farmers. Market
linkages will be established through PSPs and cooperatives. The TCEP will also
provide institutional support to cooperatives; (iii) increased disease pressure will be
mitigated through the setting up and training of pesticide application teams in



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

cooperatives and FFS, as well as through promoting the use of shade from trees
and diversification of farming systems; (iv) deforestation – interventions will be
restricted to existing farms; forest conservation agreements and participatory land-
use monitoring will contribute to controlling deforestation risk; (v) increased use of
pesticides and fertilizer – the fertilizer application promoted will be in doses too low
to cause environmental harm; biopesticides will be applied through specially set up,
trained and equipped spraying teams, thereby reducing the risk of inappropriate
use; (vi) insufficient planting material and/or not adapted to specific needs – a
collection station will be set up for screening and multiplication of seed and bud
woods for grafting; (vii) low quality of cocoa – solar dryers will be introduced for
individual farmers and at the cooperative level. LACRA will be involved in quality
control.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

40. The design of the TCEP is compliant with the relevant IFAD policies, including the
IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting – Reaching the Rural Poor,
and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
41. The Cocoa Export Strategy 2014-2018 is a blueprint for the increased

competiveness of Liberian cocoa in the global market. On the basis of an in-depth
diagnostic, the strategy proposes 15 structural interventions in the cocoa value
chain, of which at least eight will be addressed by the TCEP. These structural
interventions aim to: (i) speed up efforts to rehabilitate cocoa farms abandoned
during the civil war and better organize farm operations; (ii) improve land
management practices, aligned with Global Good Agricultural Practice
(GLOBALG.A.P.) and good management practice standards, especially at the
smallholder and cooperative level; (iii) increase availability of inputs by developing
a locally manufactured input supply chain, and by improving access to imported
inputs; (iv) use high-quality saplings/seedlings through collaboration with research
institutes in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and the United Kingdom, among other countries;
(v) increase levels of mechanization, leading to increased capabilities of sector
stakeholders for transformation and processing; (vi) better train local buying
agents engaging in best practices and ensure that they are maintained at the
farmgate level; (vii) increase support to women cross-border traders and other
women’s groups and actors active in the sector through mentoring, training in
improved negotiation skills, technical support and access to efficient grievance
mechanisms; and (viii) develop in-market support/national promotion branding.

Innovations and scaling upC.
42. Several approaches adopted by the TCEP are innovative: (a) organization of

farmers at the grass-roots level to enhance their bargaining power; (b) integration
of climate change resilience and related institutional capacity-building; (c) greater
focus on the supply chain for new genetic cocoa material; (d) added attention to
the post-harvest aspects and quality of cocoa; (e) extra emphasis on service
delivery by cooperatives to their members; (f) the combination of basic
revitalization of plantations with enhanced revitalization and replanting;
(g) additional focus on measures to include women and promote their access to
benefits; and (h) use of a long-term growth path for institutional capacity-building
of cooperatives, combined with a more-systematic approach and institutional
auditing.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

10

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Policy engagementD.
43. ASAP grant. Within the ambit of the new LACRA Act (once enacted) and the United

Nations Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Programme
(UN-REDD) policy development in Liberia – and in collaboration with other
development partners – the TCEP will support a national round-table on climate-
friendly cocoa and the potential expansion of cocoa production towards wetter
counties as part of a countrywide climate change adaptation strategy. Other items
that could be discussed are: (a) switching to farmgate pricing with a prescribed
minimum; (b) stimulating the cocoa sector through quality premiums and enforced
minimum standards; and (c) bilateral agreements with Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire on
technical exchanges, exchange of germplasm, multiplication strategies, control of
diseases and child labour issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to nine million four hundred
and eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 9,480,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme to the Republic of Liberia
in an amount equivalent to three million two hundred and eighty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,280,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
United Mexican States for the
Rural Productive Inclusion Project


United Mexican States

Rural Productive Inclusion Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: United Mexican States

Executing agency: Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL)

Total project cost: US$19.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.87 million
(equivalent to approximately US$6.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: Maturity period of 15 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the United Mexican States for the Rural Productive Inclusion Project, as
contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed loan and grant to the United Mexican States for
the Rural Productive Inclusion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mexico is a country with a surface area of 1.96 million km2. The National Council on

Population estimated a total population of 121 million people in 2015 (112.3 million
according to the 2010 census), posting average demographic growth of 1.4 per
cent per annum. Rural people account for 23.1 per cent of the total population.

2. The Mexican economy is the second largest in Latin America and fourteenth in the
world. Mexico is a middle-to-high-income country at US$9,740 per capita. Although
total GDP grew at an annual average rate of 2.5 per cent from 1994 to 2013, this
was insufficient to improve living conditions for the population. Two key constraints
on economic performance are stagnant productivity and unequal income
distribution. Productivity over the past 30 years has declined at a rate of 0.7 per
cent per annum, while the Gini coefficient was 0.509 in 2010.

3. Within the agriculture sector, a highly heterogeneous productive structure prevails.
Family farms – subsistence farming with no market linkages and located mainly in
the central and southern regions of the country – represent 51 per cent of all rural
production units. Labour productivity in Mexican agriculture is notoriously low, at
just 26 per cent of the national average. Another critical problem in sector
performance is lack of access by rural smallholders to financing.

4. In recent decades the Government of Mexico has deployed significant efforts to
combat poverty, involving a broad range of public programmes with steadily
increasing budgetary allocations. The 2015 federal budget includes a package of
financing equivalent to US$22 billion for the Special Concurrent Programme for
Sustainable Rural Development.

5. Despite the scale of this institutional and financial effort, broad portions of the
population continue to live in poverty. In 2012 the National Council on Policy
Evaluation produced data indicating that 53.3 million people were living in
situations of poverty, 31 per cent of them in rural areas. Accordingly, the
administration that took office on 1 December 2012 designed a new social policy
that explicitly seeks to create synergy between income support (mainly conditional
cash transfers) and productive development programmes. Combining these
instruments was assigned as a mandate to Prospera, the social inclusion
programme created at the end of 2014, based on earlier experiences of the
Oportunidades and Progresa programmes. This new social policy seeks to give
families benefiting from income support the opportunity to develop their own
productive initiatives in order to autonomously and sustainably generate income
that enables them to improve their living conditions.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. In this context, the Government is looking for ways to implement the new social
policy and is thus simultaneously testing different approaches to productive
inclusion. The present Rural Productive Inclusion Project (RPIP) should be seen as a
pilot in that regard, as should the Productive Territories Pilot Programme (PPTP).
IFAD provided support to the PPTP for design and initial implementation, in the
form of a grant to the Government for technical cooperation from the Latin
American Centre for Rural Development. The PPTP is now in operation and will
provide valuable lessons for implementation of the proposed project.

7. The RPIP is aligned with the National Development Plan 2013-2018, and especially
the Special Program to Democratize Productivity and the Social Development Sector
Program, which shape the context in which a new generation of social policy has
been designed. High priority is now given to the strategy of productive inclusion,
whereby the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and Prospera have
undertaken a number of actions such as design of the RPIP.

8. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s country strategy, which sets forth two main
objectives: (i) help smallholders and campesinos significantly increase their
productivity by strengthening their assets, capacities, organization and access to
public services and to goods and service markets; and (ii) contribute to making
public spending for the economic development of smallholders and campesinos
more efficient and equitable.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. This project will be implemented in 26 municipalities in three federal states:

Guerrero, Hidalgo and Zacatecas. The municipalities have been selected on the
basis of: eligibility for the National Crusade against Hunger; incidence of poverty;
presence of indigenous peoples; a significant number of families served by
Prospera, especially those with land; and the location of strategic population
centres with market potential for carrying out the productive projects of Prospera
families.

10. The target population will comprise Prospera heads of household and their families
that: (i) live in rural areas in the selected states and municipalities; (ii) live in
situations of poverty; (iii) have the potential to engage in income-generating
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities; and (iv) show interest in
participating in the project. Priority will be given to indigenous populations.

11. The project is expected to reach 12,800 Prospera beneficiary families, of whom
65 per cent are expected to submit applications to access productive projects, with
promotion provided by the project (8,400 families), and 65 per cent of these will
successfully access investments under ongoing productive development
programmes (5,400 families).

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and the reduction of rural
poverty.

13. The development objective is that beneficiary families increase their income by
implementing profitable and sustainable productive activities.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will seek to achieve its development objective through two

components: productive inclusion and institutional strengthening. In addition,
financial inclusion will be incorporated as a cross-cutting axis.

15. Component 1: Productive inclusion. This component will support Prospera
beneficiaries and their families participating in the project in accessing programmes
for productive development. It will help them use the investments efficiently to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of their products, access markets,
and thus raise their incomes. To this end, the project will strengthen the
organizational, technical and productive skills of the beneficiaries and improve their
capacities to access other government programmes.

16. In coordinating project activities in the communities, project promoters of
productive and financial inclusion (PIPFs) will play a key role, being responsible for
assisting beneficiaries in identifying potential productive activities and facilitating
access to technical assistance in designing projects for financing by the
programmes. PIPFs will also facilitate access to technical assistance for
implementation of beneficiary productive projects, and build capacities in
beneficiary organizations for obtaining additional aspects needed by some groups,
such as additional financing, legal constitution of small enterprises, etc. On the
other hand, technical assistance for the design and implementation of productive
projects will be provided by external technical assistants.

17. Component 2: Institutional strengthening. This component is designed to
strengthen the ability of Prospera to successfully take on a new role as the key
actor implementing the national strategy for productive inclusion. Its current solid
capacities are focused mainly on implementing social programmes and, above all,
on efficiently providing conditional cash transfers to more than six million
beneficiary families. Capacity-building will thus be provided both to implement the
project in the three states selected and to implement the productive inclusion
strategy nationwide.

18. The component will contribute to the development of new institutional skills through
capacity-building and training of Prospera staff in the project area and at
headquarters. In addition, research and analysis will be conducted and proposals
for innovation developed throughout implementation of the national strategy for
productive inclusion, i.e. in planning and design, operation, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). Finally, organizational learning and discussion of public policies
will be promoted through targeted knowledge management activities.

19. Cross-cutting axis: Financial inclusion. As an integral part of the process of
developing capacity for effective productive inclusion and of facilitating technical
assistance provided to Prospera families, financial inclusion constitutes a cross-
cutting axis with three concrete activities: (i) financial literacy will be promoted
through provision of financial education among beneficiaries. This training will be
provided mainly by existing institutional programmes, and will be complemented by
PIPFs; (ii) the project management unit, with PIPF support, will strive to link
productive projects with the existing supply of rural financial services, including
existing guarantee funds, and will coordinate actions with government programmes
operating in the project area, thereby leveraging additional financing, mainly
working capital, for beneficiary productive activities; and (iii) each year, as part of
the annual project seminar, a forum promoted by Prospera will take place to raise
awareness among other actors in the financial sector. This will facilitate the
effective provision of finance to productive activities of family units within the most
vulnerable segments of the population, thus supporting them in their development
and income generation.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The project is being formulated in the framework of the new social policies, which
focus on promoting productive activities among beneficiaries. Thus the project
facilitates identification and creation of productive opportunities for people living in
poverty. It does this through access to resources from programmes for productive
development that enable beneficiaries to develop sustainable income-generating
activities, with the objective of structurally breaking the cycle of poverty.

21. Prospera’s mandate seeks to create synergy between the social and productive
policies, including the numerous programmes for productive development. In that
context, it should be stressed that the project will mainly facilitate access to
investments and services – such as productive investments, technical assistance for
implementation, and rural financial services – that are currently being offered by
the other government agencies or private actors.

22. The project will promote links with productive development programmes, based on
lessons learned from other pilot programmes, such as the PPTP. In that regard, it
will benefit from the institutional linkages and attention generated by the PPTP with
several federal productive programmes. It will also take advantage of valuable
lessons learned on the strengthening of producer groups and targeting
mechanisms, among other aspects.

B. Organizational framework
23. Strategic project direction will be provided by the Prospera Technical Subcommittee

on Employment, Income and Savings (STEIA), currently chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), with representatives of Prospera’s national
coordination and heads of various productive development programmes. The
executing agency is SEDESOL, through Prospera’s national coordination. To this
end, a technical team will be appointed within the existing Prospera structure,
specifically within the Office of Coordination and Linkages (DGCV), to direct project
implementation in coordination with the various Prospera operating divisions
involved, as well as with state-level branches. This team and its location within
DGCV, with functions to be specified in the project implementation manual, is
strategically important in ensuring project management in accordance with the
objectives and timelines set, as well as close coordination with other productive
inclusion actions operating within Prospera. The Office of General Administration
and Finance (DGAF) will be responsible for the project’s administrative and financial
management within Prospera.

24. The project calls for two types of key actors for technical assistance and capacity-
building: (i) national-level institutions to provide training of national coordination
project staff and technicians supporting Prospera families benefiting from the
project; and (ii) technical assistance and training service providers supporting the
design, processing, start-up and consolidation of productive projects of Prospera
family organizations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. The project will set up a system for planning and M&E that is compatible with
Prospera’s M&E framework. Prospera is known for its strong capacity in this area,
which so far, however, has focused mainly on evaluation of conditional cash
transfers and their impact on the beneficiary group. This project will complement
the current system with a strong focus on M&E of productive inclusion and
institutionalization of these new capacities in Prospera.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

5

26. Prospera has not yet defined a single operating modality for implementation of the
productive inclusion strategy, but is rather testing different methods, such as the
previously mentioned PPTP, to then evaluate which modality is the most efficient
and effective. The present project should also be seen as a pilot providing a
learning opportunity for the institution. The lessons learned from project evaluation
and systematization will be invaluable to the Government in refining the productive
inclusion strategy. Accordingly, knowledge management is a central activity for the
project and, indeed, one of its reasons for being.

27. Ensuring the kind of learning that enables continuing improvement – based on
results and experiences in implementation of the project and other pilots – is
critical. To this end, beginning in year one, a total of three seminars will be held on
public policy and productive inclusion, as well as to share experiences, analyse
project results and promote discussion and dialogue on comprehensive policies for
productive inclusion.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. The project's financial management, including budgeting,

procurement, flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial
reporting and audit, will be the responsibility of Prospera’s DGAF, under the
supervision of a federal financial entity, to be nominated by SHCP. Project
execution will be carried out according to Prospera’s operational rules and
procedures and the implementation manual. The project will use Prospera's
accounting software, ensuring compliance with IFAD's financial reporting
requirements.

29. Flow of funds. Loan funds will be disbursed using the reimbursement method of
disbursement, whereas a designated account denominated in euro, and
administered by the designated federal financial entity, will be opened for advance
receipt of grant funds. The financial entity will open and administer a project
account, which will receive both IFAD and counterpart funds.

30. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will follow national procurement
procedures and regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
procurement guidelines.

31. Audit. Consolidated project financial statements will be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with current procedures and terms agreed by
the Ministry of Public Administration and international financial institutions, to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All project
accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those relating
to national counterpart funding. Audit reports will be delivered to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.

E. Supervision
32. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, in accordance with its Policy on

Supervision and Implementation Support. This arrangement will facilitate two
supervision missions per year. Moreover, continuous implementation support and
problem-solving is envisaged, including initial support for the implementation
manual and annual workplan and budget.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs amount to US$19.5 million, of which component 1: productive

inclusion, costs approximately US$17.2 million, and component 2: institutional
strengthening, costs approximately US$2.3 million.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Productive Inclusion 5 516 - - 1 060 10 595 17 171
2. Institutional
strengthening 1 067 500 788 - - 2 355

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

B. Project financing
34. The total cost of the project will be financed by five sources. IFAD is financing

approximately US$7.1 million through its loan and grant, while Prospera is financing
roughly US$0.8 million in counterpart funds. Given that one of the project
objectives is to promote access by the Prospera population to current productive
development programmes, an estimated US$10.6 million will be made available to
beneficiaries under such programmes over and above the IFAD and Prospera
contributions, and a beneficiary contribution is estimated in the amount of
US$1.1 million to cofinance the productive investments.

35. The IFAD loan will be made available to the Government on ordinary terms and will
have a maturity period of 15 years, including a grace period of 3 years, with an
interest rate equal to the reference interest rate determined semi-annually by the
Fund.

36. IFAD financing for this project will also cover taxes, as requested by the
Government, given the impracticability of exempting the project from taxes from a
budgetary, operational and accounting viewpoint – and given that the World Bank
currently applies this practice in the country.

37. Retroactive financing will apply for eligible expenses incurred previous to loan entry
into force but after the date of Executive Board approval, of up to EUR 587,000 for
expense category 2 "Consultancies".

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Equipment, material
and communication 138 2 - - - - - - - - 138
2. Consultancies 6 445 98 500 100 788 100 - - - - 7 733
3. Productive
investments - - - - - - 1 060 100 10 595 100 11 655

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. This section describes the benefits expected from project interventions. The main

indicators of the analysis are as follows: (i) 12,800 Prospera families benefit from
the project in the form of basic advisory assistance on production issues and
information on access to financial services; (ii) about 8,400 families benefiting from
the project prepare and submit some 1,400 projects (averaging six families per
project) to productive development programmes, of which approximately two thirds
(approximately 900 projects) are approved, benefiting some 5,400 families;
(iii) 5,400 families access technical assistance for successful implementation of



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

7

their productive projects, as well as financial education; (iv) 75 per cent of the
productive projects approved are still operating after two years; (v) 400 young
people (Prospera beneficiaries and their children) are trained in project
management and leadership; and (vi) approximately 3,400 Prospera officers and
project operators have strengthened their capacity to implement the national
strategy of productive inclusion.

39. The economic analysis shows that the project represents a profitable investment,
with an economic internal rate of return of 29.5 per cent and a net present value of
US$164.6 million.

D. Sustainability
40. The project design points to the economic and social sustainability of productive

investments of the target group. The project strategy promotes development of
their technical, organizational and administrative skills, which will enhance the
sustainability of their activities.

41. On the institutional level, component 2 has the objective of strengthening
Prospera’s capacity to successfully carry out its mandate to promote the national
agenda for productive inclusion. In that regard, the project seeks to institutionalize
skills for and knowledge of productive inclusion, which will effectively ensure the
sustainability of the institutional approach to the subject.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. The main project risks are as follows:

Risk Mitigation strategy

Lack of normative provisions and
agreements with some productive
development programmes to ensure
priority and effective access for
Prospera beneficiaries to these
programmes.

Resistance by operators of productive
development programmes – which
have traditionally not worked with poor
populations – to facilitating access by
the Prospera population to such
programmes.

Through STEIA, which includes SHCP,
Prospera and representatives of these
programmes, an ongoing dialogue will be
maintained to strengthen their
commitment to the Government’s
objective of productive inclusion.

Awareness-raising will be provided for
programme operators in the field to
ensure their inclusion of the Prospera
population.

The isolated conditions of many
localities prevent families from learning
about opportunities to undertake
productive projects and access to
productive development programme
resources.

The project will incorporate promoters of
productive and financial inclusion within
its geographical coverage area to
disseminate information about these
programmes and facilitate liaison of
families with technical service providers.

Beneficiaries do not wish to formalize
new economic activities supported by
the project for fear of losing their
Prospera transfers and having to pay
taxes.

The project will emphasize the provision
of accurate information on the rights and
responsibilities of beneficiaries in two
areas: (i) receipt of conditional cash
transfers; and (ii) tax treatment of their
productive initiatives.

Insufficient quality of technical
assistance services are available in the
project area to support families in
developing and implementing their
productive projects, as well as
insufficient incentives to attract service
providers.

Lessons learned in Mexico and other
countries show the importance of having
technicians that are familiar with, and
ideally live in, the project area. A
preliminary assessment carried out
during project design shows that quality
services are available in the project area,



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

8

having work experience within the area,
and with populations with a similar profile
to that of Prospera.

Project management is hampered by:
(i) delays and/or deficiencies in budget
availability and changes in
programming structure that place
constraints on access by the Prospera
population; and (ii) unsafe conditions in
some parts of the project area.

Project management risks will be
mitigated by ongoing dialogue between
government authorities and IFAD, and
full ownership by Prospera during
execution. The security risk will require
constant monitoring of conditions in the
field.

Degradation of natural resources
caused by the implemented production
projects, particularly sheep breeding.

This risk will be mitigated by the
inclusion of criteria of environmental
impact on the design of productive
projects. In the case of sheep breeding,
mitigation actions will be included, and
compliance with an adequate ratio of
animals per designated grazing area will
be ensured.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

43. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011–2015 in promoting
an economic asset base that is resilient to market and climate change, and in
improving access to technical assistance services in support of smallholders. The
project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by applying a
geographical, direct and self-targeting strategy; (ii) gender and age equality,
through the strategy to target women; (iii) rural finance, through greater access by
smallholder farmers to the rural financial services they need to meet their
production requirements; (iv) engagement with indigenous peoples, respecting the
principle of free, prior and informed consent; and (v) environment and natural
resource management, through the promotion of good environmental practices in
production.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
44. This project is intended to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and to reducing rural
poverty and food insecurity. The project has been formulated in the framework of
the country’s National Development Plan 2013-2018, more specifically the Special
Program to Democratize Productivity, which coordinates government actions aimed
at carrying out public policies that remove barriers limiting the productive potential
of citizens and enterprises. Moreover, the project area falls within the areas of the
National Crusade against Hunger, which comprise the Government’s priority areas
for poverty reduction.

45. The project will be implemented in close coordination with other initiatives in
Prospera, such as the PTPP, among others.

Innovations and scaling upC.
46. The approach of this project is innovative in that it seeks to bridge the gap between

social transfer programmes and productive development programmes, allowing the
beneficiaries of the first to access the latter and implement sustainable productive
projects. In that way, the project will not directly finance productive investments,
but will facilitate access to already-existing funds in the country.

47. This project is being designed as a pilot project to contribute to the government
strategy for productive inclusion. If proven successful, it can be scaled up in



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

9

accordance with government priorities. As mentioned above, Prospera has not yet
defined a single operating modality for implementation of the productive inclusion
strategy, but is testing different approaches of which this project is one. The idea is
to evaluate the diverse modalities and scale up the option that has proven the most
efficient and effective.

Policy engagementD.
48. Being a pilot, the project will have a strong focus on learning. At strategic points in

time, and at least once per year, during the annual seminar on public policy and
productive inclusion organized by the project, policymakers will be updated on
progress and lessons learned and on concrete, evidence-based policy
recommendations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A financing agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the borrower. A grant
agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute the legal
instrument for extending the proposed IFAD grant to the recipient. Copies of both
negotiated agreements are attached as appendix I.

50. The United Mexican States is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred and
seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,870,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five hundred thousand United
States dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project

Eastern States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$65.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20 million (equivalent to approximately US$27.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1.1 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM)1

Amount of cofinancing: US$29.2 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of borrower: US$4.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to successful negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and KEXIM.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

1

11

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendations for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project, as contained in paragraph 57.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Eastern States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive

path of political and economic reforms. These aim to introduce elements of popular
representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and inclusive social
development, improve the business environment, attract foreign investment and
reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar is the largest country in South-East Asia, with rich endowments of land
and water, and favourable conditions for agriculture. Its population was estimated
at 51.5 million in 2014, with an annual growth rate of 1 per cent. Some 67 per cent
of the population is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic
groups and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being rich in resources, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-
East Asia. An estimated one third of the population lived below the poverty line in
2005, decreasing to one fourth in 2010. The 2014 Human Development Report
ranked the country 150th among 186 nations rated, with a human development
index of 0.524. In 2013, Myanmar's GDP amounted to US$53 billion, with an annual
growth rate of 6.8 per cent.

4. The agriculture sector constitutes the core of the economy, representing 38 per
cent of GDP and employing about 70 per cent of the working population. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty in Myanmar, and there is
significantly greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also greater
among diverse ethnic groups compared with the majority ethnic population.

5. While, in aggregate terms, Myanmar produces a surplus of food, many rural areas
suffer from chronic food insecurity. Disparities exist among and within states and
within communities, where household food insecurity and poverty are closely
linked. Rural poverty is largely a function of lack of resource endowments. Poor
rural people typically consist of landless people and small and marginal farmers,
usually owning less than an acre to up to five acres of land. They lack access to
adequate and nutritious food, as well as to essential non-food items. Many of the
poorest live in isolated hill tracts of ethnic states in the eastern regions. These
states were previously affected by decades of civil conflict that left them isolated
and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. As requested by the Government, the 2013-2015 PBAS allocation for Myanmar is
being applied to two loan-financed projects to develop scalable models in diverse
agroecological zones. The first, Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in Myanmar,
focuses on creating a sustainable agricultural development model for the central
dry zone. The second, the Eastern States Agribusiness Project (ESAP), focuses on



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

2

22

creating a smallholder agriculture and community agroforestry model for the
upland/highland zone, with potential for scaling up across the eastern states.

7. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the
Government's policies to reduce economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with the National Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for
Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development
Action Plan. Specifically, the rationale has four dimensions: (i) to create a model at
the state level for post-conflict economic reintegration that lays the foundation for
sustained peace; (ii) to create a model for environmentally sustainable agricultural
modernization in degraded areas; (iii) to forge pathways for supporting poor
communities in the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture; and
(iv) to better link Myanmar's eastern states with regional markets and technology
flows.

8. The project is consistent with the 2014-2018 country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) for Myanmar, which aims to contribute to reducing rural
poverty, specifically of smallholders, landless people, and ethnic and other
marginalized groups. The COSOP defines three strategic objectives for IFAD’s
engagement: (i) empower rural women and men to access agricultural resources,
technologies, services and markets; (ii) create business and employment
opportunities for rural women and men; and (iii) promote the social and economic
empowerment of marginalized groups, particularly ethnic groups. The project
addresses all three strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. The project will be implemented in selected areas of Kayin and Shan (South) States

in the eastern part of Myanmar. These two states were affected by decades of civil
conflict and insecurity, which adversely affected their socio-economic development.
With recent peace-building efforts, the two states have been selected for
agribusiness development due to their good security, relatively stable political
context and economic potential.

10. In Kayin State, the project encompasses 12 irrigation schemes covering three
townships (Hpa-an, Hlain Bwe, Kaukarate) and the forest communities of
Thandaunggyi township in the northern mountains, for an aggregate area of some
108,000 acres. In Shan State, the project covers the Ho-Pong irrigation scheme
and its upland watershed areas (Ho-pong, Taunggyi, Siseine townships) as well as
the Hekke irrigation scheme (Taunggyi, Kyauk Talon Gyi townships), for an
aggregate area of about 79,000 acres.

11. The target group consists of poor rural women and men in the project areas.
Specifically, it covers: (i) farmers in irrigated lowlands with marginal, small and
medium-sized landholdings ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each;
(ii) farmers in the rainfed uplands with marginal, small and medium landholdings
ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each; (iii) agroforestry households
in mountainous areas of northern Kayin; and (iv) landless households, which will
have access to job opportunities as agricultural labourers or as workers in
agribusiness. The project will ensure that employment opportunities facilitate the
economic reintegration of returning migrants, ex-combatants and displaced people.

12. An inclusive targeting approach will be applied that encompasses geographical, self-
and direct targeting, and social and gender inclusion. The project is expected to
benefit 62,400 households or 315,000 rural men and women.

B. Project development objective
13. The project will develop an inclusive, sustainable and scalable model for smallholder

agriculture and community agroforestry in the eastern states of Kayin and Shan



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

3

33

(South). It will promote commercialized smallholder agriculture linked to
agribusiness, improve living standards in forest communities, and reverse
environmental degradation in sloping areas. It will generate substantial benefits for
households belonging to the Karen, Shan, Paoh, Intha and Mon ethnic groups.

14. The project’s goal is to improve the economic status of poor rural women and men
in selected areas of Kayin and Shan States. Its objective is to increase the incomes
of smallholder and agroforestry households in these areas in an environmentally
sustainable manner.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project has two components. Component 1. Strategic investments. This

component will finance strategic investments in land development and community
agroforestry (approximately US$42.6 million, 65 per cent of total project costs).

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Land development. The project will contribute to the
expansion of irrigated areas served by primary and secondary canals, with
complementary investments in land development identified through a participatory
process. The objectives are to improve drainage networks, irrigation water delivery
and field access, and to create opportunities for crop diversification in response to
market signals. A participatory land-use planning approach will be applied, and
free, prior and informed consent will be introduced. Farmer empowerment and
participatory water management will be strengthened in all irrigation works.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Community agroforestry. Project investment in
agroforestry will improve living conditions, generate economic benefits for forest
and upland villages and reduce encroachment on primary forest. The introduction of
sloping agricultural land technology (SALT) will protect ecosystems, increase soil
water infiltration and reduce soil erosion. In particular, SALT will generate
substantial positive environmental impact by reducing sedimentation in Inle Lake
and the Ho-Pong valley drainage system. Upland and agroforestry activities will be
defined and implemented on the basis of a participatory and culturally sensitive
approach.

18. Component 2. Enabling investments. This component will improve target group
access to knowledge, technology and services, and will maximize the benefits
generated from strategic investments (approximately US$15.7 million, 24 per cent
of total project costs).

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge and technology. The project will improve
farmer access to the technologies, inputs and services required to improve the
productivity of staple, fodder and high-value crops. It will promote a pluralistic
participatory extension platform in support of smallholder households. A network of
knowledge centres (KCs) will be established to broker service delivery to farm and
forest households through linkages with public institutions and the private sector.
These centres will operate on the basis of: a decentralized and bottom-up
approach; pluralism of actors in service delivery; promotion of public/private
partnerships (PPPs); and a clear market orientation comprising cost recovery and
sustainability.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Services. Smallholders and entrepreneurs will be provided
access to markets and to adapted and affordable financial products. Contractual
arrangements among farmers and agribusinesses, such as contract farming or
outgrower schemes, will be promoted for commodities with a comparative
advantage, market demand and growth potential. A competitive grant scheme will
attract processors to the project area, and a credit guarantee mechanism will
improve smallholder access to bank financing. Financial inclusion will be promoted
by fostering savings and credit groups and providing financial literacy training.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

4

44

21. The remaining project financing (US$6.9 million, 11 per cent of total project costs)
is allocated to central project coordination and decentralized project management,
described below.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

22. Based on institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar contexts
and the country strategy, the ESAP implementation approach is to: (i) strengthen
state-level Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) departments and other
agencies involved in agricultural and rural development; (ii) increase the
responsibility of state-level MOAI departments in phased implementation of
activities; (iii) establish a small, state-level project implementation office (PIO) in
each state to manage activities; (iv) organize implementation through contracts
with public and private service providers; and (v) implement project activities in
phases.

23. Project activities will be implemented through contracts with service providers such
as ministries/departments, NGOs and the private sector. Service providers will
enter into performance-based contracts, and their performance will be assessed by
project management and by community representatives where applicable.

B. Organizational framework
24. The project's governance framework will consist of: (i) a national project steering

committee composed of representatives of relevant central-level ministries, to
provide policy and strategic guidance; (ii) state project coordination committees
composed of directors of relevant state-level departments and representatives of
community organizations, to oversee project coordination at the state level; and
(iii) village groups, composed of representatives of community organizations,
partner NGOs and service providers, to monitor and ensure effective participation,
poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming.

25. In alignment with the Government's decentralization policy, project management
and implementation are decentralized to the state level. A PIO will be established in
each state – responsible and accountable for state-level management of the project
and achievement of its results. PIOs will be structured around project components
and investments, and will have a certain level of financial autonomy. Their staff will
be recruited on a competitive basis in compliance with IFAD guidelines. PIOs will be
supported by a central project coordination unit (PCU), established in Nay Pyi Taw
for all IFAD-financed projects. The PCU will support PIOs in planning, financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
26. The state-level annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), supplemented by activity

calendars, will be the key planning instruments for the project. They will identify
annual targets and activities, set implementation priorities, forecast procurement
requirements and facilitate the mobilization of staff and financial resources. These
AWP/Bs will be prepared through a consultative approach involving community
organizations, KCs and stakeholders. The planning process will be coordinated with
national planning procedures, as the project budget is being incorporated into the
national budget.

27. The M&E system is designed to offer comprehensive and reliable information for
results-based management. The system will be participatory and decentralized, and
compliant with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) framework. It
will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring – focusing on physical and
financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring of the use of
outputs and measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and
(iii) impact assessment – evaluating project impact on target groups. All M&E data,



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

5

55

analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and ethnic group.
Considering the well-known problems with data availability and quality in Myanmar,
a data acquisition plan for the project area will be developed at the outset of
implementation.

28. The project will use locally adapted RIMS surveys as the main quantitative survey
tools at baseline, midterm and completion. Ad hoc surveys, qualitative case studies
and thematic reviews will be outsourced to independent institutions to verify results
and draw lessons on themes such as: food security, cropping patterns, climate
resilience; small and micro-business sustainability; participatory water
management; and impact on incomes. An external independent third party (such as
a national university or NGO) will be engaged to assess project impact periodically.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s operational experiences
will create valuable knowledge, which will be captured by the PIO and PCU and
used to generate lessons and best practices. Once documented, the project’s model
of upland/highland agricultural development may be scaled up across the eastern
states. The project will share knowledge and experiences with the wider community
of development practitioners across Asia through the IFADAsia knowledge
management portal.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used for

intended purposes efficiently and cost-effectively; (ii) disbursement of funds
facilitates rapid implementation of activities; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) financial statements are prepared in conformity with internationally
recognized accounting standards; (v) a robust flow of reliable information on
project activities facilitates accountability, transparency and disclosure; and
(vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded.

31. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating
measures: (i) installation of professional accounting software; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) preparation of a financial management manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iv) state-level PIOs with delegated
authority to manage and disburse project resources, and confirmation of PCU
delegated authority; (v) technical assistance and external oversight; (vi) a control
framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits and
social elements; and (vii) a good governance framework to ensure accountability
and transparency.

32. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08 of the General Conditions
for Agricultural Development Financing, a maximum amount of SDR 100,000 for
otherwise eligible project expenditures incurred after the date of project approval
by the Executive Board and before the entry into force of the financing agreement
will be financed. Such financing will be mainly for the implementation of start-up
activities in respect of expenditures for: (i) capacity-building for PCU/PIO staff and
target groups; (ii) consulting services for studies and field surveys; and (iii) other
consultancy services. Such expenditures are pre-financed by the Government, and
will be reimbursed by IFAD only after the financing agreement has entered into
force and conditions precedent to disbursement have been met.

33. The project will use the imprest fund method in operating the two designated
accounts (for the loan and grant respectively). The Government will ensure that
counterpart funds are contained in the national allocations for MOAI at central and
state levels and that they are released to the project promptly.

34. Flow of funds to the two states will be decentralized. This will strengthen
governance structures while maintaining transparency of activities and central
controls. The bank account signatory powers for state-level expenditures will be set
at a sufficiently senior level. Control of expenditures at the state level will be



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

6

66

maintained by retaining centralization of withdrawal application preparation and
approval, access to state-level accounting data, and consolidation of AWP/Bs and
reporting.

35. External audit will be carried out in compliance with International Standards on
Auditing and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits, and independent external auditors
will be appointed on a timely basis. Audit reports will be furnished to IFAD within
six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year.

36. The PCU will oversee project procurement at central and state levels. The
procurement of goods, works and services will be handled by the state-level PIOs,
with support from the PCU for consolidated or international purchases. Procurement
will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD procurement guidelines and
handbook. Procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and time
estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower
and reflected in the procurement plan. The project implementation manual will
detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
37. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation

support mission will be undertaken annually. MOAI departments at central and
state levels will support and participate in these missions.

38. Supervision will be applied as a continuous process requiring ongoing
communication and engagement with the central Government, state governments,
the PCU and PIOs. It will encompass three functions: (i) fiduciary compliance –
covering legal conditions, financial management, procurement and contracting;
(ii) supervision – focusing on performance, progress towards objectives, activities
and outputs, planning and budgeting, monitoring and reporting, governance and
management, targeting and gender equality; and (iii) implementation support.
Implementation support will incorporate a country programme perspective by:
introducing a broad view of development investments; influencing policy based on
operational experiences; developing systems and institutions for poverty reduction;
facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships; and generating lessons and best
practices.

39. Considering the limited implementation experience in Myanmar, two midterm
reviews (MTRs) will be undertaken, at year two and year four, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impact and likely sustainability of
project activities and to make recommendations and necessary adjustments for the
remaining project periods. MTRs will be carried out jointly by the Government, the
PCU, PIOs and IFAD. At the end of the project, a project completion report will be
prepared by the Government, with support from IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
40. Total investment and incremental recurrent project costs, including physical and

price contingencies, are estimated at US$65.2 million over the six-year project
implementation period. The exchange rate has been set at 1,000 Myanmar kyats to
one United States dollar (the average rate prevailing at final design), and a
constant purchasing power parity exchange rate is assumed.

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan on highly concessional terms of about

US$27.6 million (42 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of about US$1.5 million
(2 per cent), cofinancing of US$29.2 million (45 per cent), a government
contribution of about US$4.9 million (8 per cent), and a beneficiary contribution in
kind of US$2.0 million (3 per cent). The Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) has



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

7

77

participated in the project design process and has expressed its intention to
cofinance the project.

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower /
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Strategic investments

1. Land development 3 042.5 4 513.5 - 29 172.5 - 36 728.4 56.3
2. Community agroforestry 134.2 4 457.0 - - 1 243.2 5 834.3 8.9

Subtotal 3 176.6 8 970.5 - 29 172.5 1 243.2 42 562.8 65.3
B. Enabling investments

1. Knowledge and technology 513.7 3 668.5 251.7 - 211.9 4 645.8 7.1
2. Services 113.4 10 292.5 95.0 - 566.4 11 067.3 17.0

Subtotal 627.1 13 961.0 346.7 - 778.3 15 713.1 24.1
C. Project management 1 126.5 4 632.6 1 154.4 - - 6 913.6 10.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 27 564.1 1 501.2 29 172.5 2 021.5 65 189.5 100.0

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will
include a maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.

Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower/
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Works 3 042.5 7.6 8 798.3 21.9 - - 28 407.6 70.6 - - 40 248.3 61.7
2. Vehicles 716.9 71.0 292.8 29.0 - - - - - - 1 009.7 1.5
3. Equipment and materials 7.1 7.6 86.6 92.4 - - - - - - 93.7 0.1
4. Consultancies 28.9 0.8 1 925.0 53.8 847.1 23.7 764.9 21.4 11.0 0.3 3 577.0 5.5
5. Training 197.9 1.6 2 943.5 64.5 654.1 14.3 - - 767.3 6.0 4 562.8 7.0
6. Goods services and inputs 235.3 6.9 1 945.6 56.8 - - - - 1 243.2 36.3 3 424.0 5.3
7. Matching grants and

associated investments - - 5 155.5 100 - - - - - - 5 155.5 7.9
8. Credit guarantee scheme - - 2 978.3 100 2 978.3 4.6
9. Staff salaries and

allowances 528.4 14.1 3 224.7 85.9 - - - - - - 3 753.1 5.8
10. Operating costs 173.3 44.8 213.9 55.2 - - - - - - 387.2 0.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 7.6 27 564.1 42.3 1 501.2 2.3 29 172.5 44.8 2 021.5 3.1 65 189.5 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
42. The project will directly impact an area of some 187,000 acres, of which

58,000 acres are irrigated, 104,000 are upland rainfed, and 25,000 are forest. It
will provide a range of economic and social benefits to 62,400 households
consisting of 315,000 rural women and men. Projections indicate that incremental
agricultural production in the project area from 2015 to 2021 will have an
estimated value of US$38.2 million at farm gate prices. The acreage cultivated is
expected to increase by 21 per cent, and cropping intensity by 22 per cent. Net
income per acre will increase by 64 per cent, while net income per household will
increase by 100 per cent.

43. The project's financial internal rate of return is estimated at 15.1 per cent. Its
economic internal rate of return is estimated at 13.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
44. The sustainability of project investments will be fostered through: (i) access to

knowledge – KCs will be low-cost facilities that will eventually operate on a cost-
recovery basis, evolving into PPP ventures in the medium term; (ii) access to
markets – upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

8

88

will ensure smallholder access to markets sustained through underlying business
relationships; (iii) access to water – irrigation and drainage improvement, combined
with participatory water management, will improve water distribution, and
operation and maintenance; (iv) access to finance – financial inclusion activities will
eventually link smallholders and agroforestry households with the formal financial
sector; and (v) extension services – use of MOAI extension officers trained by the
project will ensure continuity in delivery of services.

45. The project’s exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at central and state
levels; rely on a range of institutional service providers for implementation of
activities; foster profitable business relationships between producers and markets;
and improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The key risks identified relate to: (i) insecure land tenure; (ii) political interference

in project management; (iii) poor governance capacity; and (iv) fiduciary risk.
These risks are mitigated by a set of assurances negotiated with the Government,
decentralization to the state level, participation in planning and implementation,
robust fiduciary compliance procedures, capacity-building of relevant institutions at
the state level, and intensive supervision and implementation support by IFAD.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

47. The ESAP is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, in particular: (i) its targeting
strategy is consistent with the IFAD Targeting Policy approach of focusing on
economically active poor rural women and men; (ii) its investments in rural
economic growth are compliant with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy focus on
promoting inclusive financial systems; (iii) its participatory approach to land
development is consistent with the principles of free, prior and informed consent
and community-driven development stated in the IFAD policies on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security and Engagement with Indigenous Peoples;
(iv) its evolving gender mainstreaming strategy is in compliance with the IFAD
Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (v) its focus on promoting
PPPs for private-sector development and policy dialogue is in line with the IFAD
Partnership Strategy; and (vi) its environmental impact assessment procedures for
infrastructure investment are aligned with the IFAD Climate Change Strategy for
proper adaptation and mitigation measures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the

Government's policy on reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar's National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of partners such as the World Bank and the multi-donor
Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT).

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. The project is the first investment of its kind in the states inhabited primarily by

ethnic groups. It introduces several innovations in its model for sustainable
agricultural development in the upland/highland areas of Myanmar's eastern states.
Key innovations in the Myanmar context include: (i) introduction of a participatory
development approach; (ii) targeted delivery of technologies and services;
(iii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iv) livelihood diversification, with potential for higher value addition; (v) promotion
of smallholder-driven small and micro-businesses; and (vi) support for adapted
rural finance products and services.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

9

99

50. The Government considers the project a model that will eventually be scaled up in
upland/highland areas of Myanmar. The project adopts a modular approach, to the
extent feasible, in which a standard package of investment is designed to expand,
replicate, adapt and sustain successful investments. Through its investment tools
and forward-looking policy support, the project will create the pathways, drivers
and spaces for scaling up.

51. The Italian Development Cooperation has indicated its interest, in principle, in
providing parallel cofinancing to the Government to scale up the ESAP to an
additional eastern state.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement will take place on two levels. First, the project will contribute to

the analysis of policy issues related to implementation experiences. It will also
foster stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. Specifically,
the project is expected to provide evidence-based policy advice on agricultural and
rural development across upland areas – especially with regard to ethnic states.
The project will also support dialogue on technology, knowledge resources and
financial services in support of poor farm and landless households.

53. Second, the project will enhance IFAD’s direct policy engagement with the
Government and partners by channelling operational experiences in poverty
reduction to the appropriate policy and strategy discussions through platforms such
as sector working groups. These experiences provide unique opportunities to
identify policy gaps and formulate policy recommendations on issues affecting poor
rural people, and to generate an evidence base to inform policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
54. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
annex.

55. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

56. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
57. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 20 million
special drawing rights (SDR 20,000,000), approximately US$27.6 million, and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 1.1 million special drawing
rights (SDR 1,100,000), approximately US$1.5 million, and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s Report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Niger for the Family Farming Development
Programme (ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and
Zinder Regions

Republic of Niger

Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Niger

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$207.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with an
annual service fee of three quarters of a point (0.75%)
per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP):

SDR 9,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$13.0 million)

Cofinanciers: OFID, Italian Cooperation, GEF, ongoing IFAD projects

Amounts and terms of cofinancing: OFID: US$6.0 million (loan)

Italian Cooperation: US$28.2 million (loan)

GEF: US$8.0 million (grant), to be confirmed

Ongoing IFAD projects: US$10.5 million (loan)

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$33.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$11.1 million

Funding gap US$48.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Niger for the Family Farming Development Programme
(ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Niger for the
Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Niger, a landlocked country with a territory of 1,267,000 km², is counted among

the world’s least developed and low-income food-deficit countries. Approximately
80 per cent of its estimated population of 17.13 million lives in rural areas, with
more than 60 per cent inhabiting three regions: Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder. The
latest Human Development Index ranks Niger in last place at 186th, with
75.9 per cent of its population living on less than US$2 per day.

2. In a natural environment marked by an arid climate with little rainfall and high
temperatures, the agricultural sector accounted for nearly 45.2 per cent of the
country’s GDP in 2010, exhibiting higher growth than the rest of the economy
during the period. Agriculture is Niger’s main source of export earnings after
mining.

3. Agriculture in Niger is based primarily on small-scale family farms, which vary in
size according to region and combine rainfed crops with irrigated crops. Irrigated
cropping is increasing and accounts for 30 per cent of agricultural production and
90 per cent of sector exports.

4. The major agricultural constraints are climate-based, economic and technical, not
to mention organizational. Access to the factors of production (inputs, equipment),
advisory assistance, rural financing and markets is still limited. Forecasting models
are projecting a significant drop in cereal yields if nothing is done to better adapt
the country's production systems to climate change.

5. Despite these sectoral constraints, opportunities to boost agro-sylvo-pastoral
productivity and to promote farming exist. Cereal and horticultural crop yields could
be substantially increased with the use of improved cropping techniques, better
seed, the introduction of animal-drawn ploughing, the dissemination of innovations
and better irrigation techniques. These significant increases in yield could enable
rural families to produce enough for household consumption and the sale of
surplus, while at the same time improving their resilience to climate change.

6. Niger has policies for development and support of the various sectors of the
economy, especially the agricultural sector. These policies include the Sustainable
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDCI), Vision 2035, the Economic
and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2012-2015 and the 3N Initiative (I3N) for
food and nutrition security and sustainable agricultural development. With support
from its technical and financial partners, the Government of Niger drafted its
National Nutrition Policy and its National Food and Nutrition Security Policy, revised
in 2011, placing particular emphasis on interventions to guarantee the population
sufficient, varied and quality food.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
Results-Based COSOP

7. ProDAF was conceived in a global context in which 2014 was declared the
International Year of Family Farming, aimed at restoring the central position of
family farming in the agricultural, environmental and social policies of national
action programmes. IFAD operations in Niger implemented under the country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2018 are in line with and
contribute to meeting the aims of national development policies and their
objectives, actions, and strategies. The strategic coherence between I3N and IFAD
operations in Niger derives from the lessons learned from 11 projects implemented
over the past 30 years and the experiences of the Government and other technical
and financial partners with whom IFAD implements its interventions.

8. With the object of providing the Government of Niger with substantial coordinated
support in the implementation of its agricultural policies, IFAD established
operational and financial partnerships by working in close collaboration with the
Belgian Fund for Food Security (FBSA), Italian Cooperation/DGCS, Spanish
Cooperation/AECID, the World Food Programme (WFP), the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and
by making overtures to private funds (SINERGI) and the banking sector (BAGRI,
ASUSU, etc.).

9. IFAD has built its strategy in Niger on family farming adapted to a context of
structural risks and potential external shocks. This model is capable of tackling the
challenges of improving population food and nutrition security and fostering poverty
reduction, economic growth, sustainable rural development and resilience to
climate change.

10. Family farming remains highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with its
negative impact on population food and nutrition security. Forecasting models are
projecting a significant reduction in yields if no action is taken to adapt the
country's production systems to climate change. The programme focuses on
increasing the resilience of the family farming model by stressing sustainability at
the economic, social, environmental and climate level. The rationale for including
ASAP funding in ProDAF is the need to guarantee the sustainability of the targeted
production systems by ensuring their resilience to climate change. Likewise, the
rationale for the ProDAF intervention is the vulnerability of its target populations.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
11. ProDAF will be implemented in IFAD’s area of concentration in Niger, identified by

COSOP 2013-2018 as the south-central corridor of the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder
regions. The population directly targeted by the programme will be that of the
economic development poles, with the population of bordering areas indirectly
benefitting from the dynamic generated by programme activities. Some 2,030,000
people – or 290,000 households – are involved in agro-sylvo-pastoral activities.
ProDAF will focus particularly on 240,000 family farms.

12. Three types of family farms have been identified and targeted: (i) highly vulnerable
family farms; (ii) moderately vulnerable family farms; and (iii) family farms with
little vulnerability. The programme also targets two demographic groups: women
and young people. Among the latter, special attention will be paid to young women
particularly affected by early marriage. Women and young people must respectively
represent at least 30 per cent of the beneficiaries of all programme activities.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme’s general objective is to help sustainably guarantee food and

nutrition security and rural households’ resilience to crises in the Maradi, Tahoua



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

3

and Zinder regions. The development objective is to sustainably increase the
income of 240,000 family farms, their resilience to external shocks, including
climate change, and their access to local, urban and regional markets in the three
regions.

C. Components/outcomes
14. In order to meet the development objective, the programme is built on three

components: (i) strengthening sustainable family farming; (ii) improving access to
markets; and (iii) programme management and coordination, monitoring and
evaluation, and knowledge management.

15. Component 1: Strengthening sustainable family farming. This component is
geared to sustainably boosting the productivity of family farms.

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Structured, productive farms resilient to climate risks.
Interventions will be carried out in 22 watersheds in the programme area. These
activities will consist of: (i) recovering 16,000 ha of degraded land; (ii) stabilizing
dunes around watersheds in a 2,000 ha area; (iii) creating 2,500 ha of sylvo-
pastoral space; and (iv) planting hedgerows on 400 ha of land. To make better use
of the available water resources, the programme will: (i) build/rehabilitate
139 dams in series to recover approximately 700 ha of land for irrigation; (ii) build
seven multipurpose mini-dams; and (iii) create four ponds. The programme will
furnish equipment for 6,800 ha of small-scale irrigation and get it up and running.
Thus, the programme will generate a total of 7,500 ha of irrigated land.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building for rural dwellers. These activities are
designed to strengthen the institutions and organizations that provide assistance to
family farms: rural civil society organizations (farmers’ organizations, CRA/RECA),
decentralized technical services and the territorial authorities (communes, regional
boards). The programme anticipates a 30 per cent increase in current yields in
eight years through two complementary outreach mechanisms: 805 farmer field
schools and agricultural advisory assistance. These mechanisms will benefit
240,000 growers and cover some 190,000 ha.

18. The programme anticipates a 40 per cent increase in the yield of the principal
irrigated crops. It will take advantage of the mechanism of horticultural field
schools (CEPM), with 945 CEPM providing support to 30,000 growers on an
estimated 7,500 ha of vegetable farms.

19. In order to improve small-animal husbandry and poultry farming, the programme
will include three intervention measures: (i) the creation of six new private
veterinary services in the vicinity; (ii) advisory assistance in poultry farming and
small-animal husbandry, with the introduction of 210 innovations in small-animal
husbandry, benefitting 15,750 households; and (iii) the distribution of animals to
reconstitute the livestock capital of 13,500 non-resilient two-person households
(women and young people).

20. RECA and the CRAs will remain favoured ProDAF partners. Through operational
partnerships with the agricultural world (that is, the rural farming community of the
three intervention regions), the following will be actively involved in project
implementation: FUCAP and FUFO in Tahoua; FUMA Gaskiya, Sa’a and Albishirinku
Manoma in Maradi; FUBI and CSAOCP in Zinder; as well as the regional branches of
FCMN-Niya. The Chamber of commerce, industry, and handicrafts of Niger (CCIAN)
and connections with bordering countries (Niger-Nigeria Chamber of Commerce)
will be strategic priorities.

21. Subcomponent 1.3: Women’s leadership and the improvement of nutrition
security. These activities are geared to sustainably improving the nutritional status
of rural households and reducing chronic malnutrition among the most vulnerable
groups through the creation of 1,350 women’s groups under the Mata Masu Dubara
Programme. This programme will set up 90 new women-operated granaries for food



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

4

security and 4,500 home gardens for nutritional support and provide 5,500
households with farming tool kits. In all, these activities will benefit the 12,500
most vulnerable households. Nutrition awareness activities will touch roughly
100,000 households through the nutritional monitoring of children under 5 and
cooking demonstrations.

22. Component 2: Access to markets. This component is designed to improve the
access of family farms to markets through the construction/rehabilitation of rural
infrastructure.

23. Subcomponent 2.1: Structures for access to marketing platforms. A
semi-wholesale market will be built in nine new economic development poles, and
18 supplementary satellite hubs have been identified. The programme will
rehabilitate/build 850 km of rural roads. Routine and periodic maintenance of these
roads will be performed by independent road maintenance teams in cooperation
with the management of the semi-wholesale market, the Community Advisory
Assistance Directorate, the Ministry of Equipment and the Autonomous Road
Maintenance Financing Fund.

24. Subcomponent 2.2: Modes of infrastructure management and the financing
of economic operators. The programme will include the creation of management
structures for all commercial rural infrastructure created or rehabilitated and
provide the requisite assistance. The social engineering process will include the
implementation of a cooperation framework (Hadin Gwiwa in Hausa) involving all
economic operators at the site. A local cooperatives union will be responsible for
managing each satellite hub. The programme will also provide assistance to the
promoters of farming activities or collaborate with agricultural activities leading to
profitable sales-oriented ventures. This support will be provided through the
creation of a cost-sharing financial mechanism.

25. Subcomponent 2.3: Regional trade integration. The programme will work to
facilitate cross-border trade, increase knowledge about cross-border trade
constraints and propose and test solutions with economic operators. The activities
will be carried out in partnership with the Nigeria-Niger Joint Commission for
Cooperation, as well as consular trade offices, economic operators and professional
organizations.

26. Internal programme funding mechanisms. The programme’s support and
investments are financed in the following manner: (i) activities directly managed by
the programme, as in the case of infrastructure, are fully funded by subsidies;
(ii) activities targeting the most vulnerable households are funded by grants; and
(iii) activities that support economic activities are funded by cost-sharing
mechanisms.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
27. The ProDAF approach is grounded in the following three intervention principles:

(i) improvement of food and nutrition security; (ii) territorial continuity of the
interventions through the economic development pole; and (iii) scaling up the
current project activities of IFAD and its partners. The programme will promote a
strategy for learning, capitalizing on lessons learned, and communication that will
be evaluated during the course of the activities. Public-private sector
complementarity in the various intervention domains is guaranteed. ProDAF will be
implemented in collaboration with other technical and financial programmes under
way in Niger’s agricultural sector through strategic and operational partnerships.

28. The programme will be implemented in phases based on: (i) coordination with the
activities of the PASADEM and Ruwanmu projects; (ii) the maturity of local partners
– the local authorities and economic operators – that will be jointly involved in the



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

5

programme; and (iii) the ability of teams on the ground to manage the
administrative and financial processes involved in implementing the activities.

B. Organizational framework
29. ProDAF will be placed under the Ministry of Agriculture. The National Steering

Committee is responsible for strategic orientation and will verify the coherence of
the programme in this respect with national strategies; it will also approve the
annual workplans and budgets (AWPBs). The Ministry in charge will delegate project
management by decree to the three autonomous regional project management
units (URGPs), whose operations it will oversee. These units will be set up in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder and will enjoy administrative and financial autonomy. A
national advisory assistance unit (CENAT) has been created and tasked with
providing support for project engineering, political dialogue, rural roads, monitoring
and evaluation and financial consolidation of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

30. Programme planning will be an ongoing process based on the AWPBs. The
monitoring and evaluation system will be designed using the logical framework as a
tool for management, planning and decision-making by the partners in programme
implementation. The programme’s computer database will be linked directly to the
geographic information system (GIS) to allow for map-based visualization of
programme results.

31. ProDAF’s planning and monitoring and evaluation system will scale up IFAD’s
existing systems in Niger and merge them into a single database for a GIS and
common manual of procedures. During the preparation of the AWPB, quantitative
objectives will be broken down by region and implementation phase at programme
launch after a review of the logical framework with the stakeholders involved. Two
reviews at, respectively, one third and two thirds of the way into the programme
and a final evaluation are planned to compare the changes observed with the
baseline situation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. ProDAF has a reliable and rigorous internal fiduciary management and control

environment, along with a qualified team inherited from ongoing IFAD projects,
which have resulted in remarkable performance levels. An account in CFA francs
(CFAF) will be opened in the name of the programme at a commercial bank in
Niamey acceptable to IFAD. An operations account in CFAF will also be opened for
each regional project management unit and CENAT itself (four in all). Based on
quarterly cash flow needs, each of the accounts will receive funds from accounts
designated (by a lender or donor), opened in response to a request for funds by the
URGPs. At the request of CENAT, tasked inter alia with quality control, coherence
and financial consolidation, the account will be activated and managed in
accordance with the renewable funds mechanism.

33. This innovative procedure will enable the programme to receive a substantial
advance corresponding to funds for expenditures equal to six months of the AWBP.
These funds will be subject to regular and periodic verification of payments. The
teams of the ongoing projects regularly and optimally use the latest version of the
Tompro financial management software, which has proved entirely satisfactory for
preparing reimbursement requests and monthly reports.

34. The procurement system is governed by current laws, decrees and legal provisions,
which contain general principles, controls and regulations for public procurement
and public service concessions and set public procurement thresholds for the state,
public establishments, state enterprises, and corporations with majority public
ownership, on the one hand, and territorial or local groups, on the other. A priori



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

6

control of procurement procedures is exercised by the General Directorate for the
Control of Public Procurement and Financial Liabilities.

35. ProDAF will be audited annually by a qualified firm.

E. Supervision
36. ProDAF will be under the direct supervision of IFAD. During the first 12 to

18 months, the supervision mission will verify that the main preparatory measures
have been adopted for the implementation of each component, as well as for
programme management, and monitoring and evaluation.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
37. The total cost of the programme over an eight-year period, including provisioning

for unexpected physical contigencies and price increases, is CFAF 103.6 billion,
equivalent to US$207.2 million. It consists of a cost of CFAF 22.3 billion
(US$44.7 million), covered with financing that has already been approved, and
CFAF 81.3 billion (US$162.5 millions), to be covered with new financing. The
US$162.5 million to be covered with new financing is comprised of a base cost of
US$142.7 million and US$19.8 million (12 per cent) in provisioning for unexpected
physical contigencies and financial events. This figure includes taxes in the amount
of US$19.6 (12 per cent), and the foreign exchange cost is set at US$46.0 million
(28 per cent).

B. Programme financing
38. ProDAF’s total cost of US$207.2 million will be financed by: (i) IFAD, thanks to the

harmonization of the AWPB of its PASADEM and PPI-RUWANMU projects (US$10.5
million) with that of ProDAF, the performance-based allocation system (PBAS)
2013-2015 financing (US$48.5 million, 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent loan),
and ASAP funds (grant of US$13.0 million); (ii) the GEF (grant of US$8.0 million, to
be confirmed); (iii) OFID (loan of US$6.0 million); (iv) and Italian Cooperation
(loan of US$28.2 million); (v) the Government of Niger (US$33.4 million – US$18.6
million in tax exemptions and US$14.8 million in funding); and (vi) the beneficiaries
(US$11.1 million). A funding gap of US$48.5 million remains, which could be
financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 (modalities to be determined).



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of sustainable family farming
1. Structured,

productive farms
resilient to climate
risks

15 774.5 22.0 15 743.5 22.0 10 122.3 14.1 7 061.6 9.9 9 724.4 13.6 13 169.1 18.4 71 595.5 44.1

2. Capacity building for
rural dwellers

6 173.4 42.1 6 198.1 42.2 1 365.4 9.3 - - 128.0 0.9 815.7 5.6 14 680.6 9.0

3. Women’s leadership
and the
improvement of
nutrition security

2 812.6 44.0 2 812.6 44.0 - - - - - - 762.9 11.9 6 388.0 3.9

Subtotal Strengthening
of sustainable family
farming

24 760.5 26.7 24 754.1 26.7 11 487.7 12.4 7 061.6 7.6 9 852.4 10.6 14 747.8 15.9 92 664.1 57.0

B. Access to markets
1. Structures for

access to marketing
platforms

12 662.4 32.5 12 662.4 32.5 - - - - - - 13 670.6 35.1 38 995.4 24.0

2. Management of
infrastructure and
the financing of
market operators

3 267.3 39.4 3 267.3 39.4 - - - - 1 286.0 15.5 469.3 5.7 8 289.8 5.1

3. Regional trade
integration

1 720.6 44.0 1 720.6 44.0 - - - - - - 466.6 11.9 3 907.8 2.4

Subtotal Access to
markets

17 650.2 34.5 17 650.2 34.5 - - - - 1 286.0 2.5 14 606.5 28.5 51 192.9 31.5

C. Programme
management and
coordination,
monitoring/
evaluation and
knowledge
management

6 084.2 32.6 6 084.2 32.6 1 482.8 7.9 964.4 5.2 - - 4 045.4 21.7 18 660.9 11.5

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

Table 2
Programme costs by expense category and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total
Expense Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 20 991.3 31.3 20 638.2 30.8 1 893.9 2.8 3 023.8 4.5 128.0 0.2 20 285.3 30.3 66 960.6 41.2

2. Vehicles 1 277.1 30.2 1 429.2 33.8 293.9 7.0 87.8 2.1 - - 1 135.0 26.9 4 223.0 2.6

3. Equipment and
materials

1 000.6 34.0 1 000.6 34.0 109.1 3.7 67.5 2.3 - - 765.2 26.0 2 943.0 1.8

4. Training 1 827.7 37.4 1 833.7 37.5 376.9 7.7 36.1 0.7 - - 815.5 16.7 4 890.0 3.0

5. Consultations 6 930.7 33.5 6 908.7 33.4 1 693.3 8.2 500.4 2.4 - - 4 675.8 22.6 20 708.9 12.7

6. Goods & services &
inputs

7 154.4 25.7 7 365.1 26.4 6 907.1 24.8 3 792.8 13.6 - - 2 645.1 9.5 27 864.5 17.1

7. Grants & subsidies 2 634.3 16.2 2 634.3 16.2 - - - - 11 010.3 67.6 0.0 - 16 278.9 10.0

8. Salaries &
indemnities

5 637.2 36.4 5 637.2 36.4 1 324.9 8.6 382.4 2.5 - - 2 498.6 16.1 15 480.3 9.5

9. Operating costs 1 041.4 32.9 1 041.4 32.9 371.5 11.7 135.2 4.3 - - 579.2 18.3 3 168.7 1.9

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. A total of 290,000 rural households – that is 2,030,000 people – will benefit from

programme activities and sustainably increase their productivity, resilience to
climate risks and access to local and urban markets. In particular, the programme’s



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

8

overall IRR is 15.7 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was conducted; it found that the
IRR is sensitive to a drop in sales prices or yields. A drop of 30 to 40 per cent in
yields results in IRRs of 11.4 per cent and 9.9 per cent respectively, while a
30 per cent drop in sales prices results in an IRR of just 10.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
40. The sustainability of ProDAF’s intended outcomes is ensured by its effective

partnership with local public institutions, organized rural civil society and the
private sector in designing and implementing the activities. Additional factors
include: the guarantee of the economic and financial profitability of the commercial
infrastructure built or rehabilitated; the microprojects financed; watershed
management for sustainable use of land and water resources; and investments in
small-scale irrigation equipment financed through cost-sharing under local market
conditions by local financial institutions capable of renewing such financing.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The main risks and the mitigation measures adopted are as follows:

(i) The political and security situation in the programme area is
deteriorating. The programme strategy is based on an intervention that
targets local organized economic actors and communities capable of ensuring
the sustainability and continuity of the investments. The operational
mechanism boosts national and local technical and operational capacity in
collaboration with the IFAD Country Office in Niamey.

(ii) Adverse weather events. ProDAF will contribute to better forecasting of
changing weather patterns by producing and distributing meteorological
information to prevent/anticipate crises and provide adaptive technologies
that will enable producers to practice farming that is resilient to shocks
associated with climate change.

(iii) Vulnerable beneficiaries can survive crises produced by severe
weather events resulting in their decapitalization. The programme will
help anticipate, absorb, and respond to shocks by increasing the resilience of
households vulnerable to crises and contributing to the social safety net
programme.

(iv) Lack of support from territorial authorities. The programme retains the
commune as the administrative gateway for all interventions while involving
the authorities in local public-private partnerships.

(v) The fees paid by market operators are essential for guaranteeing the
sustainability of the semi-wholesale markets. Implementation partners
will employ financial analysis to help economic operators and mayors’ offices
negotiate contribution/fee levels.

(vi) Social divisions and conflicts in communities/communes. Social
engineering by ProDAF prior to any civil intervention will facilitate local
consensus building between the authorities and organized economic
operators. In the long term, this process will lead to the creation of local
public-private partnerships.

(vii) The security situation in the programme area. The risk that the security
situation will deteriorate and hinder overland travel by the supervision
missions is real. The programme will therefore strengthen the operational
capacity of the IFAD Country Office and national advisory assistance to carry
out these missions.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

9

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The programme is fully integrated into IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

aligned with IFAD policies, especially its targeting policy, its policy on improving
access to land and tenure security and its environment and natural resource
management policy, as well as the Fund’s basic principles and strategies related to
climate change, gender and knowledge management. ProDAF is classified as an
environmental Category B programme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. The programme, like all other IFAD activities in Niger, is implemented within the

framework of its COSOP 2013-2018. It is in alignment with the objectives and
intended outcomes of the PDES, the I3N, and the I3N Acceleration Plan and
contributes to their attainment. In order to offer substantial and coordinated
support to the Government of Niger for implementation of its agricultural policies,
IFAD is working in financial and/or operational partnership with Italian and Spanish
Cooperation, KfW, the World Food Programme (WFP), FAO, the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the GEF. ProDAF is also developing
synergies and complementarities with other donors and lenders active in the sector,
such as the French Agency for Development (AFD); Swiss (SDC), Danish (DANIDA),
and Luxembourg (LuxDev) bilateral cooperation agencies; the GIZ, the European
Union, the World Bank, IFC, USAID and the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC).

C. Innovations and scaling up
44. ProDAF’s scaling up approach falls under the programme’s development objective,

which is to sustainably increase the income of family farms and improve their
adaptation to climate change and access to local, urban and regional markets. In
order to accomplish this, ProDAF capitalizes on proven, measured, and documented
outcomes obtained through the operations of IFAD or other partners in Niger, while
at the same time improving tools and approaches based on the lessons learned to
boost efficiency, impact, and sustainability. ProDAF’s scaling up is part of the
ongoing dynamic process of innovation, learning and scaling up launched after the
formulation of the two earlier projects and COSOP as part of the long-term vision
for IFAD activities in Niger. The tools for scaling up IFAD activities in Niger are not
only the operations financed by the Fund but the political dialogue and knowledge
management established in the various domains. The partners are another key
vehicle for scaling up to mobilize additional financial resources and/or
supplementary expertise.

D. Policy engagement
45. ProDAF’s intervention logic is to facilitate political dialogue and institutional

improvements through advocacy built on its activities in the field. The activities for
promoting political dialogue are designed to give ProDAF the opportunity to
participate in the strengthening of national public policies for sustainable
agricultural development and food and nutrition security (I3N), financing of the
agricultural sector (in association with the public and private sectors) and
administrative decentralization (support to local groups, communes, etc.), moving
toward a subregional dimension in the areas of transportation corridors and
cross-border trade (CEDEAO, UEMOA, CILSS, NEPAD).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Republic of Niger and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/beneficiary.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

47. The Republic of Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

10

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Niger in an amount equivalent to seventeen million two
hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 17,250,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Niger, within the Debt Sustainability Framework, in an amount equivalent to
seventeen million two hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 17,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of Niger in
an amount equivalent to nine million two hundred fifty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 9,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan for the Economic Transformation
Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Economic Transformation Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Executing agency: Planning and Development Department, Provincial
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan

Total programme cost: US$120.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 48.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$67 million)1

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier(s): To be determined

Amount of cofinancing: US$22.98 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower: US$23.63 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.54 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenditures not exceeding US$0.5 million
incurred between the date of Executive Board approval
and the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement

1 Including US$10 million cancelled, upon request by the Islamic Republic of Pakistan as the borrower, from the
financing for the Southern Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (approved by the Executive Board at its 101st session, EB
2010/101/R.27/Rev.1). The proposed recommitment of the funds cancelled as such is in compliance with the rules and
procedures approved by the Executive Board in “Revision of IFAD approach to use of cancellation of approved loans
and/or grants” at its 111th session (EB 2014/111/R.12/Rev.1).



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Economic Transformation Initiative –
Gilgit-Baltistan, as contained in paragraph 43.

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Pakistan has a total land area of 769,095 square kilometres. The estimated

population in 2013 was 184 million,2 of whom over 60 per cent live in rural areas.
In 2014, nominal GDP was an estimated US$ 246.6 billion and per capita GDP was
US$1,275.3 The services sector contributes the largest share to GDP – 53 per cent
– while agriculture and industry contribute 21 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively.

2. Pakistan is a relatively “young” country with over 55 per cent of the population
below the age of 25 and over 35 per cent between 25 and 54 years. Considerable
gender disparities exist on account of socio-economic, political and health factors,
and Pakistan is ranked 141st among 142 countries evaluated by the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index in 2014. The adult literacy rate is 56
per cent but there are huge variations between the urban and rural population and
across regions. The unemployment rate is 6.7 per cent.4

3. The official poverty line in Pakistan is calorie-based and is defined as per capita
food and non-food expenditures per month to support food consumption equal to
2,350 calories per adult per day.5 A report based on the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) of 2011 calculates the overall incidence of poverty to be
36.55 per cent, with rural poverty standing at 37.08 per cent and urban at 35.49
per cent.6 Poverty in remote and geographically challenging areas like Gilgit-
Baltistan is largely driven by the small size of landholdings, poor access to
markets, lack of access to credit, inputs and support services, limited off-farm
employment opportunities, and policy and institutional constraints.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan (ETI-GB) will directly
support the Government’s second poverty reduction strategy paper (2010), which
includes agriculture as one of the nine core pillars and which places special
emphasis on rural finance and on support for agriculture and small farmers,
microenterprises and small businesses, rural infrastructure, women’s development
and education as important means of poverty reduction.

2 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2013.
3 Economist Intelligence Unit Report, 2014.
4 Pakistan Economic Survey, 2013-14, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan.
5 Ibid.
6 Haroon Jamal, Pakistan Poverty Statistics: Estimates for 2011, Research Report No.84.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

5. The ETI-GB is also aligned with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for 2010-2015 , in which Gilgit-Baltistan was prioritized in view of its
comparative deprivation and higher incidence of poverty and the earlier success of
the IFAD-funded Northern Areas Development Programme in improving the
livelihoods of the hard-to-reach poor in Gilgit-Baltistan.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. Gilgit-Baltistan is a highly mountainous and remote region in northern Pakistan

covering 72,500 square kilometres, with a population of about 1.3 million. A
distinctive feature of the region is that over 90 per cent of the inhabitants own
some agricultural land, as compared to 52 per cent in rest of the country. However,
the per capita holding is very small at 0.6-0.8 acres. Small farm sizes, long harsh
winters, mountainous terrain and other physical challenges result in consumption
levels that are lower than the national average. Dietary diversity is the poorest in
the country, and the incidence of stunting among children is estimated at an
alarming 36 per cent. A survey by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) in 2014 registers only 26 per cent of the population as food-
secure, 41 per cent as moderately food-insecure and 32 per cent as highly food-
insecure. The adult literacy rate is low, at 36 per cent, and the poverty incidence is
29 per cent as compared to 21 per cent for Pakistan overall.

7. Over 90 per cent of the region’s population is engaged in agriculture; therefore the
sector has a very important role for growth and poverty reduction. Traditionally,
apricot has been the most commonly produced food item in the region and this
continues to be the case. To capitalize on seasonal and elevation advantages, there
has been a move towards production of other high-value cash crops like fruits and
vegetables. Potato is the leading crop after apricots in terms of cultivated area and
production.

8. Smallholder farming households engaged in apricot and potato production with an
average landholding of less than one hectare (ha) will be the primary target group.
Other beneficiaries will include small-scale processors, trading and export
cooperatives, people engaged in value adding activities, input suppliers and
transporters. Gender will be mainstreamed in all aspects of the ETI-GB and youth
and women will be specifically targeted in skill development for relevant income
generation opportunities. The entry point for the initiative will be organized village
producers’ groups and marketing associations. In organizing these groups and
associations, the ETI-GB will build on the existing social capital generated by the
community organizations organized under other programmes in the region since
1982. An estimated 100,000 smallholder households, including women and youth,
will benefit directly from value chain and irrigation development activities. In
addition, about 100 local entrepreneurs will be assisted in scaling up their services
for different segments of value chains. About 10,000 persons will draw indirect
benefits from the upgrading of farm-to-market roads, extension, research and
other investments.

B. Development objective
9. The development objective is to increase agricultural incomes and employment for

at least 100,000 rural households in Gilgit-Baltistan region, as part of the overall
goal to improve incomes and reduce poverty and malnutrition in the region.

C. Components/outcomes
10. The seven-year operation will comprise of three mutually reinforcing components:

productive infrastructure; value chain development; and programme management
and policy support. These components will deliver five key outcomes: (i) 100,000
households increase their production, productivity and sales in key agricultural
commodities; (ii) a sustainable and community-driven development approach is



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

introduced, which is pro-poor and youth-, gender- and nutrition-sensitive; (iii) agri-
business actors invest in local production, processing and value addition to improve
marketing of local food products; (iv) government and private agricultural services
are sustainably improved and outreach expanded; and (5) the Government
formulates and enforces pro-poor agriculture policies.

11. The productive infrastructure component consists of two interlinked
subcomponents that will be underpinned by community mobilization and planning
activities in the four poorest districts, with the support of a competitively selected
social mobilization partner. These are, first, an irrigation subcomponent to scale up
the tried and tested community-based irrigation development approach, adding
50,000 acres of new irrigated land and providing an average of one acre of
irrigated land to participating households, including women-headed and landless
households. Participating households will also receive support in developing the
land. Second, a farm-to-market roads subcomponent will link existing production
areas and newly developed irrigated areas to main valley roads and trunk roads.
This will be achieved by upgrading 400 km of existing pony tracks to a standard
that allows use by all-terrain vehicles, and upgrading roads currently fit solely for
all-terrain vehicles to a standard that allows for truck transportation.

12. The value chain development component will be driven by a commercial and
market-centered approach whereby the initiative will identify priority valleys in
each of seven districts based on criteria that will include total population, number
of poor households, total production of priority crop, total cropped area, area
available for irrigation development and farm-to-market road needs. Coverage may
be expanded from the third year depending on progress and results. Within a
valley, interventions will start with villages with existing community organizations
that can be consolidated into larger village producer groups (VPGs). These
producer groups will provide the foundation for gradual expansion to all villages in
the valley and the organization of valley producers’ associations (VPAs).

13. The component will facilitate VPA engagement with private actors and other
partners. Contracts between VPAs and their purchasing partners will drive the
business plans of producers’ associations and the support from programme
implementing agencies. In particular, through its value chain technical assistance
team, the initiative will assist producers’ associations, processors and related
service providers in developing business plans and marketing strategies, increasing
product volume at an agreed quality standard, and accessing capital for
development to realize the full potential of their products. Where justified, capital
investments will be complemented by a value chain development fund using a
matching grants mechanism. The initiative will also build the capacity of
government extension and research agencies to effectively provide services to
VPGs and VPAs. Finally, the component will assist the Government in formulating
pro-poor policies and regulations for land records and titling, irrigation water usage
and management, road operation and maintenance, and developing effective
models for extension and research services.

14. The programme management and policy support component will put in place an
effective management and coordination system led by a steering committee
headed by a chief secretary of Gilgit-Balistan. A programme coordination unit
(PCU) will be established and will operate as an autonomous institution under the
guidance of the steering committee, and will be responsible for programme
planning and budgeting, coordination, monitoring, procurement and annual audits,
as well as management of the value chain development fund. The PCU will also
assist government departments with policy development and implementation. The
PCU will ensure that gender, youth, environment, knowledge management and
communication considerations are integrated into all aspects of programme
management and implementation.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The ETI-GB’s approach is founded on expanding the crop area, improving per-
household land holdings, and modernizing agricultural practices, thereby
transforming the rural economy from deficit/subsistence agriculture to commercial
production with marketable surpluses and more specialized, high-value agriculture
that is responsive to market demands and appropriate for the region’s comparative
advantages. A participatory and community-centered approach to land and water
development will be followed, consistent with the existing traditional practices and
community-based systems in Gilgit-Baltistan. Once a scheme is selected in
accordance with the initiative’s results-based criteria, the social mobilization
partner and implementing agency staff will involve selected communities in
decisions on terms and conditions that relate to them; the implementing agency’s
roles and responsibilities; land ownership; water availability and ownership;
equitable distribution of developed land; identification of beneficiaries including
women-headed and landless households; irrigation scheme implementation
strategy and timelines, etc. Before construction is initiated, a water users’
association, representative of all the beneficiaries, will be established to engage
with the implementing agency, the social mobilization partner and (where one is
required) the contractor. The initiative will also invest in training and equipping 40
youth construction groups for irrigation schemes, to be engaged by communities/
contractors for construction works.

16. Complementing the increase in production, the initiative will support a holistic and
demand-driven approach to value chain development (initially for apricot and
potato; subsequently, other promising products may be pursued). The entry point
for the value chain support will be the organized groups of farmers at village level,
with due regard for women and youth. Organizing smallholder farmers into
producers’ groups and formulating value chain development plans will be the key
elements to address aggregation, quality and marketing challenges. This approach
will involve education, capacity-building and networking of key stakeholders along
the entire value chain, backed by enabling policy support. At the core of this
approach will be a partnership brokerage model, whereby producers and farmers,
public services and private actors will be linked in mutually responsible
partnerships. The strategy is expected to develop capacity and networks for
sustainable expansion of production and marketable surpluses, resulting in
increased incomes and poverty reduction.

17. The initiative will actively engage existing and newly formed women producers’
groups within the target valleys to ascertain women’s priorities in terms of value
chain development, irrigation development and social development. Apart from
actively encouraging and creating opportunities for participation in VPGs, the
initiative will establish 20 women producers’ groups. Suitable opportunities for
women in the local socio-cultural setting will also be identified, such as grading,
packaging, polishing, processing, and women will receive training for such jobs.
Women-centered value chain activities will be another area of focus, including milk
marketing groups and apricot by-product processing. The initiative will introduce
labour-saving devices/equipment for women in order to address the constraints
that result from their disproportionate burden of harvesting, post-harvest shelling,
processing, drying of products, etc. To complement the anticipated effects of
improved infrastructure and higher incomes on nutrition, the ETI-GB shall also
provide training in nutrition to participating households.

B. Organizational framework
18. While the Government of Pakistan’s Economic Affairs Division will be the main

coordinating agency for IFAD financing, the Planning and Development Department
of the provincial government of Gilgit-Baltistan will be the lead executing agency,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

overseeing implementation through an empowered and autonomous PCU.
Implementation will follow a hybrid model where different components/activities
will be implemented by different public agencies, NGOs and private-sector service
providers, coordinated by the PCU.

19. Subregional coordination units will be established in each of the three regions, i.e.
Gilgit, Diamer and Baltistan. These units will be responsible for planning,
coordination and monitoring of activities in the target valleys and villages in
collaboration with the social mobilization partner, the value chain technical
assistance team and line departments. The main implementing partners will be
(i) social mobilization partners/NGOs, competitively selected; (ii) a value chain
technical assistance team; and (iii) a range of private-sector partners including
local entrepreneurs, apricot processors and exporters, corporate and commercial
buyers of seed and table potato, input supply companies; and (iv) around 220
VPGs (20 of which will be women’s associations), 20 VPAs and four to five regional
producers’ associations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The annual workplan and budget (AWPB) represents the key planning document for
the initiative. The plan’s format will follow the logical framework, including clearly
spelled out monitoring indicators that can be easily measured and reported. The
overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities will lie with the
PCU. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME) system will be finalized and
made operational, in consultation with all implementing partners, within the first
six months of start-up. The PME system will be part of an overall information,
knowledge management and communication system that will provide timely and
accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management
decision-making. A baseline survey will be conducted, preferably before start-up,
but at the latest by the end of the third month of implementation to establish
benchmarks based on the logical framework/Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS) related to outcomes and results vis-à-vis beneficiaries. Indicators
will be disaggregated by gender and socio-economic status to the extent possible
to allow for a proper assessment of whether the target beneficiaries are being
reached.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. An assessment of the financial management system was carried out to verify

compliance with IFAD’s requirements in terms of fiduciary risk. This risk,
considered high due to the remote location and weak capacity at the decentralized
level, is deemed mitigated to “medium’’ by a set of measures. These include
recruitment of qualified financial staff under performance-based contracts;
quarterly financial reporting; issuance of payments to implementing partners based
on certified statements of expenditure subject to internal and external audit; and
regular joint monitoring of ETI-GB accounts by the PCU, IFAD, the Government of
Gilgit-Baltistan, each within the context of its remit.

22. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and for coordinating and
consolidating all financial reports from implementing partners. The PCU will
maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and
internationally accepted accounting standards.

23. The annual external audit of expenditures will be carried out by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan, whose role includes the audit of all public resources. These
audit reports will be made available within six months of the close of financial year,
in line with IFAD’s guidelines.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

24. Internal audit services will be provided by a specialized private firm in the first two
years of implementation, with reports made available to the PCU, IFAD and the
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan.

25. Budgeting. AWPBs will be prepared by the PCU in collaboration with the
implementing agencies, for the approval of the programme steering committee and
IFAD.

26. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened in the State Bank of Pakistan
for receipt of loan proceeds, with a sub-account in Pakistani rupees. A PCU-
operated programme account will receive funds from the sub-account in order to
meet the PCU’s procurement and implementation obligations. Each of the PCUs and
partner agencies will open dedicated sub-accounts for the receipt of funds against
agreed AWPBs, periodic expenditure statements and expenditure returns. All fund-
flows will be based on the imprest account modality.

27. Procurement. The PCU will be responsible and accountable for procurement of
goods, works and consultancy services, which will be carried out in accordance with
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook (2010). Procurement
will follow procurement plans approved by IFAD. Specific procurement methods,
prior review arrangements, estimated costs and time frames, and risk mitigation
measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower and reflected in the
procurement plan. The programme implementation manual will detail procurement
procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
28. Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, in collaboration with the

Government and the cofinanciers. The supervision plan will include two supervision
missions annually in the first two years. Additional implementation support
missions will be organized by the IFAD country office as needed. Supervision and
implementation support will encompass: (i) fiduciary compliance with attention to
legal conditions, financial management, disbursement, procurement and
contracting; (ii) implementation performance, progress towards objectives,
investments and outputs, governance and management, targeting and gender
mainstreaming; and (iii) implementation support to provide guidance and
assistance. Implementation support will incorporate a country programme
perspective by introducing a broad view of development investments, influencing
policy and practices based on operational experiences, developing systems and
institutions for poverty reduction, facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships,
and generating lessons and best practices.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Costs
29. The total cost of the initiative, including price contingencies (16 per cent) and

physical contingencies (3 per cent), is estimated at US$120 million. The foreign
exchange component is estimated at US$8 million.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Component cost summary

B. Financing
30. Total costs are estimated at US$120 million. Of this, the Government will

contribute US$24 million (20 per cent) to finance taxes, salaries, operating costs
and certain other expenditures. IFAD will provide highly concessional financing
equivalent to US$67 million and the beneficiaries an estimated US$7 million.
Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing the initiative.
Negotiations are currently ongoing to fund the remaining financing gap of US$23
million.
Table 2
Costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiary
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Investment cost
1. Civil works 35.03 50.7 13.29 19.2 6.54 9.5 14.26 20.6 69.12
2. Equipment and materials 0.38 60.0 0.14 23.0 - - 0.11 17.0 0.63
3. Trainings 3.67 50.9 1.39 19.2 - - 2.16 29.9 7.22
4. Vehicles 0.25 32.5 0.09 12.0 - - 0.42 55.5 0.76
5. Grants and subsidies 16.28 81.0 3.82 19.0 - - - - 20.10
6. Consultancy 0.19 52.0 0.08 23.0 - - 0.09 25.0 0.36
7. Technical assistance 0.95 51.0 0.35 19.0 - - 0.56 30.0 1.87

Total investment cost 56.76 19.17 6.54 17.60 100.06
Recurrent cost
8. Salaries and allowances 6.51 51.0 2.43 19.0 - - 3.83 30.0 12.77
9. Operating costs 3.73 51.0 1.39 19.0 - - 2.19 30.0 7.32

Total recurrent cost 10.25 3.82 - 6.03 20.09
Total 67.00 55.8 22.98 19.1 6.54 5.4 23.63 19.7 120.15

31. Retroactive financing. An exception to the IFAD General Conditions is foreseen
to allow retroactive financing of eligible expenditures for certain activities before
the financing agreement enters into force. Such expenses will be reimbursable by
IFAD when the financing becomes disbursable. The exact activities and amounts to
be considered eligible for retroactive financing include limited operating costs; the

(Pak Rs '000) (US$ Million)
% % Total % % Total

Foreign Base Foreign Base
Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

A. Productive Infrastructure
1. Irrigation & Land Development 4 112 473 434 811 4 547 284 10 44 40.12 4.24 44.36 10 44
2. Farm to Market Roads 1 576 450 174 506 1 750 956 10 17 15.38 1.70 17.08 10 17

Subtotal Productive Infrastructure 5 688 923 609 317 6 298 241 10 61 55.50 5.94 61.45 10 61
B. Value Chain Development

1. Vaue Chain Fund 1 986 966 92 570 2 079 535 4 20 19.39 0.90 20.29 4 20
2. Social Mobilization 398 893 12 337 411 230 3 4 3.89 0.12 4.01 3 4
3. Agri Extension 210 673 7 580 218 253 3 2 2.06 0.07 2.13 3 2
4. Agri Research 262 382 13 415 275 797 5 3 2.56 0.13 2.69 5 3
5. Land Titling & Record system 214 861 3 208 218 069 1 2 2.10 0.03 2.13 1 2

Subtotal Value Chain Development 3 073 774 129 110 3 202 884 4 31 29.99 1.26 31.25 4 31
C. Programme Coordination Unit 830 692 22 733 853 425 3 8 8.10 0.22 8.33 3 8
Total BASELINE COSTS 9 593 389 761 161 10 354 550 7 100 93.59 7.43 101.02 7 100

Physical Contingencies 297 229 30 028 327 256 9 3 2.90 0.29 3.19 9 3
Price Contingencies 2 118 263 56 082 2 174 346 3 21 15.74 0.20 15.94 1 16

Total PROJECT COSTS 12 008 881 847 271 12 856 152 7 124 112.23 7.92 120.15 7 119



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost of the recruitment process and key equipment; the cost of installing
accounting software and preparing a finance manual; and the costs of carrying out
baseline surveys and recruiting a service provider for social mobilization. The
amount of retroactive financing will be determined during negotiations and will not
exceed US$500,000. The Government of Pakistan agrees to make provision for this
financing initially and will be reimbursed for all eligible expenditures from IFAD
financing. The effective date for the retroactive financing will be the date of the
Executive Board’s approval of the financing.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. About 100,000 smallholder households, landless households with unemployed

youth, and women-headed households will benefit directly from the ETI-GB
interventions. Another 10,000 smallholders, daily wage workers, artisans, masons,
etc. will also derive direct and indirect benefits from the interventions. Around 100
people involved in processing, adding value and providing other services along the
value chain will also benefit. The main benefits will be derived from:

(a) An additional 50,000 acres of newly irrigated land, increasing the local
irrigated area by around 30 per cent;

(b) The upgrading of 400 km of roads, which will reduce transportation costs and
enable farmers to transport bigger quantities of better quality;

(c) The injection of about US$25 million into the rural economy through labour
payments for irrigation development, of which about US$23 million will be
recovered and reinvested in the same villages for socio-economic
development, in addition to employment generated in upgrading roads and
food processing;

(d) The provision of a range of capacity-building, local processing, storage and
value addition facilities in support of 220 village producers’ associations;

(e) Sustainable, market-oriented improvements in potato seeds and fruit plant
production, processing and marketing systems;

(f) Strengthening of agriculture extension and agriculture research, and
capacity-building of the Water Management Directorate, Public Works
Department for better service delivery, commensurate with the status of a
provincial agency; and

(g) Policy formulation and reform in critical areas of water management, road
O&M, and land records and titling to ensure improved service delivery, better
governance and sustainability.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability will be promoted by engaging community-based groups and

organizations in all activities; upgrading existing systems, practices and structures
already present in the region; achieving scale efficiencies; and investing in
improving access and reducing the high transaction costs prevailing in this remote
region; and generating a commercial basis for future revenue generation by local
governments. Complementary features aimed at strengthening prospects for
sustainability include: (i) emphasizing creation of independent commercial win-win
relationships between the producers and private-sector buyers; (ii) developing
private local processing and value addition industry to create alternative avenues
for marketing of products; and (iii) strengthening the enabling environment
through support to development of local policy and regulatory systems.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Security is a key area of concern for IFAD’s country programme in Pakistan. By

providing an inclusive and expansive development initiative that benefits rural
communities across the region, the ETI-GB is expected to mitigate possible ethnic,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

religious or tribal tensions. Moreover, as the target area is of strategic importance
for the Pakistan-China economic corridor and for the national water and power
supply, both the federal Government and the provincial government of Gilgit-
Baltistan are placing significant emphasis on ensuring adequate security personnel
to maintain law and order in the area.

35. As this will be the largest development initiative to date in Gilgit-Baltistan, the
capacity of a relatively young provincial government to implement such a large-
scale intervention is another area of risk. The region has only recently been
granted provincial status, and its institutional capacities may still not be up to the
level needed to effectively implement a large development operation. The design
has therefore made provisions for capacity-building of Government services,
competitive packages for key programme staff to be recruited from the private
sector and engagement of experienced NGOs as service providers for field
implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The initiative is in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. The
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in
compliance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting, and in line with the approaches
outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme Management
Department (PMD) Operations. The initiative is consistent with the IFAD Private-
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy. Management and operation of the
proposed value chain development fund are aligned with the IFAD Rural Finance
Policy and the IFAD decision tools for rural finance. A detailed environmental
assessment has been undertaken, which determined that the intervention is
aligned with both the IFAD Climate Change Strategy and the Environment and
Natural Resource Management Policy. The assessment confirmed that the water
sources that would be tapped for irrigation are not at threat; and that the
incremental effect of additional water use is negligible. Although some scientific
projections expect overall faster glacial melt in the Himalayas, studies specific to
the Karakoram region (where this programme is located) find that glaciers are
expanding due to different climatic phenomena as compared to the western
Himalayas. The ETI-GB’s environmental classification is Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. IFAD will coordinate activities closely with other donor agencies active at present or

in the recent past in the area and will also pursue possibilities of cofinancing from
such sources as Italy, the United States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The design has already benefited from lessons learned in the past and ongoing
programmes of these agencies. IFAD is also working in partnership with WFP to
carry out hazard mapping of the target area and related communication
infrastructure. The possibilities of extending WFP’s school feeding programme and
food-for-work programme to the ETI-GB target area are being discussed with the
WFP country office.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. Attempts will be made to introduce several innovative aspects to the target area:

(a) Mutually responsible commercial relationships between the private/corporate
sector and groups of smallholder farmers that address the quality and volume
concerns of the buyers and price, market predictability and trust concerns of
the sellers;

(b) Instead of following the traditional 20 per cent community contribution
approach, the ETI-GB will sponsor construction of water schemes and land



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

development at full cost, thereby injecting about US$30 million into the local
rural economy in the shape of wages. Benefiting households will be required
to pay back 50 per cent of these costs, but over three crop seasons and into
a community account that would be used for additional infrastructure, value
chain facilities, and social development needs as per agreed village
development plans;

(c) A value chain development fund, operating on a matching grant basis,
covering the full range of products and entire region;

(d) Piloting of cost-effective water-lifting systems along main rivers with the
potential to add thousands of additional acres to agriculture production
system.

Policy engagementD.
39. Policy formulation support will be provided to the Government in relation to value

chain development and priority areas for investments. These include land
settlement and titling, irrigation water policy, road O&M policy, seed and product
certification and quality certification. The IFAD Country Office in Islamabad will
facilitate cross-fertilization between the proposed initiative and other IFAD-funded
projects in the country in these policy areas. In particular, the IFAD-funded
Livestock and Access to Markets Project in Punjab incorporates a value chain
approach that also seeks to engage with government policies, allowing IFAD to
feed bottom-up, pro-poor perspectives into national policy dialogue processes in
areas of key concern for rural poverty reduction in the country.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

41. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in an amount equivalent to forty-eight
million five hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 48,550,000),
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Convergence on Value
Chain Enhancement for Rural Growth and
Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Republic of the Philippines

Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Department of Agrarian Reform

Total project cost: US$52.53 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.8 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest
rate

Contribution of borrower: US$9.59 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$17.93 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Convergence on Value Chain
Enhancement for Rural Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE), as
contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In 2009 the population was 92.2 million and growing at 2.04 per cent annually. In

2010, gross national income per capita was US$4,002 (in 2008 dollars). Since 1981
GDP growth has averaged 3.1 per cent per annum, but only 2.3 per cent per
annum from 2001 to 2010. Over the period 2004-2010, the headline inflation rate
averaged 5.6 per cent. The Human Development Index of 0.638 in 2010 ranked
the country 97th among 169 countries, whereas in 1998 it was 0.744, which shows
that, over those 12 years, development efforts were unable to improve the human
development status. The gender development index decreased from 0.768 in 2005
to 0.742 in 2008 and the gender empowerment measure fell from 0.590 in 2005 to
0.560 in 2008. The national poverty incidence decreased slightly, from
21.1 per cent of families in 2006 to 20.9 in 2009. But with population growth, the
number of poor families rose from 3.67 million to 3.86 million in the same period,
higher than in 2003. Farmers and fishers were the poorest groups in the country,
with a poverty incidence of 44 and 50 per cent, respectively, in 2006. Nationally,
income inequality remains high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.448.

2. The failure to reduce poverty in recent years reflects underinvestment and the slow
growth of per capita incomes, high population growth and dependency rates,
natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from rising fuel and food
prices. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty, the
Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the country can still
achieve Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction targets by 2015.
Favourable factors exist that may help the country break out of its perennial
condition of widespread rural poverty, inequity and lagging human development,
including a healthy external payments situation, years of trade reform (leaving an
industrial sector fairly undistorted by subsidies and heavy protection), a stable
currency, low inflation and positive political developments.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The proposed project is consistent with the PDP 2011-2016, the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 and the IFAD country strategy for the Philippines for 2010-
2014. The rationale for IFAD’s help in financing the project is to: (i) exploit
opportunities to support the agrarian reform process and help meet the needs of
under- and unserved agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) – through a value chain
approach to enhance agricultural growth and agribusiness development – in order
to maximize benefits from the land distribution programme; (ii) support
harmonization of rural development efforts by the Departments of Agrarian Reform
(DAR), Agriculture (DA) and Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and
other agencies engaged in agribusiness development, in order to maximize impact
in rural poverty reduction; and (iii) support the DAR approach of clustering
agrarian reform communities to realize economies of scale for production, access to



EB 2015/115/R.13

2

markets and service provision in order to benefit from value chain development.
The project will contribute to the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable
agriculture and fisheries sector through improved food security and increased rural
incomes, and it supports the national Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme.

4. The project is part of the National Convergence Initiative (NCI), which seeks to
synchronize the initiatives of the three departments engaged in rural development
– DAR, DA and DENR – and optimize use of the resources available to support
sustainable rural development. Linkages will be built with the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) under the Rural Microenterprise Promotion Programme, with
the DA under the Second Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management
Project and with the DENR under the Integrated Natural Resources and
Environmental Management Project approved by the Executive Board in December
2012. Lessons learned in ongoing and previous projects have been incorporated
into the design.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target Regions IX, X and Caraga, located in the west, north and

north-east of Mindanao, which are the three poorest regions of the country,
accounting for 18 per cent of those living below the national poverty line. Within
the three regions, the project will target 11 agrarian reform community (ARC)
clusters, including 93 ARCs in 48 municipalities in 10 provinces. The target group
includes ARBs, other smallholders, under- or unemployed rural youth, indigenous
peoples (IPs), women, and business development partners, including eligible
people’s organizations (POs). The total size of the target group is estimated at
144,732 agricultural households (about 773,106 people), including non-ARC
barangays (villages) and IP households. Of this total, ARBs account for 59,217
households, of which 30 per cent are headed by women. The major crops
cultivated include coconut, rice, maize, rubber, banana, high-value vegetables, oil
palm, coffee and cassava. Some 29 per cent of ARC average incomes are below the
poverty line.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the reduction of poverty incidence

in the 10 target provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga. The project’s development
objective is to enable ARBs and other smallholder farmers in the 10 target
provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga to become highly productive and
competitive entrepreneurs and contribute to the achievement of broad-based rural
economic growth. The expected impact and outcome indicators for the
approximately 35,000 households and 100 POs (e.g. farmers’ cooperatives and
associations) in the 11 ARC clusters include: (i) average annual income increased;
(ii) increased farm income derived from new farming activities; (iii) increased
ownership of household assets; and (iv) reduced prevalence of child malnutrition.

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has the following components: (1) participatory value chain analysis

and planning; (2) integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development; (3) subdivision of collective certificates of land ownership award and
facilitation of land transfer programme; and (4) project management, monitoring
and evaluation and knowledge management.

8. Component 1: Participatory value chain analysis and planning. The expected
outcome of this component will be that value-chain business development plans for
selected crops are validated and implemented, resulting in improved farm income.
In each of the 11 ARC clusters, the component will support: (i) validation of the
proposals for value chain development as identified by the feasibility studies;
(ii) identification of the gaps and inefficiencies in the value chains and of the
solutions and investments required; (iii) identification of POs and private-sector



EB 2015/115/R.13

3

organizations wishing to and capable of participating in value chain development;
and (iv) updated ARC value chain investment plans (ARC-VIPs).

9. Component 2: Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development. The expected outcome of this component is improved production,
value addition and marketing of selected agricultural commodities. The component
has two subcomponents: (i) farm and value chain enterprise development; and
(ii) investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure.

10. Under farm and value chain enterprise development, the project will support
improvement of the quantity and quality of production at the farm level and the
phasing of production to meet market demand. It will achieve this through farmer
training, capacity-building and the provision of technical and farm management
advice in product testing, soil analysis, production technologies and management,
adaptation to threats from climate change, environmental awareness-raising and
good agricultural practices. This will involve the private sector (e.g. extension
personnel employed by buyers or consolidators) and/or public-sector agencies (e.g.
DAR development facilitators, technical staff of local government units (LGUs) and
the Agricultural Training Institute). In the area of value addition and diversification,
the project will facilitate the creation of appropriate business models and of the
institutional structures required to enable smallholders and their organizations to
engage in value addition and enterprise development, with private-sector
management of these value chains. The project aims to increase farmer share in
value chains through product differentiation and the already-mentioned value
addition and diversification. Project interventions will be implemented through the
provision of matching grants when there is a clear opportunity to improve
profitability for the target group. Other investments to enhance value addition
include the provision of assistance for product development, branding, packaging,
logistics, certification/accreditation, technology and equipment upgrading, and
organizational development through training with a focus on meeting market
requirements. The project will provide investments, on a cost-sharing basis, to
match the contributions of private-sector participants for eligible proposals and for
financing the equipment associated with post-harvest facilities.

11. In the area of market and investment facilitation, the project will develop linkages
within the value chain among input providers, producers and buyers to enhance
the profitability of farm enterprises. Assistance in consolidating supplies to meet
the volume and frequency requirements of buyers and investors is part of this
process. The assistance provided will include support for improving and/or
extending existing market information systems, trade fairs, business and investors’
forums, and assistance in negotiations with buyers and investors for leasehold,
contract growing, joint venture or marketing arrangements. The project will make
use of the expertise of agencies such as DA, DENR, DTI and the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, improve their market access and
competiveness, generate greater profits and provide a more integrated package of
services in the priority chains to be developed. The project will also assist project
beneficiaries in accessing funding from the banking and microfinance sectors using
a combination of approaches: private-sector enterprises involved in the value
chain; project matching grant funds to farmers, POs and private-sector
organizations meeting strict eligibility criteria for investments; development of the
capacity of viable farmers’ organizations to access finance from the formal banking
sector, government finance institutions and microfinance institutions; and linkages
with financial institutions to develop appropriate financing packages and products
for the value chain initiatives.



EB 2015/115/R.13

4

12. Under investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure, after participatory
planning with target ARCs and target group members, the project will invest in
rural infrastructure subprojects meeting eligibility and priorities criteria to support
value chain development. Eligible infrastructure includes farm-to-market roads,
rehabilitation/restoration of communal irrigation schemes (CISs), water-harvesting
and management, post-harvest facilities (storage, auction centres, etc.) and water
supply required to process local produce for value chain development. Irrigators’
associations and farmers’ groups/associations will operate and maintain CISs and
post-harvest facilities, while LGUs will maintain the farm-to-market roads.
Investments in additional road construction will take place only after firm funding
has been secured from participating LGUs. In addition, the capacity of LGUs to fund
and undertake maintenance of the roads will be closely monitored.

13. Component 3: Subdivision of collective certificates of landownership
award (CLOA) and facilitation of land transfer program. This component will
cover the subdivision of CLOAs and facilitation of land transfer action to stabilize
ownership and property rights in the project areas. This will provide incentive to
farmers to make their lands more productive and enable them to access credit and
engage in agribusiness projects with private investors. Target outputs and
outcomes for this component will be under the regular programme of DAR and will
be funded under the regular budget of DAR.

14. Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation and
knowledge management. The expected outcome of this component is that the
project is completed on time, within the agreed budget, and to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The output will be timely, cost-effective and transparent
management that is gender and culturally sensitive. The component will finance
the costs of project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and reporting activities at national, regional and provincial levels. It will also
finance the costs of contracted project staff based in the central project
management office (CPMO) in Mindanao, the three regional project management
offices (RPMOs) and in the 11 provincial project management offices (PPMOs),
honorariums of DAR regular staff assigned to the project, equipment, vehicles,
short-term consultants, training, preparation of project manuals, case studies and
operating costs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The key elements of the overall project approach are: (i) use of a participatory
value chain development approach to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, sustainably improve the profitability of
household farm enterprises, improve their market access and competiveness and
generate greater profits; (ii) application of convergence in implementing project
activities under the leadership of DAR to enhance the investment and opportunity
climate for agribusiness; (iii) use of the ARC clustering approach for the provision
of support to ARCs for value chain development; (iv) implementation through DAR,
at all levels, with the participation of the other agencies (e.g. DTI, DOST, LGUs and
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples [NCIP]); and (v) emphasis on
knowledge management (KM) and learning to ensure that experience and lessons
learned are available to improve project performance and for scaling up and wider
dissemination.

16. The project implementation period is six years. The implementation strategy will
include: (i) geographic targeting to identify the project areas and provide a
preliminary list of target commodities based on the 11 feasibility studies and
investment plans already prepared; (ii) selection of private sector organizations to
provide marketing and/or other services that meet the proposed eligibility criteria
during the initial participatory value chain analysis and planning phase; (iii) self-
targeting by members of the target group based on their interest in participating in



EB 2015/115/R.13

5

project activities; (iv) non-poor households will be targeted through their inclusion
in the POs or other types of organizations formed; and (v) provision of public
goods, such as improved farm to market roads, rehabilitated CISs, post-harvest
facilities, etc. Consultations were held with the NCIP, the organization charged with
supporting the integration of IPs in the mainstream. The approach to working with
IPs as a sub-group of the target group will work within the framework of the NCIP’s
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan. This approach
involves putting into practice the principle of free and prior informed
consultation/consent on all project activities by providing adequate information.

B. Organizational framework
17. DAR will be the lead agency for project implementation, in cooperation with DA,

DENR, DTI and DOST. DAR has the necessary institutional capacity and structure to
undertake this role and the experience gained from implementing over 60
externally funded projects – including two recently completed IFAD projects that
were implemented satisfactorily in Mindanao. DAR has staff at all levels of
government, down to the municipal level (municipal agrarian reform officers), and
a development facilitator assigned to each of the 11 ARCs to work with
beneficiaries. The project management structure involves a CPMO based in
Cagayan de Oro (Region X); RPMOs in each of the three regions; and PPMOs in
each of the 10 provinces (two operational divisions in Bukidnon). The oversight
structure includes a project steering committee at the national level as the
project’s policymaking body; a regional multi-stakeholders committee (RMSC) in
each of the three regions to advise regional project implementers on major policy
considerations and technical and operational issues and to ensure participation of
the region-based agencies in project implementation; and a cluster project
operations team (CPOT) in each of the 11 ARC clusters to serve as coordinating
mechanisms for delivery of government services to the clusters.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. At start-up, project staff and stakeholders at national and regional levels will
prepare a multi-year global workplan and budget for achieving project objectives
and targets, for approval by the project steering committee. Participatory planning
of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will start at the barangay and ARC
cluster levels, involving representatives of the ARCs, CPOTs and PPMOs. The
project will have a results-based M&E system to report the status of project
implementation and progress on outputs, outcomes and impact. The overall M&E
system will consist of regular reports and process monitoring by the CPMO, based
on data provided by RPMOs, PPMOs and implementing agencies, and
communicating the project’s physical progress data and financial accounts,
maintained by the CPMO and regional/provincial offices. During the first project
year (PY1), DAR will undertake a baseline survey to cover all indicators of the
logical framework, including RIMS indicators, and, subsequently, midterm impact
and completion impact surveys. M&E and KM units will be established in all
implementation levels. M&E documentation results will contribute to policy studies
to improve the business environment for smallholder farmers in the Philippines,
with a view to scaling up within the country.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management of the project will follow government systems, rules and

regulations for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the loan – to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s standard disbursement procedures. The
Bureau of the Treasury, through DAR, will maintain one designated account
exclusively for the loan. DAR, through the CPMO, will be responsible for overall
management of project funds, which includes: oversight of project operations,
procurement, internal control, accounting, review and consolidation of project
AWP/Bs, physical and financial reporting, audits; and consolidation of accounts and



EB 2015/115/R.13

6

withdrawal applications. RPMOs and PPMOs will be accountable for project funds
received for implementation of the project. DAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each of the partner implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to specify the services and support to be provided
by each agency and by the project.

20. IFAD’s review of the project implementation manual (PIM) will be a precondition of
disbursement. Guidelines in the PIM will be consistent with the Government’s and
IFAD policies, systems and procedures. Annual financial statements on project
funds will be prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting standards, such as
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), or national standards where these are
converging towards internationally recognized best practice and/or are deemed to
provide minimum disclosures.

21. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually in
accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. All project accounts will be
audited, including all sources of funding. Annual audit reports will be submitted to
IFAD within six months after the end of each fiscal year.

22. The project will follow government procurement regulations (RA 9184) using the
latest implementing rules and regulations – to the extent that they are consistent
with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance policy
to fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions.

E. Supervision
23. Annually, IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly

conduct a full supervision and implementation support mission, and a post-
supervision mission 6 to 9 months later, depending on progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
24. Project costs are estimated at about US$52.53 million over a six-year

implementation period, including taxes and duties estimated at US$5.96 million or
11 per cent of total costs. Price contingencies of 3 per cent, and physical
contingencies have been computed at 3.5 per cent of base costs on all items, both
decided by the National Economic and Development Authority.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Participatory value chain analysis and planning 0.58 63.5 0.34 36.5 - - - - 0.92 1.8
2. Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural

enterprise development

i. Farm and value chain enterprise development 11.78 35.6 1.72 5.2 2.01 6.1 17.56 53.1 33.07 63.0

ii. Value chain related rural Infrastructure 10.86 79.0 1.05 7.6 1.47 10.7 0.37 2.7 13.74 26.2

Subtotal 22.63 48.3 2.77 5.9 3.48 7.4 17.93 38.3 46.81 89.1

3. Project management, M&E and KM

1. M&E and KM 0.93 50.9 0.90 49.1 - - - - 1.83 3.5

2. Project management 0.86 29.0 2.10 71.0 - - - - 2.96 5.6

Subtotal 1.80 37.4 3.00 62.6 - - - - 4.80 9.1
Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0



EB 2015/115/R.13

7

B. Project financing
25. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$25.01 million (47.6 per cent);

(ii) contribution of the borrower for US$9.59 made of national government
counterpart funding of US$6.08 million (11.6 per cent) and LGU financing of
US$3.51 million (6.6 per cent); and (iii) contributions from proponents and
beneficiaries of about US$17.93 million (34.1 per cent). The financing plan by
expenditure category and financier is presented in table 2 below. The categories of
expenditures may be merged into broader categories in the financing agreement.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
Proponent Total

Expenditure categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.   Works 9.79 80.0 0.61 5.0 1.47 12.0 0.37 3.0 12.24 23.3

2.   Equipment and materials (for farms and
enterprise development)

8.17 30.0 0.68 2.5 1.50 5.5 16.88 62.0 27.23 51.8

3.   Equipment and materials (for value
chains)

1.87 55.0 0.34 10.0 0.51 15.0 0.68 20.0 3.40 6.5

4.   Consultancies 3.69 73.0 1.36 27.0 - - - - 5.05 9.6

5.   Training and workshops 1.32 71.7 0.52 28.3 1.85 3.5

6.   Equipment 0.17 35.0 0.32 65.0 - - - - 0.49 0.9

7.   Government support staff - - 0.80 100.0 - - - - 0.80 1.5

8.   Operation and maintenance - - 1.48 100.0 - - - - 1.48 2.8

Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. It is estimated that about 35,000 rural households will benefit directly from the

project, including 3,000 jobs to be generated by the project in the value added
subsector. Some 15,000 households, not counted elsewhere, will benefit from
improved rural roads, bringing the total to 50,000 beneficiary households. The
main incremental outputs following project investment in the target ARC clusters
will derive from the priority products selected by the feasibility studies. Likely
benefits at the farm level will stem from increased production and improved
productivity, enhanced value added at the farm level and higher prices as a result
of both quality improvements and more efficient marketing. Additional benefits will
be generated by the project’s capacity-building programme, e.g. strengthened
capacity to participate in value chain and rural enterprise development, and for
implementing agencies, capacity to target and manage poverty reduction and rural
development programmes in a gender-sensitive and participatory manner.

27. The financial and economic impact of the project has been assessed by:
(i) preparing detailed feasibility studies for the value chain investments that are
likely to be undertaken under the project; and (ii) analysing each model to
ascertain probable impact at the individual farmer level, in comparison with typical
without-project incomes. The project shows an economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 44.6 per cent and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.57 discounting benefits and
costs at 15 per cent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the results are
robust. For example, the project would still be viable if all costs increased by
20 per cent and benefits 20 per cent lower. The economic and farm budget
analyses will be updated based on market demand and value chain analysis
undertaken in the first year.

D. Sustainability
28. The following elements are built into project design to help ensure that the

proposed investments and benefits are sustainable: (i) dedication of the first year
of implementation to the analysis, identification and planning of the project’s
investments in priority value chains involving famers, their organizations and the



EB 2015/115/R.13

8

private sector; (ii) the experience and lessons learned in the implementation of the
11 feasibility studies contribute to ensuring that subsequent investments are
sustainable; (iii) the project has a strong focus on involvement of the private sector
on a long-term basis to enhance the sustainability of investments and benefits;
(iv) it will support contractual and other types of arrangements linking smallholders
with the private sector to enable them to move up the supply chain and incorporate
greater value addition; (v) beneficiaries and LGUs will be involved in providing
counterpart funds for infrastructure facilities and will be responsible for their
operation and maintenance; (vi) project design takes into account the knowledge,
systems and practices of IPs, which will also help ensure the sustainability of
project interventions in areas where IPs are present; and (vii) 18 months before
the completion date, the CPMO will work closely with all stakeholders at national,
regional, provincial and municipal levels, and with ARCs and barangays, to finalize
an exit strategy and sustainability plan based on specific mechanisms to ensure
sustainability after the end of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The first risk is that effective coordination among the three NCI agencies in the

field will be more difficult than at the national level. Project design counters this
risk as follows: (i) all agencies having a role in project implementation will be
members of the project steering committee to be able to resolve inter-agency
coordination issues; (ii) all implementing agencies will have an NCI focal point
through whom the project will interact with the NCI at the national level; (iii) the
three RMSCs will include representation of all relevant agencies to ensure effective
coordination of implementation in the regions and ARC clusters; and (iv) within
ARC clusters, CPOTs will include staff involved in day-to-day project
implementation. The second risk is the degree of willingness of the private sector
to be involved in implementation of component 2, which is essential for the success
of the project. This risk is addressed through: (i) component 1 and the
participatory analysis and planning process, which will involve all potential
participants, including representatives of private-sector agencies involved in the
particular value chains under analysis; and (ii) during the value chain analysis and
planning process, publication of the availability of grants for value chain
development to match investments from the private sector, the size of the grants
available, and the terms and conditions of the grants for diverse interventions. The
third risk is the weak capacity of poorer LGUs to provide the required counterpart
funds for rural infrastructure investment. The project counters this risk by reaching
an agreement with the Government on a financing plan for these investments
based on a financing ratio of 80 per cent for the IFAD loan, 5 per cent for national
government counterpart funds, 12 per cent on average for LGUs and 3 per cent for
beneficiary contributions.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

30. IFAD policies relevant to the project include: the IFAD Targeting Policy: Reaching
the Rural Poor; Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; Engagement with
Indigenous Peoples; IFAD Rural Enterprise Policy; IFAD’s Private-Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy; IFAD Climate Change Strategy; IFAD Rural
Finance Policy; and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities
and Operations. Project design has reflected these policies and lessons learned in
the IFAD country programme. The project is classified as Category B and employs
the following mitigation measures: value chain development is resilient to climate
change, environmentally friendly and sustainable; training includes management
and adaptation to the threats of climate change and environmental awareness;
environmentally friendly and sustainable production systems will be promoted (e.g.
use of the farming systems approach, good agricultural practices and varieties that
can tolerate climate variability); and DENR and its local offices will be involved to
ensure that value chain development is in line with good practices for



EB 2015/115/R.13

9

environmental and natural resource management.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
31. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and

sustainable agriculture and fisheries sector. The project will complement other
donors working in the same sector – such as the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency and World Bank – to increase project impact in
poverty reduction and on policy dialogue with the government and other
stakeholders. IFAD will also work with government programmes for an improved
policy environment and governance. The project will explore diverse types of
partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries and the private sector,
ensuring that such arrangements are fair to farmers and ARC communities.
Private-sector organizations and business development partners can take a leading
role as innovators in improving the returns from existing and emerging value
chains in an enterprise-oriented development approach.

Innovations and scaling upC.
32. The project will be the first foreign-assisted project under DAR to support the NCI.

Its investment is quite small when compared with the growth needed to make a
serious dent in rural poverty in Mindanao. However, the project could catalyse
improved household incomes and attract further investment for scaling up – in
order to fully realize the potential benefits of Mindanao’s comparative advantage in
key agricultural commodities.

Policy engagementD.
33. The project will finance policy/case studies – for policy dialogue and consultation

with relevant national and local institutions and with other stakeholders – on
planning and implementation of the value chain approach to agro-enterprise
development, mechanisms for convergence and other relevant studies. The studies
envisaged could include: (i) consolidation of smallholder production to achieve
economies of scale in production and marketing, appropriate business models, and
contractual and legal arrangements; and (ii) innovative engagement of the private
sector in providing rural infrastructure to support value chain development.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

35. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million
eight hundred thousand euros (EUR 22,800,000), equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Paraguay for the Project for
Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Republic of Paraguay

Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$23.83 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.80 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.37 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.09 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.36 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for the Project for Improved Family and
Indigenous Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay, as contained in
paragraph 30.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for
the Project for Improved Family and Indigenous
Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. With a GDP per capita in 2013 of US$4,040, Paraguay has achieved an average

annual growth of 4.8 per cent in the past 10 years, albeit with wide variations
linked to climatic influence on the performance of the agriculture and livestock
sectors. Of the total population of 6.8 million people, 23.8 per cent are poor
according to the Continuous Household Survey conducted in 2012. Some 2.7 million
people live in rural areas, of whom 1.4 million are poor or extremely poor. Poor
producers are being displaced from their lands by the advance of export-based
farming, especially of soybeans. About two thirds of Paraguay’s 235,904
smallholder families are poor. Women stand out as particularly disadvantaged: out
of every 100 households in extreme poverty, 34 are headed by women. The
country has an indigenous population of 115,000, and over 90 per cent of these
people live in poverty.

2. The environmental situation is critical and exacerbated by the development model
followed by the country for decades, which is based on the extractive exploitation of
hardwoods coupled with deforestation to support the expansion of the agricultural
frontier on fragile soils and ecosystems. The projections of climate change models
predict higher temperatures and rainfall, which will increase the presence of disease
vectors and reduce the availability of water in the dry months, along with the
productivity of plants and animals.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)

3. The Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production in Departments of
Eastern Paraguay (PROMAFI) is aligned with national policies and responds to
IFAD's strategic framework for Paraguay as defined in the 2004 COSOP. It is
complementary to the ongoing Inclusion of Family Farming in Value Chains Project
(Paraguay Inclusivo), which is financed by IFAD and the Government.

4. The project is also consistent with current government policy, which prioritizes the
fight against rural poverty. As a consequence, the Government requested that the
project design reflect the strategic objectives of the current COSOP, to be followed
by the preparation of a results-based COSOP in 2015. The proposed project is
aligned with the poverty reduction and social development pillar of the National
Development Plan and the objectives of the Strategic Agricultural Framework,
2009-2018, which supports the development of family farming, food security and
the substantial reduction of poverty and social exclusion. It also complements the
Government’s "Sowing Opportunities" programme aimed at reducing extreme
poverty. This programme coordinates all ministerial and institutional interventions



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

2

through the Technical Planning Secretariat, and includes the Tekoporã programme,
which offers conditional cash transfers to families in extreme poverty.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area includes four departments in the northeast of the country. In each

department, priority will be given to districts with high poverty rates.

6. The project focuses on family farmers and indigenous communities. A high level of
participation by women and young people will be achieved through a positive bias
in the financing conditions. Environmental factors will be taken into account, and
specific measures will be introduced to increase producers’ responses to climate
change. The project will work exclusively with families that belong to rural
organizations (ROs), encompassing both existing productive organizations and
incipient committees of family farmers and indigenous communities.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s purpose is to contribute to the sustainable reduction of poverty among

the vulnerable rural population. Its development objective is to increase incomes
sustainably through strengthened social capital, productivity and adaptation to
climate change. The specific objectives are to: (i) consolidate organizations of small
producers; (ii) facilitate the use of productive assets by ROs to increase their
production and marketing sustainably and in a way that is adapted to climate
change; and (iii) provide ROs with access to appropriate financial services.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The project has four components:

 Component 1: Organizational strengthening. Starting with committees at
a relatively low level of organization, the grass-roots organizations will be
strengthened to enable them to identify and undertake business activities.
The methodology will involve identification of rural representatives chosen by
the organizations’ members from among their membership, who will be
trained to lead the participatory process of strengthening ROs. Participatory
rural appraisals will culminate in plans aimed at increasing the ROs’ capacity
for participation, organization, management and administration, production,
commerce and finance, and for identifying investment opportunities in
business plans. For the indigenous communities, a similar process will result
in the participatory development of indigenous community diagnostics, which
will serve as a foundation for the strengthening process and for investment
planning activities in community development plans.

This component includes services for climate change adaptation, including a
plan to complement the national network of weather stations with 20
additional stations in the project area, a climate information service to be
accessed by text messages, training of technicians, and support for preparing
the sector policy and strategy for climate change adaptation.

 Component 2: Sustainable productive development. This component
provides cash transfers and support services for investments at the level of
ROs through regular business plans, business plans with climate change
adaptation activities, and community development plans for indigenous
communities. The business plans will include productive investments,
technical assistance and activities to strengthen the ROs. The community
development plans will cover productive investments, social investments and
strengthening of indigenous communities. Advisory services will be provided
in order to integrate climate change adaptation activities into business plans,
especially for the production of vegetables and milk. In addition, ROs will



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

3

receive technical support from the project implementation unit to ensure that
the business plans meet market demand for public procurement programmes.

In addition, a production and marketing information service will be
established, delivering text messages and audio recordings provided by
various government units through a strategic partnership with a mobile
network operator.

 Component 3: Rural financial services. This component aims to
strengthen the capacity of ROs to finance their working capital needs through
credit from intermediary financial institutions. To this end, a guarantee trust
will be established to provide guarantee certificates to ROs with approved
business plans.

The project will contribute to the National Financial Inclusion Strategy
promoted by the Central Bank, through training-of-trainers courses in rural
financial education. The course topics will include financial literacy and
consumer protection for borrowers.

 Component 4: Project management. For efficient project management, a
project implementation unit will be established with headquarters in the field,
possibly in the city of San Estanislao. This office will have a project manager
responsible for overall implementation and a technical field coordinator
responsible for managing the field staff and for liaising with the target group
and local authorities in implementing project activities and instruments.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will expand, deepen and replicate activities that were successfully
implemented under the Paraguay Rural Project (PPR), in view of high demand. The
participatory methodology applied by that project marked a substantive change in
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock’s approach to rural development, and has
generated strong social capital through participatory assessments, institutional
strengthening plans and business plans that transfer authority for planning and
implementation to the ROs.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The executing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock through the

National Directorate for Project Coordination and Management (DINCAP), which will
constitute the project implementation unit. DINCAP will be responsible for project
implementation including planning, procurement and accounting. Since most of the
project activities are integrated into plans managed by ROs, supporting ROs in
planning, implementation and accounting for funds will be an important
responsibility of the project implementation unit.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

11. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), learning and knowledge
management system is based on experiences and lessons learned from the PPR,
especially in connection with applying participatory processes and assessing the
maturity of ROs and the use of participatory, community-owned dynamic maps as
graphical diagnostic tools for determining the baseline situation of ROs and families.
The system will promote results-based management in order to provide a coherent
framework for strategic planning and project management.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
12. Financial management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the

project implementation unit, will be responsible for the financial management of all
project resources, including the flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

4

accounting, financial reporting and audit. The project will implement an accounting
system acceptable to the Fund as a condition of disbursement from the loan and
grant accounts. The mechanism of start-up costs may be used for early project
expenditures, including to set up the accounting system.

13. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Finance will open two designated accounts in United
States dollars at the Central Bank of Paraguay exclusively for the loan and grant. In
addition, operating accounts (project accounts) in local currency will be opened at
the Banco Nacional de Fomento or other banks acceptable to the Fund.

14. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out by the
project implementation unit on the basis of national standards and in accordance
with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procurement in the context of strengthening
plans, business plans and community development plans will be managed by the
ROs in line with the project implementation manual.

15. Audit. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by
private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All project accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding. The
scope of the audit will include visits to the ROs and review of the guarantee fund.
Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of
each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
16. IFAD will be in charge of project supervision. The initial supervision tasks include

support for the rapid start-up of PROMAFI and setting up the accounting, planning
and M&E systems.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
17. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$23.8 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$4.6 million relates to the organizational strengthening
component; US$14.6 million to sustainable productive development; US$1.5 million
to improving rural financial services; and US$3.1 million to project management.
Management costs make up 13 per cent of the project cost. Costs include 3 per
cent for contingencies in respect of local price escalation for vehicles, goods,
services and operating expenses, and 2 per cent for physical contingencies in
respect of vehicles, goods and services.

B. Project financing
18. The project will be financed by IFAD through a loan of approximately

US$17.4 million and an Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant of US$5.09 million. The beneficiaries will contribute US$1.4 million (in kind).
In line with World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank funding operations
in the country, where applicable, IFAD’s resources will be used to finance taxes.
The financing plans by component and category of expenditure are presented in
tables 1 and 2 below (some of the categories of expenditures may be grouped in
the financing agreement).



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

5

Table 1
Financing plan by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Organizational
strengthening 3 500 76 1 094 24 - - 4 594 19

2. Sustainable productive
development 9 569 65 3 705 25 1 361 9 14 634 61

3. Rural financial services 1 418 94 98 6 - - 1 515 6
4. Project management 2 888 94 197 6 - - 3 085 13

Total project costs 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

Table 2
Financing plan by category of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles 72 100 - - - - 72 0
2. Goods, services and inputs 2 809 49 1 553 27 1 361 24 5 723 24
3. Grants and subsidies 8 121 77 2 463 23 - - 10 584 44
4. Credit and guarantee funds 3 654 77 1 077 23 - - 4 731 20
5. Administration 2 718 100 - - - - 2 718 11

Total 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
19. The project will reach approximately 14,000 rural households (around 60,000

people), organized in approximately 303 productive organizations and
33 indigenous communities. It is estimated that 80 per cent of project activities will
generate the expected benefits, which is equivalent to a portfolio of 195 successful
business plans and 26 community development plans.

20. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the viability of the family-based
project-level activities. The economic internal rate of return is 16.5 per cent.

D. Sustainability
21. PROMAFI is sustainable from a variety of perspectives: (i) institutionally, since it

responds to the framework of a specific national policy and an explicit decision by
the Government of Paraguay to replicate and extend the experiences of the PPR
and strengthen beneficiaries’ organizations; (ii) from a productive and market point
of view, given the guaranteed steady demand for food and in light of the policy
support to family farming as a positive prospect for the sustainability of productive
investments and markets; (iii) socially, by facilitating the access of rural poor
people, indigenous communities, women and youth to public goods and services;
(iv) financially, by creating sustainable rural finance services; and
(v) environmentally, by implementing environmental standards and
recommendations based on the rational use and conservation of natural resources.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
22. The risks of failing to achieve the stated objectives are limited both in quantity and

in potential adverse impacts. The main risks are: (i) difficulties in ensuring inclusion
of poor people, indigenous populations or producers, to be minimized by the
territorial targeting of beneficiaries in segments and ongoing evaluation of results;
(ii) slow pace of territorial coverage due to operational and management difficulties,
to be mitigated by the early hiring of technical support teams and provision of
training; (iii) slow rate of project implementation linked to the time required for



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

6

ROs to mature and implement business plans, to be addressed by timely annual
planning to ensure achievement of targets without distorting results; (iv) market
risks, to be addressed by affording special attention to marketing and supporting
linkages with public procurement; and (v) climate risks that may affect volume and
quality of production, to be attenuated by supporting climate-smart technology and
disseminating appropriate farming practices and meteorological information.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

23. The project approach and implementation modalities are fully consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. Specifically, they support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, climate change, environment and natural resource
management, gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting. The
project is also fully compliant with the ASAP objectives.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
24. The project is in line with the Government's plans and the objectives of the

Strategic Agricultural Framework 2009-2018. It is also consistent with the
Government’s policy of financing transfers to communities with a 30 per cent credit
element.

Innovations and scaling upC.
25. PROMAFI is based on a broadening and replication of PPR activities in view of high

demand. The PPR has shown that, when appropriately supported, ROs can improve
their production and marketing, and achieve business continuity. The participatory
methodology that allowed the PPR to generate strong social capital will be improved
and scaled up. Project innovations include: scaling up the group-based credit
guarantee mechanism to a national system of credit guarantees; a mobile phone-
based production and marketing information service, which has the potential to
enhance the provision of extension services; and the creation of a system for
assessing the institutional maturity of productive and indigenous organizations,
which will facilitate the design of suitable capacity-building activities for
organizations.

Policy engagementD.
26. The project capitalizes on the successful experiences of the PPR, and is in line with

government and IFAD policies. It supports the Government’s policy of reducing
conditional cash transfers by including a credit element for financing investments,
and the strategic uptake of information technology for agricultural extension
services. In addition, in collaboration with the Central Bank of Paraguay, the project
backs the country’s financial inclusion policy by supporting rural financial education.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
27. A financing agreement between the Republic of Paraguay and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached herewith as an appendix.

28. The Republic of Paraguay is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
Trust Fund, acting through IFAD in its capacity of Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

29. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

7

VII. Recommendation
30. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Paraguay for an amount of fifteen million eight hundred thousand
euros (EUR 15,800,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of
Paraguay for an amount of three million six hundred and fifty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,650,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's Report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal
Resources and Livelihood Project (FishCORAL)


Republic of the Philippines

Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources,
Department of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$43.05 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 27.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$29.96 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.33 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.12

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal Resources and
Livelihood Project (FishCORAL), as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Philippines is a middle-income country, and in 2013 the GDP reached an annual

growth rate of 7.2 per cent. However, the recent increase in GDP has not translated
into a reduction of the incidence of poverty, indeed there has been little change
from 2009 to 2012; 22.9 per cent (2009) and 22.3 per cent (2012) of families in
those two years were living below the poverty line. The failure to reduce poverty
during the previous decade reflects underinvestment, slow growth of per capita
incomes, a high population growth rate, high dependency rates, inequitable
distribution of income, natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from
rising fuel and food prices. Nationally, income inequality remains high, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.44. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of
poverty, the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the
country could still achieve the Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction
targets by 2015. In 2011, the Human Development Index for the Philippines was
0.644, ranking 112th among 187 countries. The country’s Gender Inequality Index
improved to 0.427 in 2011, ranking 75th in the world.

2. Fishers were among the poorest groups in the country, with a poverty incidence of
41.4 per cent in 2009, higher than the 35 per cent in 2003. Municipal fishers1 and
their families remained poor due to: (i) low coastal productivity owing to habitat
and watershed degradation; (ii) fish stock depletion due to illegal fishing practices,
pollution and overfishing; (iii) lack of access to basic services and institutional
support; (iv) high population density in coastal areas; (v) poor post-harvest
handling and distribution systems; (vi) lack of alternative income-generating
activities; and (vii) weak political will on the part of local leaders to enact and/or
enforce fishery laws.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The rationale for investing in the fisheries sector is that: (i) fishers, especially
municipal fishers, are among the poorest groups in the country; and (ii) the
fisheries sector is very important to the fishing communities as it is the source of
their livelihoods and a major source of dietary protein for the population as a
whole, and the main source of foreign exchange earnings for the national economy.
The project includes investments and activities to address the key issues that have
impoverished many fishing communities, such as coastal habitat degradation, use
of illegal fishing practices, overfishing, lack of enforcement of fishery ordinances,
pollution and a lack of viable livelihood activities alternative to fish capture. It will
adopt the ecosystem approach to fisheries and coastal resource management, and
a bay-wide approach to enabling the municipalities and fishing communities to

1 Those who fish within 15 km of the shoreline, 12 km in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



EB 2015/115/R.12

2

improve the productivity and sustainable management of their fishery and coastal
resources. The project will link the livelihood enterprises it supports to the market
economy to help ensure their sustainability. It will assist the Bureau of Fisheries
and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in improving its institutional capacity to support the
fisheries and coastal resources sector. The project is in line with the priorities
defined in the PDP 2011-2016 for the fisheries sector in the areas of inclusive
growth, poverty reduction, improving the economic status of poor coastal
communities, building the capacity of communities and local administrations to
better manage their coastal resources, improving the productivity of inshore
waters, exploring the export potential of fisheries, improving food security and
nutrition, and overall GDP growth. It also contributes to attainment of the goals and
targets of existing sectoral plans, such as the Agrikulturang Pilipino (AgriPinoy), the
Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Programme (AFMP) and the Fisheries Road
Map. Investment in livelihood development supports the Agribusiness Road Maps
for the fisheries sector and the regional development plans.

4. The project is complementary to and supportive of the Government’s
Reconstruction Assistance to Haiyan and the Department of Agriculture’s
rehabilitation plan for the agriculture sector. These initiatives will help rebuild
fishing communities and rehabilitate coastal resources affected by Typhoon Haiyan
in the Eastern Visayas Region, through rehabilitation of the coastal and fishery
resources and recovery of the livelihoods of fishing communities – contributing to
increasing community resilience to natural disaster and climate change risks. The
project is consistent with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2010-2016 in: (i) improving fisheries and
coastal resource management and the livelihoods of poor coastal communities; and
(ii) managing natural resources within the context of climate change, gender
mainstreaming, policy dialogue and support for decentralization.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target 11 bays/gulfs from Regions 5, 8 and 13 in Luzon and

Visayas, and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The targeted
bays are located in 14 provinces, with 103 municipalities or cities bordering the
bays/gulfs and 1,098 coastal villages/barangays. Approximately 724,000 poor
people or 188,000 households live in these coastal villages, of which 90,596 are
fishing households with an estimated 38,050 of them living below the poverty line,
including households headed by women and/or out-of-school youth. The main
criteria for selection of project beneficiaries will be based on the socio-economic
conditions of fishing households, using up-to-date lists of poor households from the
Department of Social Welfare and Development. The project will identify potential
beneficiaries by targeting existing, eligible registered people’s organizations (POs)
and their fishing community members. Members of the target group will include
memberships of the POs, either self-selected or based on their interest in the
proposed livelihood enterprise(s) or through participatory wealth ranking. The
project will also establish new POs in response to demand from the target group.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reduction of poverty in the target

coastal communities of the targeted bays/ecosystems by 5 per cent from the mean
poverty incidence of 42 per cent. The development objective is to realize (a) annual
income of participating fishing community households increase by 10 per cent from
baseline; and (b) employment of women engaged in income generating activities
increased to 40 per cent from the baseline of 20 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.12

3

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has three components: (i) coastal resource management; (ii) livelihood

development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The expected
outcomes for components 1 and 2 are: component 1: fishing communities adopt
sustainable management of fishery and coastal resources that increase overall
stocks; and component 2: fishing households in the target coastal communities
constantly engaged in diversified sources of income.

8. Component 1 will:

(a) Assess governance and legislation by the bay management councils (BMCs),
and facilitation of the formation, reactivation and management of the
operations of the BMCs, including the adoption of bay-wide fisheries
ordinances. The project will encourage the creation of integrated fisheries and
aquatic resource management councils (IFARMCs) where no such organization
exists, and will support their operation and that of the existing IFARMCs,
including capacity-building. It will also facilitate the participation of local
fishing communities in the management of municipal fisheries and coastal
resources, together with local government units (LGUs), by incorporating pre-
existing fisheries management systems. It will assist LGUs in introducing
and/or completing registration of municipal fishers, their motorized and non-
motorized fishing vessels and gear and the introduction of a municipal
licensing system for fishers, fishing vessels and gear, as well as collection of
associated licensing revenues and their use to support enforcement of
fisheries ordinances.

(b) Help control overfishing caused by illegal fishing and high population density
along the coastline and will support law enforcement and regulatory activities
of LGUs to manage fishing efforts and provide alternative marine and land-
based livelihood opportunities to contribute to a reduction in overfishing. It
will address the lack of landing, catch and effort statistics by having fishing
households record data to enable BFAR to propose policy measures to
appropriately address overfishing based on reliable and timely information.
The project will support a review of existing relevant legislation, including
municipal fishery ordinances, in consideration of the proposed changes in the
Fisheries Code.

(c) Reinforce fishery law enforcement teams (FLET) at village or community and
LGU levels. BFAR will organize and strengthen law enforcement teams
composed of coast guard and police personnel to apprehend violators. The
project will assess the types and social and economic characteristics of illegal
fishing, propose ways to address this complex issue, and provide equipment
and training as required. The project will assist LGUs in improving
coordination functions with BFAR and other relevant agencies; the fisheries
database and reporting system; and revenue generation from registration
fees, fines, and fees for resource use, etc. These steps will help institutionalize
the arrangements for funding law enforcement activities and fisheries coastal
resources management.

(d) Update coastal resource management plans through a participatory process
involving local communities, people’s and private-sector organizations and
local governments. They will become coastal resource management and
investment plans and will be part of a comprehensive land and water use plan
and of the municipal development plans of LGUs. All subprojects proposed for
financing and included in the municipal development plans will reflect the
need to address the expected impacts of climate change and to reduce the
risks of natural disasters. Assistance will be provided to help LGUs settle
disputes on municipal boundaries to establish clear municipal waters
delineation.



EB 2015/115/R.12

4

(e) Manage mangroves, sea grasses, coral reefs and beaches using an ecosystem
approach. New and existing fish sanctuaries and other types of protected
areas will be established and managed. The project will help protect, enhance
and rehabilitate resources, e.g. stock enhancement in protected areas using
juvenile and adult fish from hatcheries.

(f) Support coastal resource management – the project will finance the
infrastructure and equipment required, including delineation markers for
identified fish sanctuaries within targeted bays. LGUs will be fully responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment
provided by the project – during and after the implementation period – with
the support of IFARMCs.

9. Component 2 will:

(a) Support/reactivate suitable existing POs and form new groups/POs as needed,
giving particular attention to the participation of women. Key elements of the
training modules will be group organization and management, basic
entrepreneurship, business management, value chain concepts and
approaches, coastal resource management and gender mainstreaming.

(b) Promote environmentally friendly livelihood enterprises identified in the
approved coastal resource management plans, for example fisheries-related
enterprises, sustainable tourism and other appropriate enterprises. There will
be no project support for increasing fishing activities or for provision of fishing
gear. Mitigation measures for identified feasible livelihood enterprises will be
put in place to prevent further environmental degradation, waste generation
and overexploitation of resources. Project-financed inputs for livelihood
enterprises will be provided as a package, combined with the provision of
training for the members of POs, including both technical skills and the
business development aspects of operating livelihood enterprises. Subsequent
cycles will be financed from the income earned, while successful enterprises
can access microfinance institutions or NGO sources to finance future
expansion.

(c) Finance the following: infrastructure facilities to support seaweed production;
access improvements, connecting coastal communities to the nearest all-
weather road for transport of marine products; improvements of selected
BFAR hatcheries; and, where needed and justified, construction of fish-landing
facilities; provision of mini ice plants with cold-storage facilities, smoke
houses, store houses and dryers. It will also assist in the identification of
potential private investors and the preparation of feasibility studies. POs will
be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
and equipment provided by the project – during and after the implementation
period.

10. Component 3 will assist BFAR in implementing its reorganization plan in the four
regions and will finance the project management and coordination structures and
associated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms at national, regional, bay-
wide and city/municipality levels.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The key elements of the project’s implementation approach include: (i) use of the

ecosystem approach for fisheries management; (ii) financing of activities identified
by coastal communities and municipal/city authorities and included in the LGU
development/investment plans; (iii) implementation arrangements that will follow
the Government’s procedures and mandate at all levels and will operate within the
government framework for decentralization and as part of the National



EB 2015/115/R.12

5

Convergence Initiative; and (iv) consultation with the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples, if indigenous peoples (IPs) are found to live in any of the
target coastal communities – following the approach and procedures for engaging
IPs in development. The phasing of project implementation will be based on the
readiness of POs, LGUs, BMCs and regional agencies. The livelihood development
subprojects will be aligned with the priority commodities identified by the BFAR
Regional Roadmaps to ensure their suitability for the target locations and thus
contribute to their sustainability.

B. Organizational framework
12. BFAR will be the project’s lead implementing agency, with full responsibility for

project administration and management, and will use its existing structures at
national, regional, and provincial levels to implement project activities. The
municipalities and cities are responsible for managing municipal waters and coastal
zones. A high-level inter-agency project steering committee (PSC) at the national
level will provide policy guidance; approve project implementation guidelines,
annual workplan and budgets (AWP/Bs) and procurement plans; and resolve
implementation issues that cannot be decided at the regional level. A regional
coordination and steering committee (RCSC) will serve as the policy and
institutional advisory committee for project implementation at that level, and will
facilitate effective and efficient delivery of various agencies’ services in support of
the project. A bay coordination and support committee will coordinate project
activities within each bay. A project support and coordination office (PSCO) at BFAR
central office will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and monitoring project
implementation, coordinating within BFAR and with government oversight agencies,
LGUs, project management teams at regional, municipal and bay/gulf levels, and
IFAD. Regional project management offices (RPMOs) will be established in each
target region. Municipal/city project management offices (M/CPMOs) will be based
at the municipal or city LGU in Regions 5, 8 and 13, while in ARMM a municipal
project implementing unit (MPIU) will be based at the BFAR Provincial Fisheries
Office under the leadership of the provincial fisheries officer. The project will
operate as part of the National Convergence Initiative, with assistance from other
government agencies as needed.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. AWP/Bs will be prepared through a participatory process, starting at the
community level and involving representatives of POs, the CPMO/MPMO/MPIU and
the bay/gulf alliance. RPMOs will consolidate the provincial AWP/Bs into a regional
document. PSCO will consolidate the regional AWP/Bs into a national AWP/B for
IFAD review and subsequent PSC approval.

14. Monitoring and evaluation. Project M&E will be in accordance with the
Government’s harmonized, national Results-based Performance Management
System and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). It will report
on project implementation status and progress in terms of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The RCSC and RPMO will provide regular reporting on accomplishments
regarding policy and major operational issues to regional development councils,
LGUs and other stakeholders. The project will conduct baseline and completion
impact studies. A rapid participatory resource and socio-economic assessment will
be conducted in each bay at project start-up and completion.

15. Learning and knowledge management. The project will generate and manage
knowledge in order to: improve implementation; contribute to BFAR’s body of
knowledge; aid in raising awareness of stakeholders; and enhance future policy
development and project/programme implementation. It will support innovative
approaches, document lessons learned and organize knowledge-sharing among
project staff, BFAR and other implementing agencies. It will also share knowledge



EB 2015/115/R.12

6

with other IFAD-assisted projects across the country and the region.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. BFAR, through the PSCO, will be responsible for overall

financial management of the project, including AWP/Bs, procurement, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and audit. The
project will follow the government’s financial systems, rules and regulations under
the New Government Accounting System, consistent with IFAD’s standard
disbursement procedures, for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the
IFAD loan and government counterpart funds. RPMOs will be responsible for
management of funds at the regional level. BFAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each LGU and other implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to detail responsibilities, required services and their
financing. In order to reduce fiduciary risks arising from insufficient experience and
capacity, the financial management capability of the central and regional offices of
BFAR and of LGUs will need to be strengthened through staff training and close
supervision.

17. Flow of funds. The Department of Finance, through the Bureau of the Treasury,
will open a designated account in United States dollars, in the central bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD, exclusively for the loan. Project accounts in the
Philippine peso will be opened at central and regional levels.

18. Procurement. BFAR will undertake major procurement packages in line with the
annual procurement plans through the PSCO and RPMOs supported by their
respective BAC and Finance and Administrative Services Division. Procurement will
follow the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Government Procurement
Reform Act (RA 9184) to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines. Smaller items, as defined in the procurement plans, will be
procured by regional offices.

19. Audit. Project consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the
Commission on Audit in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The
annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each
fiscal year.

20. Governance. IFAD will apply a policy of zero-tolerance in respect of fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive action.

E. Supervision
21. IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly conduct annual

supervision and implementation support missions, and IFAD will conduct a post-
supervision mission 6-9 months later, depending on the project’s progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
22. Total project costs are estimated at US$43.05 million over a five-year

implementation period, as shown in table 1. This includes taxes and duties
estimated at US$3.72 million or 8.8 per cent of total costs, which will be covered by
the Government’s contribution. Base costs were estimated at 2013 prices, with
price contingencies of 3 per cent per annum for pesos and dollars, and physical
contingencies of 3.5 per cent of base cost for all expenditures except staff costs.
Physical contingencies amount to US$1.14 million and price contingencies to
US$1.43 million, yielding total contingencies of US$2.57 million (6 per cent of total
baseline costs). The estimated average cost per target beneficiary household is
US$274 per household.



EB 2015/115/R.12

7

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Coastal resources

management 18 751.2 77.7 2 537.4 10.5 2 725.8 11.3 128.3 0.5 24 142.6 56.1
2. Livelihood

development 10 988.2 72.7 1 721.1 11.4 1 199.8 7.9 1 199.8 7.9 15 109.0 35.1
3. Project management

and coordination 216.4 5.7 1 866.1 49.2 1 710.5 45.1 - - 3 793.0 8.8
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

B. Project financing
23. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$29.96 million (69.6 per cent);

and (ii) a Government contribution of US$11.76 million (27.3 per cent), consisting
of the national government counterpart contribution of US$6.12 million
(14.2 per cent) and LGU financing of US$5.64 million (13.1 per cent); and
(iii) contributions in cash or in kind from proponents and beneficiaries of about
US$1.33 million (3.1 per cent).

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/

proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 726.8 80.3 230.4 10.7 193.4 9.0 - - 2 150.6 5.0
2. Equipment,

materials, and
supplies 17 734.0 76.4 2 486.1 10.7 1 735.9 7.5 1 247.4 5.4 23 203.4 53.9

3. Consultancies 10 494.9 89.5 1 071.2 9.1 80.8 0.7 80.8 0.7 11 727.7 27.2

4. Government staff - - 367.1 16.1 1 915.5 83.9 - - 2 282.6 5.3
5. Operation and

maintenance - - 1 969.8 53.5 1 710.5 46.5 - - 3 680.3 8.5
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. About 724,000 poor people or 188,000 households living in the 1,098 coastal

villages in the 11 targeted bays/gulfs will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 90,596 are fishing households, with an estimated 38,050 (146,495 people)
living below the poverty line. Project interventions are expected to improve the
productivity of municipal waters and coastal zones and generate livelihood benefits
for the members of coastal communities. Project benefits are expected to be
generated through: (i) effective law enforcement and regulatory activities with
respect to municipal fisheries; (ii) improved protection and management of coral
reef, mangrove, sea-grass ecosystems and other coastal resources; and
(iii) implementation of sustainable community-based livelihood enterprises.

D. Sustainability
25. To help ensure sustainability, the following are included in project design:

(i) assisting LGUs in developing sustainable sources of local revenues to finance
FLETs and provide funds for investment in the management of municipal fisheries
and coastal resources; (ii) ensuring the participation of POs and their members in
identifying and planning proposed livelihood activities; (iii) involving the private
sector on a long-term basis to enhance sustainability of the investments in



EB 2015/115/R.12

8

alternative sources of livelihoods for members of coastal communities and their
organizations; (iv) requiring beneficiaries, municipalities and cities to share in the
costs of the project’s investments; and (v) after the midterm review, preparing an
exit strategy and sustainability plan.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The current lack of technical and management capacity within BFAR is a risk. It is

addressed by the inclusion of sufficient contract staff to manage the project
together with the assigned staff of BFAR. The project will support BFAR’s
reorganization plan through provision of the capacity development needed to
improve the technical capacities of BFAR’s offices in the target regions. A second
risk is unsustainability of project activities after the project ends, thereby repeating
the experience of many previous project interventions in various bays/gulfs. The
project design tackles this issue by focusing on the generation of sustainable
sources of local revenues to finance the necessary law enforcement activities and
investment in resource management. Another risk is that agencies concerned may
be unable to provide the coordinated approach needed at the local level. The design
counters this risk through the use of memorandums of agreement between BFAR
and all agencies engaged in project implementation to specify roles and
responsibilities, costs and sources of finance. It also includes all agencies with a
role in project implementation as members of the regional coordination and
steering committees; and indicates that all implementing agencies will have a
FishCORAL focal point at the national level. An associated risk concerns the
willingness of the private sector to be involved in supporting the development of
alternative livelihood enterprises for the members of fishing communities. This is
addressed by involving the private sector from the initial planning stages through to
the processing and/or marketing of the products, and by the availability of some
initial project finance for livelihood development production activities to match
investments from the private sector for processing, drying and marketing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project design is consistent with the third strategic objective of the COSOP2 and

aligns well with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, which focuses on:
secure access to natural resources; climate change adaptation and mitigation;
improved agricultural technologies and effective production services; more
comprehensive financial services; integration into value chains through competitive
agricultural input and produce markets; rural enterprise development and off-farm
employment opportunities; technical and vocational education and training; and
empowerment of rural poor people through effective and sustainable rural
producers’ organizations. In this context, agriculture includes fisheries. Under the
Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, the project is classified both as
Category C and Category D, as it is intended to directly enhance the quality of the
environment or address existing environmental problems in coastal areas; and the
rural infrastructure components are small-scale and do not fall under other
categories.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable

agriculture and fisheries sector. It will complement and coordinate with existing and
planned projects of the Department of Agriculture and others (e.g. the Philippines
Rural Development Project (World Bank), Integrated Environment and Natural
Resource Management Project (AsDB/IFAD) and Ecosystems Improved for

2 “Selected marginalized and poor communities dependent on coastal resources in Bicol, eastern Visayas, northern
Mindanao and ARMM have sustainable access to fisheries and other productive coastal resources, use sustainable
management practices and diversify livelihood opportunities to meet their basic needs (in particular, food).”



EB 2015/115/R.12

9

Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH – USAID). IFAD will also work with government
programmes for an improved policy environment and governance. The project will
explore diverse types of partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries
and the private sector. Private-sector organizations and business development
partners will take a leading role as service providers in improving the returns from
livelihood enterprises.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. Despite the relatively small investment in relation to the scale of the issues

involved, the project could be a catalyst for improving household incomes and
attracting further investment in scaling up. This in turn could realize the potential
benefits from good, sustainable management of city/municipal fisheries and other
coastal resources. A key innovation for scaling up will be the sustainable financing
systems to be developed and introduced at the municipal level to: (i) effectively
enforce the fisheries ordinances for municipal fisheries and coastal resources; and
(ii) improve conservation and management of fisheries and coastal resources by
local governments and fishing communities.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will support policy/case studies for policy dialogue and consultation with

the relevant national and local institutions. Such communication will concern the
management by LGUs of municipal/city fisheries and coastal resources and
development of alternative livelihood enterprises for coastal communities. The
project will provide support in reviewing existing relevant legislation, covering the
parts of the Local Government Code related to: municipal fisheries; the Coastal
Zone and Fisheries Code of the Philippines; possible duplication between the roles
and responsibilities of the BMCs and IFARMCs; and the future management role of
pre-existing fisheries management systems. The project will also provide support to
review other relevant legislation such as the Agriculture and Fisheries Management
Act. After the midterm review, it would pilot proposed changes to the codes with
respect to municipal fisheries in selected locations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

32. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-seven million
three hundred and ten thousand euros (EUR 27,310,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$29.96 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the
Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Executing agency: Ministry of Plantation Industries

Total project cost: US$65.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 18.45 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.764 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms: Maturity period of 25 years, including agrace period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier(s): Bank of Ceylon and People’s Bank

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$32.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.61 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and
Rubber Revitalization Project, as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Sri Lankan economy has grown at an impressive pace in recent years,

recording an annual average growth rate of about 7.4 per cent in 2014. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals and
compares favourably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender
equality. The Government’s development policy framework is articulated in the
Public Investment Strategy 2014-2016, which sets the principal targets as raising
the per capita income to US$4,000 in 2016 and elevating Sri Lanka to the level of a
strong middle-income country. The new Government, initially appointed in January
2015 and then reappointed in September 2015, has maintained these targets.

2. Eighty per cent of Sri Lanka’s population resides in rural areas, and agriculture
remains the backbone of the economy despite its declining share of GDP.
Smallholder farmers are major contributors to food security. The government’s
strategic direction for agriculture is to achieve a sustained improvement in
production through increased productivity and market competitiveness. Poverty is
primarily a rural phenomenon, and the main population groups living in poverty
are: (i) smallholders in crop and plantation production; (ii) plantation workers in
estate areas; (iii) artisanal and small-scale fishers; (iv) women-headed households;
and (v) unemployed and underemployed labourers.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. Rationale. The tea and rubber subsectors have been important contributors to the
national economy. Tea smallholders contribute 70 per cent of Sri Lanka's total tea
production while smallholder rubber growers make up 62 per cent of the land under
rubber cultivation. About 50 per cent of the smallholder tea lands are more than 20
years old with less than optimal production capacity. There is a dire need for
replanting, without which many of the smallholders will be pushed below the
poverty line. The Government has a subsidy scheme in place aiming to address
smallholders' difficulty in accessing appropriate financial products for tea replanting.
However, both the timeliness and level of financial support this government scheme
provides remain problematic, and additional financing is needed in order to
strengthen smallholders' participation in the replanting programme. The project will
complement the existing government scheme, and will make it more effective by
providing capital investment support to smallholders at the commencement of tea
replanting.

4. As part of the National Rubber Master Plan, the Government has been promoting
rubber in non-traditional rubber cultivation areas to provide a source of livelihood
for smallholders. This expansion is also a direct response to the demands of the



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

private sector, which has been calling for greater government support for rubber
production. The Government has introduced proactive policy that supports the
granting of land permits, land clearance and initial rubber cultivation. The project
serves to reinforce the Government's priority of rubber development in non-
traditional areas, focusing support on smallholder production.

5. Alignment with government priorities and the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP). The project is directly
aligned with the government’s development priorities as defined in the Public
Investment Strategy 2014-2016, particularly the policy directions for the tea and
rubber subsectors. It is consistent with the RB-COSOP for Sri Lanka (2015-2020)
and contributes directly to its two strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project area will cover eight neighbouring districts in central and southern Sri

Lanka, including Galle (tea), Matara (tea), Ratnapura (tea and rubber processing),
Badulla (tea), Kandy (tea), Moneragala (rubber) and Ampara (rubber) and Nuwara
Eliya (tea). A total of 144,000 people, or 32,000 households, are expected to
benefit from the project.

7. The target group of tea interventions will be existing poor smallholder tea growers
having less than one hectare of unproductive tea lands. The target group of rubber
interventions will be smallholders having a holding of one hectare of rubber, to be
selected by poverty level. Gender equality will be one of the criteria used in the
selection of beneficiaries, to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the tea and rubber
growers are women.

B. Project development objective
8. The project goal is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security,

increase their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The development objective
is to ensure that smallholders' economic activities in tea and rubber become more
productive, profitable and resilient.

C. Components/outcomes
9. The project will have three components: (i) tea smallholder development;

(ii) rubber smallholder development; and (iii) inclusive rural financing, to be
supported by project management.

(i) Component 1: Tea smallholder development (approximately US$44.44
million; 69 per cent of total base cost), will promote better organization
among tea smallholders to enable them to effectively and sustainably produce
and market their products. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening tea
societies in production and marketing; (b) market-driven production support;
and (c) income and market diversification for tea smallholders.

(ii) Component 2: Rubber smallholder development (approximately
US$14.78 million; 22 per cent of total base cost), will enhance rubber
production and processing of quality rubber products with better market
linkages. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening rubber societies,
including processing and market sensitivity, (b) market-driven production
support, and (c) income and market diversification for rubber smallholders.

(iii) Component 3: Inclusive rural financing (approximately US$3.5 million;
6 per cent of the total base cost), will facilitate access by the targeted
smallholders to available bank financing for production, harvesting and
marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products. It has two
subcomponents: (a) facilitating access to lending from the banking system;
and (b) supporting implementation arrangements.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

10. The main project outcomes include: (i) 200 revitalized tea societies and 100
strengthened rubber societies able to effectively provide a range of services to their
members; (ii) high-yield tea crops replanted on 5,500 hectares and rubber planted
on 3,000 hectares by smallholders to provide a sustainable source of income and
diversified livelihoods; and (iii) strengthened smallholders undertaking sustainable
commercial business with the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project will adhere to the principles of demand-driven participatory

development to ensure that smallholders are the key decision-makers when they
participate in project activities. A value chain approach will be adopted in
identifying the relevant activities from production to processing and marketing.
Overall project implementation will take into account the following key factors: (i) a
large number of smallholders are the predominant producers of tea and rubber;
(ii) the private sector is keen to enhance tea and rubber production in order to
meet the growing market demand for these commodities, as well as to promote
sustainable and responsible farming; (iii) the formal banking sector is unable to
effectively provide the needed lending products due to their loan processing
procedures and risk aversion to rural lending; (iv) there is a need to strengthen the
capacity of government extension staff; there is also a need to put in place an
implementation strategy that is sustainable and does not lead to friction with
existing line agency staff; and (v) the cadre of village-level government staff can be
effectively employed for project implementation.

B. Organizational framework
12. The lead agency for the project will be the Ministry of Plantation Industries (MPI).

MPI will (i) appoint a senior staff member to supervise the overall implementation
of the project; (ii) set up a national steering committee to guide and steer project
implementation; and (iii) establish a project management unit (PMU) responsible
for daily project operations. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. District
level implementation will be the responsibility of the Tea Small Holdings
Development Authority (TSHDA) and the Rubber Development Department (RDD),
two of MPI's main constituent institutions. The district office of TSHDA, headed by
the TSHDA regional manager, and that of RDD headed by the RDD deputy director,
will act as the district project management cell (DPMC).

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. The project logframe will be the basis for preparing the annual work plan
and budget (AWP/B). The logframe will be refined periodically to reflect any
changes and adjustments that may be necessary during the life of the project. The
overall responsibility for AWP/B preparation will rest with the project manager, with
support from the TSHDA regional manager for tea and the RDD deputy director for
rubber at the district level. The district project AWP/Bs will be prepared by the
TSHDA regional manager or the RDD deputy director. The project manager will be
responsible for consolidating the district AWP/Bs into the overall project AWP/B, for
approval by the national steering committee and then no-objection by IFAD.

14. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will establish an effective and
efficient M&E system to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data and
information for sound result-based management and decision-making. The overall
responsibility for the project M&E activities will lie with the PMU, specifically its M&E
coordinator, who will be responsible for ensuring the consistency, accuracy and
timeliness of all project reporting. All M&E activities will be based on the IFAD
guidelines for project M&E and the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
first- and second-level indicators handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated by



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

gender and socio-economic status to allow for a proper assessment of poverty and
gender targeting.

15. Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlying theme. The
project is expected to offer valuable opportunities for learning at the policy,
operational and technical levels because it has certain novel features that can make
the existing government scheme for tea replanting and rubber expansion more
effective. In addition, the project can contribute to restructuring the manner in
which the group rubber processing centres are financed and operated as business
enterprises; demonstrating the use of eco-restoration to enhance tea yields;
promoting partnership with the private sector for better market linkages; and
enhancing the access to existing bank lending products for tea and rubber
production and other income-generating activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. MPI as the lead project agency will be responsible for

overall financial management. The financial management arrangements will, to the
extent feasible, be mainstreamed into government systems. Operational day-to-day
fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of the PMU embedded within MPI, in
liaison with the DPMCs attached to district-level TSHDA and RDD offices. The PMU’s
financial management role will include consolidating AWP/Bs, managing the flow of
funds, maintaining project bank accounts, processing disbursement requests,
consolidating interim financial reports, and preparing annual financial statements
for audit. The PMU will put in place an imprest mechanism for the release of
adequate funds to DPMCs. It will also be responsible for ensuring that district-level
finance staff are provided with appropriate training and guidance with regard to
reporting expenditure and procurement. The financial management risk for the
project is rated medium. Measures to be put in place to mitigate this risk include
qualified and experienced financial staff, a detailed financial and accounting
manual, automated accounting processes (accounting software), quarterly financial
reporting, and internal and external audit.

17. Flow of funds. MPI will be responsible for managing the flow of funds from the
IFAD loan proceeds and the government counterpart funds, opening and
maintaining the designated account in United States dollars at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka to receive initial deposit and replenishments, obtaining the agreed
counterpart funds from the General Treasury, forwarding imprest applications
prepared by the PMU to obtain advances from the designated account to meet
project requirements, and scrutinizing and forwarding withdrawal applications to
IFAD. MPI will make adequate annual budgetary provisions for both IFAD and
counterpart funds in the national budget, based on the project AWP/B.

18. Audit. The Auditor General, who is constitutionally mandated to audit all
government accounts and reports to Parliament annually, will perform the external
audit of the project. The Auditor General will submit audited financial statements
and a detailed audit report along with a management letter no later than six
months after the end of the financial year.

19. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project
will be carried out in accordance with the national procurement guidelines to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. The
procurement methods to be applied in each case will depend on the expenditure
and the estimated value of the contract. The thresholds for the different
procurement methods will be detailed in the letter to the borrower.

20. Governance. In line with its anti-corruption policy, IFAD will apply zero tolerance in
respect of fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive action.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
21. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD which, with government

collaboration, will conduct annual supervision missions, regular implementation
support missions, a midterm review and a completion review.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
22. The total project cost is estimated at US$65.4 million including contingencies

(US$3.8 million) over a period of six years. Project costs are organized into: (i) tea
smallholders development (69 per cent of total base costs); (ii) rubber smallholders
development (22 per cent of total baseline costs); (iii) inclusive rural financing
(6 per cent of the base cost); and (iv) project management (4 per cent of total
baseline costs).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Tea smallholder
development 16 380 36.9 - - 1 955 4.4 26 107 58.7 44 442 68.0

2. Rubber smallholder
development 7 635 51.6 15 0.1 1 654 11.2 5 480 37.1 14 783 22.6

3. Inclusive rural financing 50 1.4 3 251 92.8 - - 201 5.7 3 502 5.4

4. Project management 1 699 63.6 - - - - 974 36.4 2 674 4.1

Total 25 764 39.4 3 266 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 65 401

B. Project financing
23. IFAD will provide a loan equivalent to US$25.764 million on blend terms; the

Government will provide counterpart funds equivalent to US$32.76 million; the two
participating banks will provide an amount equivalent to US$3.25 million as a line
of credit from their own funds; and the beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at
US$3.61 million.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries Borrower/Counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 4 491 60.5 - - 1 772 23.9 1 162 15.6 7 425
2. Vehicles 686 41.0 - - - - 987 59.0 1 674
3. Equipment and materials 3 985 72.0 - - 1 332 24.1 219 4.0 5 536
4. Consultancies 587 89.5 - - - - 69 10.5 656
5. Credit - - 3 000 100 - - - - 3 000
6. Goods, services and

inputs 2 028 75.1 - - 505 18.7 169 6.2 2 702
7. Capital grants and

government subsidy 9 624 27.0 - - - - 26 000 73.0 35 624
8. Training 1 294 67.3 251 13 - - 364 18.9 1 923
9. Salaries and allowances 1 645 41.0 - - - - 2 369 59 4 014
10. Operating costs 1 424 50.0 - - - - 1 424 50 2 847
Total 25 764 39.4 3 251 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 62 504

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. The project is expected to benefit a total of about 32,000 households and 144,000

people. Women-headed and poor households will be targeted in particular. The
project's support for tea replanting and intercropping will lead to increased yields



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

from tea as well as from appropriate inter-crops such as pepper. On average, a
household’s production benefits will increase from 3,000 kg/ha to over 14,000
kg/ha of fresh tea leaves in a year over a 20-year period, at a minimum.
Smallholders planting rubber will be able to benefit from a steady income from
latex, the average production of which is expected to be 2,160 kg per year for the
next 30 years. The project will contribute to institutional sustainability at the village
level by strengthening tea and rubber societies and linking them with private-sector
partners. The project's economic internal rate of return is estimated at 26 per cent.

D. Sustainability
25. There are strong elements in the project design that will enhance the sustainability

of benefits for smallholders. The most significant investment will be in the
replanting of tea and planting of rubber trees on new lands. The tea plantations are
expected to provide yields for another 20 to 25 years while the planting of rubber
trees is expected to provide benefits for 30 to 35 years. The quality of produce will
be ensured through the provision of high quality plants from nurseries certified by
the Tea Research Institute and the Rubber Research Institute. The marketing of tea
and rubber is not an issue in the country as there is high demand for both. Due to
the acute shortage of rubber, any additional rubber product can easily be
marketed. The ability of smallholders to convert latex into ribbed sheets will
enhance shelf life, and this in turn will make marketing easier. The increased
capacity of the smallholders to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises
through project support will enhance the sustainability of their livelihoods.
Smallholders' livelihoods will be further enhanced by increased incomes generated
from linkages with the private sector and implementation of the business models.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The first risk is smallholder's lack of capital to invest in the replanting of old tea

crops and new rubber lands and also in processing equipment. This will be
addressed by providing capital support upfront to supplement government
financing. The second risk is the unavailability of plant materials, which can be
addressed by supporting private nurseries for tea and the large RDD nursery in the
Ampara district for rubber to provide the required plant materials. The third risk is
related to the timely regularization of land for the new rubber plantations. This is
currently being proactively addressed by MPI in collaboration with the Forest
Department and the Mahaweli Development Authority, both of which have agreed
to make the lands available immediately upon project start-up. The fourth risk is
farmer groups' low management and negotiating capacity, poor access to roads,
lack of transport and market information. These will be addressed through capacity-
building for tea and rubber societies and by supporting farm roads for enhanced
accessibility. Finally, the risk of climatic factors such as drought leading to lower
yields will be mitigated through the adoption of good agricultural practices,
including soil renovation and soil moisture management.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project is in line with IFAD policies, specifically: (i) the project target group has

been clearly defined and the selection of the project area is in keeping with IFAD's
targeting policy; (ii) in compliance with IFAD's gender policy, the project will make
special provision for the targeting of women, and gender disaggregated indicators
will be used to monitor women's participation; (iii) in line with IFAD's private sector
strategy, the project will place a strong emphasis on further developing and
strengthening the smallholders' linkages with licensed tea and rubber collectors and
processors; (iv) in keeping with the IFAD rural finance policy, the project will
facilitate access of smallholders to available financing for production, harvesting
and marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products; and (v) the design has
capitalized on the IFAD strategies and guidance tools for natural resource



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

management, climate change and environment, and has structured the project
activities in a way that will bring positive environmental impact and socio-economic
benefits to the communities.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project is aligned with the Government’s development priorities for the tea and

rubber subsectors, and supports the implementation of the newly developed
National Rubber Master Plan. It will complement the ongoing government
programmes for smallholder tea replanting and rubber production. The project will
explore and support diverse types of partnerships between the project beneficiaries
and the private sector for enhanced access to market and financial services.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. The project will vertically scale up to new geographic areas the successful

interventions in support of smallholder tea and rubber production initiated through
the IFAD-financed Smallholder Entrepreneurship Development Programme. It will
provide funding support for business models that link smallholders with the private
sector to ensure effective market access. The project will also partner with two
state banks to enhance smallholders' access to existing financial products specific
to tea and rubber.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will facilitate the conduct of studies to assess the role and contribution

of the up-front capital grant in encouraging tea smallholders' participation in the tea
replanting scheme. The results of such studies will be used to initiate policy
dialogue with the Government on reviewing and possibly revising its subsidy
scheme to make it more effective for smallholders.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached
as appendix I.

32. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is empowered under its laws to
receive financing from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in an amount equivalent to
eighteen million four hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 18,450,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu
Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)


Democratic Republic of the Congo

North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock

Total project cost: US$52.974 million

Amount of IFAD loan under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant under the 2013-
2015 PBAS allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: repayment term of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
commission of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$9.718 million

Contribution of the borrower/
beneficiary: US$5.950 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.528 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture
Sector Support Project (PASA-NK), as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support
Project (PASA-NK)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Following several decades of political instability, insecurity and economic

devastation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is enjoying robust economic
growth and a stable macro-economic framework. Agricultural and mineral
resources are vast, among the largest in sub-Saharan Africa. The country has an
area of 2.34 million km² and a population of about 71 million, close to 70 per cent
of whom live in rural areas.

2. Growth in GDP, which has improved significantly since 2010, is greater than 7 per
cent. In addition to agriculture, which employs 64 per cent of the active population
and generates 33.4 per cent of GDP (Central Bank of the Congo, 2013), the most
important sectors are trade (22 per cent) and mining (12 per cent).

3. Economic growth, in tandem with public investment in the health and primary
education sectors, has enabled the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reduce the
incidence of poverty from 71.34 per cent in 2005 to 63.4 per cent in 2012. The
rural poverty rate remains high at 69 per cent in 2012. Food and nutritional
insecurity remain at alarmingly high levels: 54 per cent of rural households are
food-insecure, 43 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished and
8 per cent suffer from acute malnutrition.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
RB-COSOP

4. The country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2012-2016 set two
strategic objectives: (i) improve smallholder farmers' access to effective production
services, appropriate technologies and local markets; and (ii) professionalize
farmers' organizations so that they can become economic partners with private
enterprises in rural areas.

5. PASA-NK is aligned with both COSOP strategic objectives, and will strengthen
portfolio results in terms of sustainable access by smallholder farmers to inputs
and markets, remuneration of agricultural products at more advantageous prices
for farmers (the COSOP calls for a 30 per cent increase) and stability of apex
producer organizations (POs). PASA-NK will also balance the distribution of IFAD-
cofinanced operations in the country's western and eastern regions.

6. The Government intends to develop inclusive value chains, in addition to
investments now under way in agro-industrial complexes (Nsele agro-industrial
zone and Bukanga-Lonzo agro-industrial park). This intention is fully aligned with
the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA) and the aims of promoting value
chains in agriculture and agro-industry. The Government's vision and the strategic
objectives of the programme cofinanced by IFAD in the Democratic Republic of the



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

2

the Congo converge in North Kivu to remove the financial, institutional and physical
constraints now faced by the people living in the province.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. As indicated by its name, PASA-NK will be implemented in the province of North

Kivu, and more specifically in the territories of Beni, Lubero, Rutshuru, Nyiragongo
and Masisi. Activities will involve one or two crops in each of the territories
targeted.

8. North Kivu province falls within the post-conflict territories located to the country's
east, and covers an area of close to 60,000 km². The population in 2014 was an
estimated 6.5 million people, 88 per cent of them living in rural areas where the
population density is more than 100 habitants par km². According to the Human
Development Index, the province is ranked 10th of 11 provinces. An estimated 70
per cent of poor people in the province live in rural areas.

9. PASA-NK covers production and commercialization of four crops: maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee. The crops were selected on the basis of the following
criteria: (i) number of producers involved; (ii) potential for growth in production
and productivity; (iii) existence of expanding markets accessible to smallholders:
local, national, subregional and international markets, including fair trade niche
markets; (iv) potential for improving incomes and value added; (v) potential for
integration of vulnerable groups such as women, unemployed rural young people
and landless poor people; and (vi) presence in the subsector of a public service,
NGO or lead apex PO to provide technical guidance and other economic services.

10. Based on the four selected value chains, five lead organizations have been selected
to play a leading role in project implementation: (i) the Central Cooperative of
North Kivu (COOCENKI) for maize, to implement project activities in Rutshuru
territory; (ii) the League of Women Farmers Organizations of the Congo
(LOFEPACO) for rice, in Beni territory; (iii) the Farmers Union (SYDIP) for potato, in
Lubero, Masisi and Nyiragongo territories; (iv) the Federation of Agricultural
Producers Organizations of the Congo (FOPAC), for PO capacity-building and
advocacy; and (v) the NGO VECO for the Arabica coffee value chain, given the
tangible results it has achieved, to develop economic services for gourmet coffee in
Beni and Rutshuru.

11. PASA-NK will target, first and foremost, poor and very poor households who will
benefit from financial support granted by the project to facilitate access to
improved seed and fertilizer and agricultural advisory assistance. Storage and
processing activities will benefit all households. Activities to develop coffee growing
will affect poor, less poor and wealthy households owning coffee plantations. Poor
households will be defined as follows: (i) cultivated area of less than 1 ha;
(ii) livestock (type and number) of less than 5 head; (iii) transportation by bicycle
or scooter; and (iv) widows heads of household. Lead POs have suggested that
additional criteria be added, such as: (i) farmers working an area of at least 0.25
ha in a single location; and (ii) victims of domestic or sexual violence. A total of
28,400 households will benefit directly from the project activities.

B. Project development objective
12. The main objective of PASA-NK is to sustainably improve food security and incomes

among participating households. The development objective is to improve
productivity and profitability for four crops produced by smallholders – maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Capacity-building for actors supporting agricultural value

chains. Component 1, representing 58.1 per cent of total project cost, is divided



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

3

into three subcomponents: (i) development of economic services provided by POs;
(ii) institutional strengthening for POs; and (iii) support for the public sector. The
outcomes of these three subcomponents will be: (i) economic services provided by
POs are viable and appreciated by farmers; and (ii) the performance of provincial
public services in support of producers has improved.

14. Component 2: Support for rural infrastructure. Component 2, representing
22.5 per cent of total project cost, is divided into two subcomponents:
(i) rehabilitation of agricultural access roads; and (ii) capacity-building for
provincial and territorial coordination by the Agricultural Access Roads Division
(DVDA). The expected outcome is a reduction in the cost and time taken to
transport goods.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. PASA-NK calls for professionalizing POs around economic services to improve

smallholder access to agricultural inputs and markets and, accordingly, boost
agricultural productivity and incomes. These economic services comprise: (i) for
maize, access to improved seed, provision of advisory assistance, and storage and
warehousing to facilitate deferred group sales synchronized with periods of higher
prices for maize; (ii) for rice, access to improved seed and fertilizer, provision of
advisory assistance, storage and warehousing, and support for the LOFEPACO rice
mill; (iii) for potato, production of improved variety mini-tubers, access to fertilizer,
provision of advisory assistance, collection and sales facilitation for wholesalers;
and (iv) for coffee, improved variety nurseries, provision of advisory assistance,
washed coffee processing, facilitation of organic and fair trade certification, and
facilitation of quality green coffee sales on niche markets.

16. Based on this vision, the project will be implemented in accordance with the
following underlying principles:

17. Business plans. All lead POs will organize their interventions at the value chain
level based on business plans demonstrating the profitability of economic services
offered to their members. The economic services will be organized around weak
links in the maize, rice, potato and coffee value chains.

18. Financial terms. The project will trigger and support a virtuous process of
development within which POs will be assisted in undertaking economically viable
activities. In order to be viable, such activities must be based on a sound
mechanism for access to production factors, processing and commercialization.

19. Contractualization. This will be one of the building blocks of business plan
implementation by POs. Contractualization will govern relations with other actors
within the targeted food value chains: processors, traders, input suppliers and
other service providers.

20. Gradualism and sequencing of interventions. The project will be implemented
in the post-conflict area, where people are readjusting to stability. As a result,
project interventions and support will be organized in a prudent, gradual and
sequenced manner to ensure that each stage is properly managed and brings the
desired results.

B. Organizational framework
21. PASA-NK will be under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and

Livestock. The provincial Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of North
Kivu will become a member of the existing steering committee. The project will be
coordinated by a project coordination unit (PCU) with administrative and financial
management autonomy, based in Goma.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

4

22. To facilitate project start-up, IFAD will provide the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Livestock – as oversight agency – with a start-up advance of US$650,000 from
the grant proceeds, to: (i) recruit PCU staff and international technical assistants
who are to train the PCU to ensure ownership of the project objectives and
approach; (ii) put in place basic tools needed for first disbursement; and
(iii) undertake the baseline study to ensure that results are available as of year
one.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. Annual planning for the project will begin with an evaluation of business plan
execution by the economic services for the four value chains. This will establish
high-level direction to plan for the following year and update the business plans, as
part of the process of participatory self-evaluation and preparation of the annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B). The AWP/B for the following year will be based on
the updated business plans for each value chain, subsequent preparation of the PO
institutional strengthening plan, the scope of public services provided and
engagement with the private sector, based on the new business plan targets. The
planning of rehabilitation works on access roads will be aligned with opening up
access to areas targeted in the business plans.

24. The PCU will set up a simple, operational M&E system. The logical framework
provides minimum indicators to provide information on the effectiveness, efficiency
and impact of PASA-NK. In addition, the M&E system will provide information on
IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) system, and will include a
geographical information system.

25. Knowledge management under PASA-NK will leverage existing initiatives. Thus,
FOPAC, which has a communication system in the form of its quarterly news
bulletin and rural radio network, will play a leading role provincially by
disseminating information on the project in the bulletin and studies on advocacy-
related issues, mapping land tenure conflicts and mapping value chains. At the
national level, the project will enter into an agreement with the ECO CONGO
network, a digital content platform to disseminate relevant information on
sustainable rural and agricultural development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Both of the national confederations (COPACO and CONAPAC) publish a
periodical bulletin and PASA-NK could reserve space for an article twice a year. At
the regional and international level, it is proposed that the IFAD-cofinanced
Farmers Organizations Support Programme (PAOPA) be used for capitalization of
PASA-NK activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and procurement. However,

the rural engineering works will be the responsibility of a project manager with the
competencies and human resources needed for procurement. Contracts for civil
engineering works (building construction and rural road rehabilitation) are the most
difficult to organize and supervise for PCUs, as they have limited staff.

27. A strategy to mitigate fiduciary risks will be adopted, based on the following
measures:

• Monthly verification of the project accounting database, to be done jointly by
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and the IFAD country
office;

• Submission of a quarterly report using the template provided by IFAD
financial services. Reports are to be prepared by the PCU and sent to IFAD for
review;



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

5

• Recruitment of international technical assistance in financial management and
procurement, commencing at the outset of the project, to set up a more
effective organizational structure of fiduciary functions; and

• Semi-annual audit of project accounts and procurement by a qualified audit
firm. The PCU will be responsible for hiring the external auditors.

28. Flow of funds. Two mechanisms will be set up to finance project activities: (i) the
designated account and financing of project expenses with a justified and
reimbursable advance; and (ii) direct payments by implementing partners based on
the achievement of specific results.

29. Audit. The Government will, with the prior consent of IFAD, appoint external
auditors to perform two external audits of PASA-NK each fiscal year, in accordance
with international auditing standards and the procedures and criteria set out in
IFAD's guidelines on project audits (for use by borrowers/beneficiaries).

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will supervise the project directly in close collaboration with the Government.

IV. Project cost, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
31. The total cost of the project is estimated at US$52.974 million over a nine-year

period. The main sources of financing are: (i) IFAD with US$33.78 million, or 63.8
per cent of total project cost – the Democratic Republic of the Congo is classified as
"yellow" under the Debt Sustainability Framework, and is therefore eligible for 50
per cent grant and 50 per cent loan financing, i.e. a grant of US$16.89 million and
a loan of US$16.89 million; (ii) OFID with US$9.718 million, or 18.3 per cent of
total project cost; (iii) the Government with US$5.95 million in the form of
exemptions from taxes and tariffs on the goods and services to be purchased by
the project; and (iv) the beneficiaries with US$3.58 million, or 6.7 per cent of total
project cost.

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Capacity-building for actors
supporting agricultural value chains
1. Development of PO economic
services 16 022 75.3 - - 1 730 8.1 3 528 16.6 21 279 40.2

2. Institutional strengthening for POs 2 448 93.7 - - 164 6.3 - - 2 613 4.9

3. Support to public sector 5 276 76.4 689 10.0 940 13.6 - - 6 905 13.0

Subtotal 23 747 77.1 689 2.2 2 834 9.2 3 528 11.5 30 797 58.1

B. Support for rural infrastructure

1. Rehabilitation of access roads - - 8 481 75.0 2 827 25.0 - - 11 308 21.3

2. Capacity-building for DVDA - - 548 86.8 83 13.2 - - 631 1.2

Subtotal - - 9 029 75.6 2 910 24.4 - - 11 939 22.5

C. Coordination and management 10 032 98.0 - - 206 2.0 - - 10 238 19.3

Total cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

6

B. Project financing
32. Table 2 below indicates how the funds provided by IFAD will be used, by category

of expenditure.
Table 2
Project cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Studies 384 28.3 808 59.6 163 12.0 - - 1 355 2.6

B. Vehicles and equipment 2 418 65.3 146 4.0 1 137 30.7 - - 3 702 7.0

C. Training and workshops 8 164 93.4 188 2.1 -0 - 387 4.4 8 739 16.5

D. Civil and rural engineering 418 3.5 8 576 70.8 3 081 25.4 43 0.4 12 118 22.9

E. Support fund 9 279 67.1 - - 1 568 11.3 2 971 21.5 13 819 26.1

F. Technical assistance

National expertise 2 368 100.0 - - - - - - 2 368 4.5

International expertise 1 808 100.0 - - - - - - 1 808 3.4

Subtotal assistance technique 4 176 100.0 - - - - - - 4 176 7.9

Total investment cost 24 839 56.6 9 718 22.1 5 950 13.5 3 401 7.7 43 909 82.9

II. Operating expenses

A. Personnel 6 009 97.9 - - - - 126 2.1 6 135 11.6

B. Operating and maintenance 2 931 100.0 - - 0 - - - 2 931 5.5

Subtotal operating expenses 8 939 98.6 - - 0 - 126 1.4 9 065 17.1

Total project cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. All crop models indicate that the situation of smallholder producers will improve

with the project. The cost-benefit ratio is quite significant: 1.6 for potato, 1.4 for
rice, 1.3 for coffee and 1.2 for maize. Net present value is between US$81 and
US$565/household/year, calculated at an opportunity cost of capital of 30 per cent
per annum.

34. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 18 per cent and the
NPV, at the opportunity cost of capital of 9.32 per cent, is US$16.5 million. A
sensitivity analysis shows that the results obtained are robust: it would take an
income reduction of 37 per cent or a cost increase of 59 per cent to bring down the
EIRR to the level of the opportunity cost of social capital.

D. Sustainability
35. The sustainability of project-supported activities has been considered from several

different perspectives.

36. Institutional sustainability. The project has opted to build implementation
partnerships with lead POs and NGOs with proven experience in the subject areas
targeted. This approach, by handing over direct responsibility to professional
agricultural actors, provides guarantees of continuity and sustainability. Moreover,
having technical services take part in, inter alia, project supervision, setting up
farmers field schools, providing agricultural advisory assistance and M&E, will
position these services better within the socio-economic development of the
province, which is an element of sustainability.

37. Financing arrangements. The approach adopted by the project calls for
providing a temporary subsidy for agricultural inputs – improved seed and fertilizer
– as a process trigger, together with a policy to mobilize savings and create a
credit culture among farming households, facilitating smallholder access to financial
services over the longer term.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

7

38. Returns on economic services. More sustainable rice, maize, potato and Arabica
coffee production should enable beneficiary households to improve their savings
and investment capacity and encourage them to maintain the same levels of
fertilizer and improved seed use and value chain integration. Farmers should
therefore be in a position to pay for inputs at market prices by the time of project
completion.

39. Consolidation of associational and cooperative life. The project will contribute
to consolidating associational life by meeting the needs of beneficiary households
to enable them to participate in the activities of their POs, specifically by paying
dues and undertaking commercial transactions to purchase inputs and market
production. Commercial linkages between POs and market operators will enhance
the sustainability of the economic services.

40. Improving access and viable rural access roads. Improving access to
production areas and hubs and linking them to consumption centres are clearly
factors underpinning agricultural production. Rehabilitating access roads, supported
by a maintenance programme such as the one in effect in North Kivu, provides a
guarantee of sustainability in this regard.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The four major risks and related mitigation strategies are outlined in the table

below:

Risks Mitigation measures
Deteriorating security situation
given electoral and economic
challenges in the Great Lakes
region

Losses of goods and
destruction of infrastructure
funded by the project

 The Congolese army and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) conduct a search for
armed groups to disarm and neutralize them

 The European Parliament negotiates the text of legislation to dissuade European
companies from using blood minerals

 The United Nations system and MONUSCO monitor the security situation closely
 FAO and WFP collaborate closely on an analysis of the situation and the

complementarity of interventions (resilience, recovery, development)
 Trucks made available to lead POs ensure regular pickups and storage at well-

guarded central warehouses located in town
 Project activities are staggered

Land tenure issues: land
disputes and abusive breach of
land lease contracts

 The provincial decree of 2012 on customary land management stipulates
procedures for resolving land disputes

 FOPAC performs advocacy on land tenure issues to ensure secure access for
farmers

 Training of paralegals continues within the project framework
Delay in tax and quasi-tax
relief for agricultural production
and trade

 FOPAC organizes advocacy on this subject with supporting studies
 Synergies in action are sought with other organizations working on the same

subject, such as ELAN
 Updating of the national strategy is leveraged to revise the level and quality of

taxation applied to the subsector and, by extension, to others
Drop in prices, specifically for
Arabica coffee

 Coffee cooperatives are in command of processing and commercialization costs
 The gourmet coffee market, which offers prices that are 20 to 30 per cent higher

than the New York quoted price, is targeted
 Export prices and export procedures benefit from tax relief
 Revision of the national coffee strategy to commence in 2016 benefits from

support, focusing on competitiveness issues (taxation and legislation)

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The project is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

complies with IFAD's policies on targeting, gender equality, natural resource
management, climate change and access to land and land tenure security.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

8

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. PASA-NK is consistent with national legislation defining a strategic framework for

the agricultural and rural sector, i.e.: the Agriculture and Rural Development
Sector Strategy adopted in 2010, the Law on Fundamental Principles for Agriculture
passed in June 2012, the National Agricultural Investment Plan 2013-2020 adopted
in 2013, the Coffee Subsector Reactivation Strategy 2011-2015, the Provincial
Stabilization Strategy and the priority action plan introduced in the provinces,
including North Kivu.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. In the context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the major innovation

under PASA-NK is creating linkages between POs and government services to
improve the economic services provided to farmers and explore opportunities for
commercialization. This approach could be scaled up under the programme
cofinanced by IFAD and, over the longer term, in areas where there is a relatively
well structured farmers movement and active trade in agriculture.

D. Policy engagement
45. PASA-NK contributes to implementation of the following policies: the provincial

decree on the management of customary lands, and the tax exemptions on trade
in agricultural products. The project will support FOPAC in carrying out advocacy
actions in these areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

47. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve
million one hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve million one hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Benin for the Market Gardening Development
Support Project

Republic of Benin

Market Gardening Development Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry in charge of agriculture Ministére en charge de
l'agriculture

Total project cost: US$49.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: 16.8 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$23.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant:

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

0.35 million SDR (equivalent to
approximately US$0.5 million)

3.2 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$12.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$4.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015 116/R.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Market Gardening Development Support
Project, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
for the Market Gardening Development Support Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The population of Benin is estimated to be approximately 10 million, with a growth

rate of 3.5 per cent per year; 56 per cent of the population is rural. Benin is one of
the poorest countries in the world. Benin’s 2014 Human Development Index of
0.476 ranked in 169th out of 187 countries.

2. Agriculture is central to Benin’s economy, accounting for approximately 70 per cent
of employment and 30 per cent of GDP. Benin has recorded strong economic
performance, with an average annual growth rate of 3.9 per cent from 2006 to
2012, 5.6 per cent in 2013 and 5.7 per cent in 2014. Despite these positive trends,
economic growth has had a limited impact in terms of poverty reduction due to
high population growth and the vulnerability of the Beninese economy to external
shocks and climate change, and its dependence on primarily rainfed agriculture.

3. Poverty is characterized by strong regional disparities. Households most vulnerable
in terms of food consumption and poverty are those dependent on rainfed
agriculture (cereals and tubers) as the sole or primary source of income.

4. Youth and young adults (aged 15-35 years) account for approximately 60 per cent
of the national population. Due to a chronic lack of jobs in rural areas, youth
migration from rural to urban areas is growing by the year.

5. Benin is experiencing a deficit in vegetable production despite the market
opportunities existing in the country and elsewhere in the subregion. Moreover, its
high added value means market gardening production is a major direct and indirect
source of jobs for young people and women in urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

6. The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Sector Recovery (PSRSA) aims to boost market
gardening production and productivity to meet domestic demand and strengthen
the contribution of Beninese producers to cross-border trade.

7. The Market Gardening Development Support Project (PADMAR) is fully aligned with
the 2011-2015 country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). It is also in
keeping with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and perfectly aligned with axis 1
of the Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (CPRS), the National Agricultural
Investment Programme (NAIP), the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural
Development in Africa Programme (CAADP), the National Microfinance Strategy
(SNMF), the National Decentralization and Devolution Policy (PONADEC) and the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).



EB 2015 116/R.14

2

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will be implemented in southern Benin, working in 27 of the country’s

44 municipalities, located in seven of the country’s 12 departments: Atlantic,
Couffo, Littoral, Mono, Ouémé, Plateau and Zou. The project area has more than
5.8 million inhabitants. The departments and municipalities were selected based on
the following four criteria: (i) the potential for or emergence of profitable small-
scale market gardening; ii) the existence of useful hydro-agricultural potential that
could be developed for use by smallholders at a reasonable cost; (iii) proximity to
major consumer centres, including the cities of Lagos, Ibadan, Lomé, Accra and
Cotonou; and (iv) high rates of poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition and youth
unemployment.

9. The target group comprises: (i) market garden producers cultivating small areas –
1/8 hectare; (ii) vulnerable farming households with low crop diversification that
are motivated and interested in market gardening; and (iii) other value chain
actors, both upstream and downstream of production, including related services
and occupations such as input distribution, marketing, processing and trades
related to the construction and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and
equipment supply.

10. Moreover, every link in the market gardening value chain will target as a matter of
priority: (a) young women and men (aged 18-24 years) and young adult women
and men (aged 25-35 years) with economic initiative, motivated and engaged or
seeking to establish themselves in the market garden vale chain; and (b) women
working as producers, processors or traders. The goal is set as at least 40 per cent
women and 50 per cent youth and young adult men and women among the direct
beneficiaries.

B. Project development objective
11. Overall project objective. The overall project goal is to help sustainably improve

food and nutrition security and reduce rural poverty in the project area.

12. Development objective. The development objective is to sustainably boost the
income of market gardeners, while strengthening their resilience to the effects of
climate change.

13. The project aims to reach 20,000 direct beneficiaries (120,000 household
members), including 17,000 market garden producers, and create 3,000 jobs
upstream and downstream of production, primarily for young men and women. It
will have significant impact through the provision of economic and social training to
growers and of institutional strengthening to market gardening organizations and
public and private institutions involved in the market gardening value chain. It is
expected that production will increase by at least 50 per cent and climate resilience
will be strengthened for 10,000 households as a result of the support provided by
the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP).

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project consists of the following three components:

Component 1. Value addition and marketing
15. Subcomponent 1.1. Partnership development and stakeholder

professionalization. Market garden value chain actors are expected to forge
professional partnerships that will add value to their products on local and
subregional markets. Activities will include: (i) support for the establishment of a
stakeholders’ forum, the “Market Gardening Stakeholders’ Form” (TFM), to promote
better governance in the market gardening value chain; (ii) a programme to
strengthen the institutional capacities of professional organizations; (iii) support to
existing systems in terms of information on pricing and vegetable markets; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

3

(iv) support to the development of services and jobs upstream and downstream of
production, especially for young holders of initiatives in new businesses that will
accompany the modernization of the sector.

16. Subcomponent 1.2. Market infrastructure and improved accessibility. The
expected outcome is the establishment of resilient infrastructure to enhance value
addition and facilitates market access. Activities will include: (a) support for the
construction and restoration of infrastructure collection, packaging and temporary
storage of market gardening inputs and produce; and (b) the repair of 120 km of
rural roads and construction of crossings needed to improve access to market
gardening production areas and the maintenance system.

Component 2. Improving market gardening productivity and production
17. Subcomponent 2.1. Resilient market gardening facilities. The expected result

is guaranteed and sustainable access to water and land for market gardening
producers. In this regard, the project will support the following activities: (a) the
development of 2,100 hectares of resilient market gardening plots, including 100
hectares of plots for the demonstration of innovative, water-efficient and low-
carbon market garden irrigation; (b) land tenure security for market gardening
producers; (c) the establishment of a committee to monitor the work and maintain
the market gardening plots, and capacity-building of committees charged with the
maintenance and management of irrigation systems and facilities; and (d) the
construction of flood protection dikes in areas at high risk of flooding. Solar-
powered pump irrigation systems will be used wherever conditions allow.

18. Subcomponent 2.2. Access to improved technologies and techniques. The
expected outcome is increased productivity and production among market
gardening producers in the context of climate change. Activities will include:
(a) specialized local advisory support provided by Market Gardening Technical
Specialists (TSMs) and link-producers; (b) access to quality production inputs
through the provision of market gardening kits including water-efficient irrigation
facilities and quality inputs; (c) support for the provision of quality inputs and
demonstrations on market gardening irrigation innovations; and (d) nutrition
integration support, including the promotion of the cultivation of local vegetables.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project is part of the broader trend of market gardening intensification in the

coastal areas of West Africa but has the following specific features: (i) it targets
small-scale market gardening producers so as to maximize their contribution to job
creation and the reduction of rural poverty; (ii) it takes into account the value
chain dimension, which will be developed through TFMs, and will strengthen
professional organizations and occupations and services upstream and downstream
of production; (iii) it systematically promotes modern, water-efficient and,
wherever possible, solar technologies, with a view to strengthening the
competitiveness of small market gardening enterprises; (iv) it systematically
promote quality inputs; (v) it promotes local leafy vegetables popular among
consumers and rich in vitamins and minerals; and (vi) it systematically strengthens
climate change resilience.

20. The IFAD Framework Programme in Benin (ProCaR) will be responsible for project
coordination and management, while field activities will be implemented through:
(a) TSMs, who will act as a technical reference group for the project at the
commune level in collaboration with regional centres for rural development
(CARDER) and agricultural development centres at the commune level; (b) link-
producers: experienced producers, living on site and receiving regular training and
support from TSMs, who will ensure the inclusion of their peers in market
gardening activities, each supporting and training 24 producers in market
gardening good practices, and receiving regular capacity-building from TSMs; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

4

(c) facilitators, who will run the TFMs to ensure they are able, in the medium term,
to ensure governance of the market gardening value chain.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Finance will be the borrower/recipient for this project. The Ministry

in charge of agriculture will provide technical supervision. The ProCaR National
Steering Committee (NSC) will be modified to include representatives of PADMAR
stakeholders, including the National Platform of Farmers’ Organizations and
Agricultural Producers of Benin (PNOPPA). The Minister for Economic Development,
Public Policy Evaluation and the Promotion of Good Governance, or his
representative thereof, will chair the NSC. The NSC secretariat will be hosted by
the MAEP Department of Programming and Forecasting, supported by ProCaR. The
NSC will be responsible for approving annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and
monitoring the project.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. The activities implemented under the project will be presented each year in an
AWPB prepared with the help of TSMs and facilitators, and developed in the form of
site investment plans consolidated at the regional level. These regional investment
plans – standalone investments and enabling investments – will be consolidated by
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in a national AWPB to be submitted for
comments to the Ministry in charge of agriculture, then approved by the NSC,
before submission to IFAD for approval. Each draft AWPB will include: a detailed
description of the activities of the coming year; a procurement plan during covering
18 months the first year and 12 months from the second year; a statement of the
origin of funds and expected results. From the second year, the AWPB will include a
summary of the results achieved and constraints encountered during the year
concerned.

23. The project will develop a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
to measure progress in implementation, its effects and its impact on target groups.
M&E will inform a small number of relevant indicators relating to the Results and
Impact Management System (RIMS), relating to the impacts climate change.

24. M&E will have three levels of indicators and include: (i) internal monitoring of
planning by measuring progress in physical and financial implementation against
the AWPB; (ii) monitoring of the logical framework indicators to measure the
attainment of expected outputs and outcomes; and (iii) impact assessment. The
indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age.

25. The project will draw on the core nutrition and food security indicators generated
by the baseline survey of the Adapted Rural Financial Services Development Project
(PAPSFRA). An anthropometric and socioeconomic survey will be conducted at the
end of the project. The ProCaR online database will be updated to reflect the
specific project indicators.

26. The approach adopted will aim to establish a value chain between M&E, knowledge
and communication, to collect, process, document and broadly disseminate,
through various media, using new information and communication technologies.
Data on results and impact will be collected and compiled into an electronic library.
The data will be analysed and trends in key indicators will be presented in a
differentiated format according to user needs (graphics, maps). The ProCaR
website, social networks and sharing workshops will be used to share and
disseminate results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Project funds will be managed in accordance with the procedures in force in Benin

and with IFAD procedures for the financial management of projects. They will be
set out in detail in the letter to the borrower and in the ProCaR manual of



EB 2015 116/R.14

5

administrative, financial and accounting procedures, which will be updated to
incorporate PADMAR.

28. The ProCaR PCU, which was created by ministerial order and has autonomous
financial and administrative management, will be responsible for the financial
management of the project. It will prepare semi-annual financial reports for
submission to the Government and to IFAD, as well as project financial statements
for each fiscal year. At project launch, the PCU will prepare an 18-month
procurement plan to be submitted to IFAD for approval. The plan will indicate, for
each market, the procurement method, the proposed thresholds and the applicable
preferences. Goods, works and services will be procured in accordance with
national procedures for procurement, subject to their compatibility with relevant
IFAD guidelines.

E. Supervision
29. IFAD will directly supervise the project and administer the financing (loan and

grant). In this regard, the Fund will conduct two supervision missions per year,
with the participation of representatives of the Ministry in charge of agriculture, the
Ministry for Development and other interested ministries and partners. The first will
be primarily a support mission and will focus essentially on reviewing and
finalizing: (i) the initial AWPB; (ii) the manual of administrative, financial and
accounting procedures; and (iii) procurement documents.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
30. The total projects costs amount to US$49.2 million over seven years, with a base

cost of US$47.8 million. Taxes account for 9.8 per cent of total costs, at US$4.8
million, including US$0.4 million and US$1.0 million respectively for physical and
financial contingencies (3 per cent of base cost). Investment costs amount to
US$46.8 million, or 95.1 per cent of the base cost. Operating expenses account for
US$2.4 million, or 4.9 per cent of the base cost.

Table 1
Project costs by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value addition and marketing

Partnership development and
stakeholder professionalization 277.1 11.3 1 943.9 79.5 - - 203.6 8.3 - - 19.9 0.8 2 444.6

Market infrastructure and improving
access 1 343.0 18.0 - - - - 6 083.3 81.7 - - 19.7 0.3 7 446.0

Subtotal 1 620.1 16.4 1 943.9 19.7 - - 6 286.9 63.6 - - 39.7 0.4 9 890.6

2. Improving market gardening
productivity and production

Resilient market gardening facilities 1 534.5 18.3 - - - - 5 713.1 68.2 865.2 10.3 270.2 3.2 8 383.0

Access to improved technology and
techniques 1 221.9 4.7 17 572.6 67.1 500.0 1.9 - - 3 336.4 12.7 3 543.3 13.5 26 174.1

Subtotal 2 756.4 8.0 17 572.6 50.9 500.0 1.4 5 713.1 16.5 4 201.6 12.2 3 813.4 11.0 34 557.1

3. Coordination, M&E and
knowledge management

Coordination and management 226.5 6.7 2 875.1 85.3 - - - - 268.0 8.0 - - 3 369.6

M&E and knowledge management 235.8 17.2 1 108.3 80.6 - - - - 30.4 2.2 - - 1 374.5

Subtotal 462.3 9.7 3 983.5 84.0 - - - - 298.3 6.3 - - 4 744.1

Total 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

6

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan and grant, an ASAP grant, a loan from

the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), a contribution from the
beneficiaries and a contribution from the Government of Benin. IFAD will
participate in the project financing by providing a loan in the amount of US$23.5
million on highly concessional terms (equivalent to CFAF 13.7 billion or 47.8 per
cent of total project costs) and a grant in the amount of US$0.5 million (equivalent
to CFAF 0.3 billion). The IFAD loan will be used as follows: 73.9 per cent for
improving productivity and production (component 2); 9.2 per cent for value
addition and marketing (component 1); and 16.9 per cent for coordination, M&E
and knowledge management. The IFAD grant funds will be entirely allocated to the
“Access to improved technologies and techniques” subcomponent, implemented
under component 2, specifically to new irrigation technology demonstration
activities.

32. OFID will provide a loan of US$12 million (equivalent to CFAF 7 billion FCFA or 24.4
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 47.6 per cent for the resilient
market gardening facilities subcomponent, implemented under component 2, and
52.4 per cent for component 1 activities.

33. ASAP will provide a grant of US$4.5 million (equivalent to CFAF 2.6 billion or 9.1
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 93.4 per cent to finance the
activities of component 2 and 6.6 per cent for coordination, M&E and knowledge
management.

34. Beneficiaries will contribute in the amount of US$3.9 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.3 billion or 7.8 per cent of total project costs), corresponding to their
participation in meeting the costs of developing market gardening plots, access to
mark gardening technologies, and building market and crossing infrastructures.

35. The Government will contribute an estimated US$4.8 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.8 billion or 9.8 per cent of total costs) to the project financing, corresponding to
the total taxes and duties due on the goods and services procured by the project.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

I. Investment
costs

1. Rural/civil
works 2 503.8 18.0 100.7 0.7 325.7 2.3 10 168.6 73.1 521.2 3.7 289.9 2.1 13 909.9

2. Subsidies
and grants 0.0 - 11 819.9 66.2 - - 102.7 0.6 2 399.7 13.4 3 543.3 19.8 17 865.5

3. Vehicles 81.7 23.0 194.1 54.6 - - 53.0 14.9 26.5 7.5 - - 355.2

4. Equipment
and material 397.5 23.0 532.4 30.8 - - 382.4 22.1 396.0 22.9 19.9 1.2 1 728.1

5. Consultants 1 796.4 18.0 6 527.3 65.4 - - 1 192.4 11.9 464.1 4.7 - - 9 980.1

6. Training and
workshops 0.0 - 2 226.3 75.4 174.3 5.9 101.0 3.4 451.0 15.3 - - 2 952.6

Total investment
costs 4 779.4 10.2 21 400.6 45.7 500.0 1.1 12 000.0 25.6 4 258.5 9.1 3 853.1 8.2 46 791.5

II. Operating costs

A. Operating costs 59.5 18.0 270.8 82.0 - - - - - - - - 330.3

B. Staff costs 0.0 - 1 828.6 88.3 - - - - 241.5 11.7 - - 2 070.1

Total operating
costs 59.5 2.5 2 099.4 87.5 - - - - 241.5 10.1 - - 2 400.4

Total project
costs 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The project will provide direct socioeconomic benefits to at least 20,000 market

gardening value chain actors (thereby reaching 120,000 individuals), including
approximately 17,000 market gardening households cultivating small plots of 1/8
hectare. It will create 3,000 new jobs, primarily for young people, upstream and
downstream of production, including in related services and occupations, such as
input distribution, marketing, processing and trades related to the construction and
maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and equipment supply. It will contribute to
the production of 68,000 tons of a range of vegetables per year by the sixth year
of implementation. The basic economic rate of return (ERR) of the project is 27.5
per cent. The net present value (NPV) is estimated at US$25.3 million.

37. The direct benefits expected are: (i) 1,100 ha of land converted and equipped with
irrigation system in areas of high water table;  60 ha converted and equipped in
areas where the water table is of moderate depth; 60 ha converted and equipped
in plateaus or low water table areas; 480 ha of lowlands converted; 300 ha
converted and equipped in areas with artesian water; (ii) 12,000 linear metres (ml)
of ASAP-funded flood-protection dykes for market gardening facilities; (iii) 120 km
of desert tracks repaired and 279 ml of crossings built for use in all seasons;
(iv) 150 business, upstream and downstream of market gardening production,
created or strengthened; and v) 27 communes equipped to maintain the repaired
tracks.

38. In terms of environmental benefits, the project will make it possible to avoid:
(i) approximately US$560,000 in fuel consumption per year; (ii) an estimated
1,423 t CO2 eq of greenhouse gas emissions per year, equivalent to approximately
US$12,800; and (iii) 25-50 per cent of market gardening produce lost to flooding,
drought or excessive heat over every two-year period, corresponding to 20,400
tons or US$6.1 million. The project will also reduce water consumption through the
use of water-efficient technologies.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability has been systematically built into project design. The inclusion of the

poorest people and the facilitation of their access to quality equipment and inputs
is intended to create, in the medium term, self-financing capacity or access among
farmers’ organizations (FOs) to funding from financial institutions for the use of
their members. For market gardening sites, demand-based project interventions
are the true gauge of sustainability; these include: land tenure protection, the
participation of market gardening producers and rural communities in investment,
the use of locally tested and relevant technologies, the building of their financial
management capacities so as to enable them to buy inputs and renew equipment,
as well as the participation of producers in maintenance.

40. There is a high likelihood that the project achievements will be sustainable. The
establishment and effective functioning of TFMs, financing for water-efficient
irrigation systems and the provision of high-quality inputs will give stakeholders
the means to increase their competitiveness and enhance their production quality.
The strategy of fully empowering FOs to provide affordable services to their
members is intended to ensure the sustainability of project gains. Finally, the
empowerment of TFMs will ultimately enable them to ensure market gardening
subsector governance.

41. Improving land tenure security among market gardening producers will promote
investment in and the sustainability of their modes of production and reduce
conflicts. The organizational and management capacities of relevant civic land
tenure structures will be strengthened. Moreover, mechanisms for managing and
maintaining market gardening plots and infrastructure will be established, and user
capacity strengthened. Year-round production and better understanding of and



EB 2015 116/R.14

8

access to national and subregional markets to sell produce at remunerative prices,
as well as a more integrated understanding of the seasonal nature of these
markets, will be major gains contributing to sustainability.

42. The project will invest in monitoring water resources and salinzation risk as key to
the economic and environmental sustainability of its activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. Following the adoption of mitigation measures, the project risk level is rated as

medium. It will nonetheless face systematic risks inherent to the market gardening
subsector and to the planned programme activities. These risks have been
identified and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated at the design level.
The support of ASAP will help further mitigate these risks.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
44. The project is fully aligned with IFAD strategy and policies, including the 2011-

2015 Strategic Framework, the climate change strategy, environmental and social
evaluation procedures, the targeting and gender strategy, supervision and
implementation support, and environment and natural resource management
policies. The project is also fully aligned with the objectives of ASAP.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The project is closely aligned with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and aligned

with axis 1 of the CPRS and with the NAIP, the CAADP, the SNMF, the PONADEC
and the NAPCC. It is in line with other projects and initiatives under way,
supported by IFAD and other donors, including the IFAD-supported PACER and
PAPSFRA projects, the Belgian Technical Cooperation-funded Market Gardening
Stakeholder Support Project, the United States Agency for International
Development -funded Growing Resources for Enhanced Agriculture Enterprises and
Nutrition project and the African Development Bank-financed Ouémé Valley
Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project. Regarding rural youth employment, the
project will create partnerships with the Multi-year Water and Sanitation Sector
Support Programme and the Special Programme for Youth in Agriculture in Benin
and the Songhai Centre.

C. Innovations and scaling up
46. In the context of action research, the project will demonstrate market gardening

sector innovations that have a direct impact on priority areas, such as:
(i) determining appropriate fertilizer dosage for various types of market gardening
produce; (ii) phytosanitary treatments and mechanical protection measures, in
particular integrated protection against biological pests; (iii) the use of pesticides
and fertilizers of biological origin; and (iv) evaluating the performance of local,
salt-tolerant market gardening crop varieties and short-cycle varieties in mitigating
climate risks, and organic material value addition (compost).

47. The project will also demonstrate innovations in irrigation, water-efficient systems
and solar-powered pumps, in partnership with FOs, the Directorate-General for
Rural Development and Equipment and the National Agricultural Research Institute
of Benin. These demonstrations will be developed with the assistance of specialized
institutes, and funded by the ASAP financing (innovative kits) and the IFAD grant
(draining and piping).

48. The project will invest in monitoring pesticide residues in groundwater and market
gardening produce as an innovative element in keeping with the sustainable
agricultural production focus of the project. The project will also assess the
salinization level of the soil. Innovations once tested and evaluated will be scaled
up.



EB 2015 116/R.14

9

D. Policy engagement
49. The project will contribute to the transformation of the market gardening subsector

through the professionalization of its stakeholders. It will conduct, through TFMs,
policy consultations on topics of relevance to value chain actors, such as:
(i) improving access to land rights among vulnerable groups (women and young
people); (ii) policy relating to imports and access to specific market gardening
fertilizers; (iii) sustainable access to financing for small market gardening
producers; (iv) setting quality standards for market gardening produce and inputs;
and v) and the taxation of imports and exports.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

51. The Republic of Benin is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to sixteen million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (16,850,000 SDR) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty-five thousand
special drawing rights (355,000 SDR) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to three million two and twenty
thousand special drawing rights (3,220,000 SDR) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Malawi for the
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Republic of Malawi

Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water
Development

Total programme cost: US$83.95 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 19.30 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.48 million)

Amount of IFAD
Debt Sustainability Framework grant:

SDR 19.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.54 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 5.15 million (equivalent to approximately
US$7.06 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Department for International Development (DFID);
private sector

Amount of cofinancing: DFID: US$0.5 million
Private sector: US$3.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$13.08 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.28 million (in kind)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Malawi for the Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Malawi for
the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Malawi is a densely populated landlocked country of some 15 million people in an

area of 118,484 km2, of which 24,000 km2 is covered by freshwater lakes and
mangroves. Population growth is almost 3 per cent per annum and the country has
one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world. With a Human Development Index
of 0.414, Malawi is ranked 174th out of 187 countries (2014), while for its gender
development index it ranked 116th out of 208 countries (2013). Education levels are
low. Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition, combined with HIV/AIDS prevalence
of 11.9 per cent, add to the challenge.

2. Poverty is mainly rural. Approximately 51 per cent of the Malawian population lives
below the poverty line of a dollar a day (Millennium Development Goals [MDGs]
Report 2013), while in rural areas over 85 per cent of the people are poor.1 Rural
areas also have a higher occurrence of both stunted and underweight children than
do urban areas. In 2005, the Government of Malawi set up the Fertilizer Input
Supply Scheme, which increased maize production and enabled the country to
become self-sufficient in years with normal weather conditions. However, Malawi’s
progress against the MDGs remains mixed. Hunger has decreased, but persists.
Targets for poverty reduction and primary education are deemed unlikely to be
achieved by 2015.

3. Women have remained disadvantaged in many aspects of life, despite their large
share in the food-production labour force. They have little control over produce,
and benefit less from the income earned. Young people also face considerable
challenges, mainly in terms of few employment opportunities outside agriculture in
rural areas and the ongoing fragmentation of landholdings. Farming, predominantly
rainfed, is associated with low cash-income generation, hard labour and low status.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Most smallholder families in Malawi live at the subsistence level, with cash or food
insecurity for several months of the year. Adverse climate effects exacerbate the
already precarious situation of many smallholders. In 2015, for example, floods
destroyed a large part of the maize harvest in southern Malawi, while other areas
suffered under prolonged drought, with severe consequences for crop yields, food
security and nutrition.

5. Land productivity has been declining for decades, mainly due to existing
inappropriate land and water management practices that do not support sustainable
crop production and erosion control measures. Moreover, farmers do not possess
sufficient financing to purchase fertilizer to restore soil fertility. Irrigation is scarce
and this curbs agricultural production to only one harvest per year.

1 National Statistical Office of Malawi, Statistical Yearbook 2008.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

2

6. Access to land under customary procedures is increasingly under threat due to the
high demand for arable land. Seasonal sublets of land have become frequent and
benefit those who can afford to pay, while the poor may lose their land.

7. Several government- and donor-funded programmes aim to reverse current trends
in the loss of soil fertility and declining yields. The Government invests in the
Fertilizer Input Supply Scheme to enhance soil fertility and increase yields of maize,
the main staple crop, and to boost national food security. Unfortunately, it faces
difficulties in sustaining the scheme due to its high costs.

8. The proposed Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE) has been
designed to address the above issues through investments in irrigation and in
improved rainfed agriculture adapted to smallholders. It seeks to enable: higher
land and labour productivity; application of sustainable, climate-smart land and
water management practices; and a focus on agricultural markets to generate cash
income for smallholders.

9. The Government is committed to addressing rural poverty through agricultural
growth. The second Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS II) defines
water development as a key strategic area. In 2015, the Irrigation Master Plan and
Investment Framework (IMPIF) was formulated to expand access of smallholders to
irrigation in order to boost crop production and enhance resilience to adverse
climate events. The Government asked IFAD to invest in the IMPIF and in the
development of water management for smallholder agriculture.

10. PRIDE is fully compatible with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) 2010-2015 and complements services provided by the existing IFAD
portfolio. Synergies will be developed with both the Rural Livelihoods and Economic
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP – value chain development) and the Sustainable
Agriculture Production Programme (SAPP – good agricultural practices in rainfed
systems).

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The programme will be implemented over a seven-year period in two regional

clusters in the northern and southern regions of Malawi. The programme will target
poor smallholder farmers of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme. The
primary target group comprises food insecure households. Smallholder farmers will
be supported in: (i) being allocated secure land in the programme irrigation
schemes; (ii) joining water users’ associations (WUAs) and obtaining representation
on catchment management committees; and (iii) becoming business entities
(individually and as groups) to respond to market opportunities.

B. Programme development objective
12. The programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to food

insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks. Its development
objective is that smallholder farmer households increase their income and nutrition
through sustainable agricultural production. The programme’s two major outcomes
are that smallholders: (i) operate climate-smart land and water management
systems; and (ii) adopt environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural
production systems on both rainfed and irrigated land.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The

objective of this component is to develop climate-smart land and water
management systems for smallholder households on rainfed and irrigated land. The
objective will be achieved through preparation and management of about 15
irrigation schemes, together with establishment and strengthening of WUAs to
manage, operate and maintain irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

3

governance. Agricultural productivity will be increased through irrigation, using
water storage for a second or third crop, while PRIDE will address environmental
degradation risks by investing in soil and water conservation measures. The latter
will be funded entirely by a grant from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP). The measures aim to restore soil cover on
vulnerable grounds, control erosion, and carry out reforestation of slopes and
protection of river buffer zones, as a contribution to national greenhouse gas
reduced-emission targets.

14. Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this
component is to promote adoption of environmentally and economically sustainable
agricultural production systems by smallholder households on both rainfed and
irrigated land. The programme will support efficient knowledge transfer to
smallholder farmers through trials and demonstrations, combined with better
information from the private sector on market potential and opportunities. The
component will promote climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including
the use of weather and climate information services, irrigation optimization,
application of integrated pest management and reduction of post-harvest losses.

15. Market linkages will be promoted through: value chain analyses to identify suitable
crops; training, mainly through farmer business schools; and commodity platforms
to bring together all actors in a value chain. A dedicated irrigation technology
window – under the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund – will be piloted with the
private sector and cofunded by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID). The private sector will provide farmers with modern irrigation equipment
such as drip irrigation and will facilitate marketing of their produce.

16. PRIDE will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities, such as the choice of crops
or value chain commodities, and support this through the following measures:
(i) integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting
diversified and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated
homestead food production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved
cooking stoves, which reduce the need for fuelwood by as much as 60 per cent,
combined with nutrition education.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

17. During the implementation phase, PRIDE will actively mobilize partners and
resources for communities in scheme cluster areas so that these communities can
sustainably harness natural resources for agriculture, build competence in
production, and profit from better market linkages. The implementation approach
comprises a phased development process: identification, preparation,
implementation and review. Programme management will be tasked with
monitoring and reporting regularly to safeguard positive environmental and social
outcomes. With an average design-to-commissioning time of three years, irrigation
investments will be phased in three lots, with one or two schemes per irrigation
service division in each lot. Progress and lessons learned in the first three years of
irrigation projects developed under the programme will be carefully documented
and will inform the schemes to be developed in the second phase.

18. PRIDE builds on lessons learned in various projects in Malawi, such as the World
Bank/IFAD-funded Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development
Project (IRLADP), and links with other projects in the water sector promoted by
various donor agencies.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

4

B. Organizational framework
19. The lead programme agency will be the Department of Irrigation (DOI) within the

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MOAIWD). The DOI will
establish a dedicated programme coordination office (PCO) which will be staffed
with highly qualified personnel, either from the government's roster or from the
labour market. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions. A programme steering committee
(PSC) will provide strategic oversight and is composed of senior representatives of
the ministries concerned, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development (MOFEPD). The PCO will be assisted by a technical advisory team
representing the departments concerned with programme implementation: Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MOAIWD), Land (under the Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Urban Development), Environmental Affairs (under the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), Debt and Aid (under MOFEPD), and
others as needed. The programme will coordinate fully with the agriculture sector-
wide approach programme (ASWAp) to ensure full alignment with government
investments and policies.

20. In the village and scheme cluster areas, the programme will coordinate its entry
with the existing village-level leadership (traditional authorities) and structures,
organized in village development committees. These will convene a combined
village committee to provide oversight for programme and community activities.
Detailed preparations for land consolidation and irrigation scheme preparation will
be delegated to a WUA formation committee. Implementation of more
straightforward activities (soil and water conservation, GAPs and market linkages)
will be handed over to beneficiary groups and lead farmers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme’s approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
knowledge management will be in line with the 2001 National Irrigation Policy and
Development Strategy, the MOAIWD M&E framework and IFAD requirements, based
on emerging best practices of the IRLADP and other IFAD-funded projects.

22. The main planning tools for PRIDE comprise the logical framework, overall
programme budget and annual workplan and budget (AWP/B). Every year, a
decentralized, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken.
The consolidated AWP/B will be presented to the PSC for approval and to IFAD for
concurrence. Implementation of the AWP/B will be monitored through the
programme’s M&E system, which will produce semi-annual reports.

23. Programme M&E will be based on IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The programme will conduct baseline and follow-up surveys combining
collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data with application of a
multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist in tracking changes
in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, which measures changes in women’s
empowerment levels as a result of an intervention.

24. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s M&E system,
and particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons learned during
implementation. These will translate into factsheets that will contribute to the wider
policy debate in the smallholder agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place
through programme and MOAIWD websites, or relevant institutions such as
research agencies, and will be presented at national workshops on key programme
themes.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

5

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. A financial management assessment was carried out

during design and concluded that the proposed financial management
arrangements for PRIDE are at medium risk. Transparency International's Global
Corruption Perceptions Index scored Malawi at 34 per cent in 2014.2 IFAD’s Rural-
Sector Performance score regarding accountability and corruption in rural areas
scored Malawi at 3.75 in 2014, which translates into medium risk.

26. Mitigation measures aim to enhance the country’s financial management systems
through: use of computerized accounting software, specifically recruited
programme finance staff, accounting linked to M&E, and the use of dedicated bank
accounts. Processing of PRIDE’s day-to-day transactions will be handled outside the
government Integrated Financial Management System. However, the programme
will provide periodic returns to the Accountant General to enable the updating of
government accounts. Accounting will be linked to the M&E system, requiring that
the terms of reference of the financial management team and the M&E expert be
linked on these aspects. The proposed arrangement will be managed by the PCO
under the oversight and guidance of MOAIWD.

27. Flow of funds. IFAD and ASAP funds will flow into one designated account, from
which they pass to the programme operational accounts. The MOFEPD Treasury will
manage the designated account and the PCO the operational bank accounts. All
accounts will be opened at a commercial bank satisfactory to IFAD. Any
government agencies participating in PRIDE will be required to open a PRIDE-
specific bank account to receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved
AWP/Bs, to be retired before subsequent releases.

28. Procurement. All procurement funded under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent they are consistent
with IFAD’s 2010 Project Procurement Guidelines. Malawi’s legal and institutional
framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently robust.

29. A procurement assessment of IRLADP operations was undertaken as part of the
design of PRIDE and, as a result, a number of mitigation measures will be
incorporated concerning bid registers, contract administration, engagement of the
MOAIWD Internal Procurement Committee, and so forth. A procurement specialist
in the PCO will ensure compliance with IFAD requirements and that procurement
processes in practice are fully compliant with the legislative and regulatory
framework.

30. Governance. A governance and anti-corruption framework will be elaborated as
part of the programme implementation manual during the first year of
implementation. This will ensure transparency, accountability in the use of
resources, and participation, i.e. that people have a voice in decisions that may
affect them. Key features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of
women and disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community
representatives in local-level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring
of programme activities; (iv) both internal and external audit of programme
accounts and processes; (v) IFAD supervision and implementation support;
(vi) reporting of results to the PSC and IFAD, with key information published on a
programme website; and (vii) a grievance system.

E. Supervision
31. PRIDE will be directly supervised by IFAD jointly with the Government, with a focus

on: (i) fiduciary aspects; (ii) achievements and the quality of programme
implementation; and (iii) implementation support emphasizing environmental and
climate assessment procedures. Supervision missions will normally be carried out

2 Transparency International: 0 per cent means not corrupt and 100 per cent highly corrupt.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

6

twice a year. Timing of the missions will be coordinated with production of the six-
monthly progress report, so that missions can gauge the situation at the same cut-
off dates and thus provide an additional perspective on progress at PSC meetings.
During the start-up phase, implementation support will be provided to assist in
setting up adequate systems and to enhance technical capacities. Supervision will
focus on the quality of institutional arrangements, including timely installation of a
high-quality M&E system and creation of baselines.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs are estimated at US$84 million, including price and physical

contingencies, duties and taxes. The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) a
seven-year programme period, starting in 2016; (ii) price contingencies of 6 per
cent, and physical contingencies of 3 per cent; (iii) local inflation set at 10 per cent,
and foreign inflation set at 2 per cent; (iv) an exchange rate fixed at US$1 =
440 Malawi kwacha (MK); and (v) the Government will waive duties, excises and
taxes or will finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the programme.
Taxes and duties are estimated at US$13 million of total programme costs.
Component estimates are summarized in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID

Private
sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

I. Irrigation development and
catchment management 16 294 17 736 1 878 - - 7 283 10 527 53 718
II. Agriculture and market
linkages 2 979 7516 4 984 498 3 000 - 1 940 20 918
III. Programme management
and coordination 7210 1 288 201 - - - 616 9 314

Total 26 483 26 540 7 063 498 3 000 7 283 13 083 83 950

B. Programme financing
33. The programme will be financed by a total IFAD contribution equivalent to some

US$53 million in the form of 50 per cent loan and 50 per cent grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF); ASAP grant financing in an amount equivalent to
about US$7.0 million; DFID financing of about US$0.5 million; private-sector
financing of about US$3.0 million; a Government contribution of about
US$13 million; and a contribution by beneficiaries of about US$7.3 million (in kind).
The IFAD loan will be provided on highly concessional terms, including a 40-year
maturity period, a 10-year grace period, and a 0.75 per cent annual service charge.

34. IFAD will provide start-up funds from loan and DSF proceeds in the amount of
US$560,000 to cover specified expenditures aimed at enhancing capacity for a
quick start-up.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID Private sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 13 906 31.1 13 906 31.1 1 034 2.3 - - - - 6 953 15.6 8 896 19.9 44 696
2. Vehicles 565 70.0 - - - - - - - - - - 242 30.0 808
3. Equipment and materials 195 8.5 91 4.0 1 397 61.2 - - - - 157 6.9 443 19.4 2 284
4. Studies and consultancies 1 613 18.4 3 338 38.1 2 302 26.3 - - - - - - 1 506 17.2 8 760
5. Training 1 031 10.6 5 685 58.4 1 405 14.4 - - - - 172 1.8 1 439 14.8 9 732
6. Cofinancing - - 2 502 41.7 - - 498 8.3 3 000 50.0 - - -0 - 6 000
7. Operations and
maintenance 1 084 87.1 - - - - - - - - - - 161 12.9 1 245
8. Salaries and allowances 8 087 77.6 1 017 9.8 925 8.9 - - - - - - 395 3.8 10 425

Total 26 483 31.5 26 540 31.6 7 063 8.4 498 0.6 3 000 3.6 7 283 8.7 13 083 15.6 83 950

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is estimated at

20 per cent (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Malawi,
estimated at 12 per cent.3 The EIRR is based on the assumption that 80 per cent of
targeted farmers will adopt the GAP technology packages promoted by the
programme and 90 per cent will be engaged in farming of irrigated land.

36. PRIDE will generate financial benefits in the form of increased financial returns (net
incomes) to about 17,500 smallholder households as direct beneficiaries of the
programme. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the
programme area owing to expected increased financial returns (about 10-fold) from
irrigated and improved rainfed agriculture, post-harvest technologies and improved
employment opportunities.

37. Other social benefits include improved nutrition and increased food security through
diversification of crop production. PRIDE will strengthen the status of women
through their economic and social empowerment. The main approach includes
promotion of gender-balanced access to irrigated land, representation in WUAs and
other farmers’ institutions, access to GAPs and cash-crop value chains.

38. Better access to and use of weather information, irrigation and community-based
approaches are expected to lead to sustainable land and water management. In
conjunction with a higher degree of commercialization among farmers, PRIDE is
expected to render smallholder farming systems more resilient and better-adapted
to the effects of climate change.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability of the benefits generated and approaches will be ensured through a

number of mechanisms. PRIDE embraces a clear strategy for horizontal and vertical
scaling up, with identified pathways, key drivers and institutional space.

40. Knowledge management will be central to information-gathering and learning. Key
results and information will be communicated to the wider public for participation
and to the Government for action in policy development. The focus on linking
smallholders to market will be key, as irrigation investments will only remain
profitable if commercialization of smallholder farming takes place. Farmers will
manage the irrigation schemes through a proven institutional set-up involving
WUAs and consultative planning. These institutions are expected to remain and
become the main development engine, as is the commercialization approach. Land
consolidation will be practised using existing procedures and involving community

3 World Bank: Average deposit interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks in Malawi.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

8

organizations and the Government. The dynamics will be analysed in annual
studies.

41. Environmental and social sustainability will be achieved through implementation of
specific environmental and social management plans and necessitates resettlement
plans based on the assessments and frameworks adopted by the Government.
These frameworks will ensure that potential environmental and social impacts or
required resettlement actions be identified and addressed accordingly, before the
related irrigation schemes are constructed.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. Risk management will include adoption of mitigation measures and their

monitoring. Delayed programme start-up has been a common feature in the past.
Preparation of the implementation manual and a start-up plan aim to counteract
potential delays. By programme start-up, the action plan will be agreed and
earmarked funding will enable staff training and the purchase of equipment.
Another key risk is slow registration of WUAs. The registration process has been
placed in the start-up phase to complete the process before construction begins.

43. PRIDE will recruit from both the public and private sector to avoid gaps in staffing
and to obtain the best skill levels. A critical risk involves follow-up on environmental
safeguards. In line with IFAD’s 2015 Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP), a full assessment was carried out during design, leading to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework. These frameworks will guide the impact assessments, to be executed
during implementation, but prior to construction of the irrigation schemes. The PCO
will host an environmental coordinator to monitor needed actions in line with
Environment and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.

44. The establishment of irrigated command areas will require a redistribution of land.
PRIDE will benefit from the processes and experience of IRLADP. At scheme
development, farmers will be provided equitable access to land. Any agreements
will be subject to free, prior and informed consent by the affected parties, and will
include compensation for any loss of land and assets due to irrigation development.
A grievance mechanism will ensure the possibility of recourse following decisions.

45. Risks related to financial management include: (i) flow of funds is delayed due to
poor management of the designated account located within the Reserve Bank of
Malawi; (ii) MOAIWD capacity for internal audit is limited; and (iii) submission of
audit reports is delayed. The following mitigation measures will be established:
(i) the designated account will be located at a commercial bank; (ii) internal audit
will be outsourced; and (iii) the Auditor General has agreed to ensure timely
submission of audit reports.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. Programme design is compliant with the main IFAD policies and strategies. SECAP
has classified PRIDE as category A. In line with SECAP, as mentioned above, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework were developed during design and adopted by the Government. They
specify the next steps in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and
follow-up actions. PRIDE is compliant with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management
Policy and Climate Change Strategy. Climate-change adaptation measures are
integrated into programme activities to address climate risks and the potential
multiplication of effects, such as damage to landscapes and infrastructure.

47. Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated into programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. PRIDE will be



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

9

implemented respecting IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security, the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests and the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in
Africa. Before supporting any intervention that might affect land access and use
rights of communities, the programme will ensure that their free, prior and
informed consent has been solicited through inclusive consultations based on full
disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned and their implications.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. PRIDE is fully in harmony with MGDS II, which defines water development as a key

strategic area. Under this strategy, the IMPIF plans and coordinates interventions in
irrigation funded by IFAD and other donor agencies. PRIDE is also aligned with the
Government's Climate Change Investment Plan and will contribute to two
adaptation programmes: (i) strengthening catchment area and soil and water
conservation management; and (ii) improving community resilience through
agricultural production. PRIDE will coordinate fully with the ASWAp to ensure full
alignment with government investments and policies. The programme is fully
supported by the donor group on food agriculture and food security in Malawi.

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. PRIDE complements RLEEP and SAPP in the current IFAD country programme in

Malawi. It will build on and scale-up the successes of IRLADP and other irrigation
projects in terms of adopting innovative approaches that ensure full community
participation and promote equitable land access.

50. PRIDE, itself, aims to serve as a model to be scaled up in Malawi and elsewhere.
The potential for scaling up seems good, as pathways are in place – such as policy
engagement. For example, an integrated natural resources management policy
framework has been established, and the government policy on WUAs is conducive
to participatory planning. Key drivers for scaling up include financial and fiscal
space. The Government is committed to funding operations and maintenance for
larger rehabilitation works, and it will be the responsibility of WUAs to carry out
regular maintenance of the schemes. WUAs and other grass-roots organizations
represent the institutional space, an approach that has been successful in IRLADP.
PRIDE will be equipped with a strong M&E and knowledge management system to
deliver the information needed for successful scaling up of its approach and to
render it a sustainable investment.

51. In terms of innovation, PRIDE will support the newly established irrigation window
of the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund, funded by DFID and UNDP. It is expected
that the private sector will form a consortium to provide modern irrigation
technologies and marketing channels to smallholder farmers.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement is expected for compliance with environmental and social

safeguards, impact assessments, land tenure and the building of climate resilience.
The registration and full recognition of WUAs as key institutions is critical to the
success of PRIDE. The same applies to policies regarding GAPs and extension. The
mainstreaming of improved nutrition has become a key issue for IFAD. Dialogue on
these topics will take place at all levels – from community to national – to review
compliance, gather lessons learned and refine existing regulations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Malawi and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included in
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Malawi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

10

55. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,300,000) (approximately
US$26.48 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the Republic
of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,350,000) (approximately US$26.54
million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in
accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to five million one hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,150,000) (approximately
US$7.06 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola
for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture
Project

Republic of Angola

Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Angola

Executing agency: Ministry of Fisheries

Total project cost: US$12.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.91 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms, subject to interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent in addition to a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum on the principal amount
outstanding with a maturity period of 25 years, including
a grace period of 5 years, starting from the date of
approval by the Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): Although not included as part of this project proposal,
parallel grant financing is being finalized from the
European Community in the amount of
EUR 10.0 million.

Contribution of borrower: US$1.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD.





Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project,
as contained in paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal
Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Angola is located in south-western Africa and is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to

the west, Namibia to the south and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Zambia to the north and east, respectively. It is the third-largest country in sub-
Saharan Africa, covering an area of about 1.2 million square kilometres. Because
no population census has been conducted since 1970, population estimates must be
relied on and currently range between 16 and 18 million people, of whom some
41 per cent live in rural areas. Angola is one of Africa’s most resource-rich
countries, representing sub-Saharan Africa’s second-largest oil producer, after
Nigeria, and the world’s fourth-largest producer (in value) of diamonds. The
country also possesses a wealth of other natural resources, including minerals,
water, agriculture, forestry and fisheries.

2. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975 after 14 years of fighting, but
was then immediately engulfed in one of Africa’s most prolonged civil conflicts,
between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). Peace seemed
imminent in 1992 when national elections were held, but fighting was renewed
when UNITA rejected the election results. A new peace agreement, the Lusaka
Protocol, was signed in 1994, but war resumed in 1998. In April 2002, a ceasefire
was called following the death of the UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi; and on
21 November 2002, the Government and former rebels signed a peace agreement
that definitively ended the Angolan Civil War.

3. After almost four decades of war, much of the country’s economy had collapsed,
infrastructure was destroyed, institutions were weakened or no longer functioning,
the society was polarized, an estimated 4 million people were displaced, poverty
was rampant, and the newly created political process was fragile. Over the last 12
years since signing the peace accords, the Government, together with its national
and international partners, has developed and implemented programmes to restore
order and security, revitalize the economy, restore basic social services and
rehabilitate basic infrastructure. The political process appears to have stabilized,
and in the latest election (August 2012), the MPLA party of President Jose Eduardo
dos Santos won over 72 per cent of the vote.

4. Angola ranks 148th out of 186 countries on the Human Development Index (HDI)
(2012), an improvement when compared with its 2004 HDI ranking of 166th out of
the 177 countries. However, despite the progress made, poverty remains prevalent
throughout much of the country. An estimated 68 per cent of the population live
below the poverty line, and 15 per cent of households live in extreme poverty.
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where 94 per cent of households are
categorized as poor. Other indicators also point to the difficult conditions in the
country as a whole: (i) 38 per cent of the population lack access to safe water


sources; (ii) only 30 per cent of the population have access to government health
facilities; (iii) life expectancy at birth is estimated at 47 years (2010), among the
lowest in the world; (iv) despite major efforts at educational reform, about 75 per
cent of teachers have never received any relevant training; (v) only 54 per cent of
enrolled children complete the primary level; and (vi) Angola ranks 106th out of 134
countries in the gender gap index (2009).

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Government is fighting poverty on various fronts through (i) its 2005 Strategy
to Combat Poverty (ECP); (ii) its 2009 National Strategy for Food and Nutrition
Security (ENSAN); (iii) poverty alleviation activities including in its national annual
plans; and (iv) resources earmarked in each municipal budget for implementation
of annual local plans to combat poverty, including rural development. The
Government continues to allocate more than 30 per cent of its budget to improving
social conditions, a figure projected to increase over the next five years.

6. The ECP’s main goal is to halve the country’s poverty level by 2015 and to
consolidate peace and national unity through sustained improvement in the living
standards of all Angolans. The main priorities identified in the ECP are (i) the
reconstruction of infrastructure; (ii) increased access to education, health and other
basic services; and (iii) decentralization of governance structures. The ECP
highlights rural development, with a focus on improving food security and
revitalizing the rural economy. Key proposed actions are (i) strengthening the
production capacity of the traditional sector, particularly food crops and fisheries;
(ii) relaunching rural commerce; (iii) sustainably managing natural resources; and
(iv) reorganizing the legal framework and public institutions. Priority actions are to
be guided by the following basic principles: (i) a focus on smallholders; (ii) the
importance of community participation; (iii) the concentration of planning,
implementation and monitoring at the municipal level; (iv) complementary
activities with donors, the private sector and NGOs; (v) specific targeting of
women, including access to land; and (vi) HIV/AIDS treated as a cross-cutting
concern.

7. The goal set out in the ENSAN is to ensure that, at all times, all Angolans have
physical and economic access to adequate quantities of a variety of good-quality
food to enable them to contribute to the human, economic and social development
of the country. The main policy priorities are to: (i) increase and diversify
agriculture and sustainable fish production to improve the well-being of the
population; (ii) improve access to food; (iii) diminish levels of malnutrition; and
(iv) guarantee basic sanitation, and food and drinking water quality. Both the ECP
and the ENSAN are reflected in the Government's National Development Plan
(2013-2017).

8. Parallel to these efforts, the Government is also making considerable headway with
promoting decentralization through several complementary initiatives: (i) the
Integrated Municipal Programme for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation;
(ii) the transfer of health services to the municipal level; and (iii) the creation of
consultation and social dialogue councils. In addition, the National Development
Plan includes measures that reinforce the integrated vision of development, as
evident in the newly launched Rural Villages Requalification Programme. The
multidimensional nature of poverty, recognized in the ECP and in Angola’s human
development indicators, suggests that livelihood and food security improvements
alone will not be enough to sustainably overcome poverty and maintain households
in rural areas. Opportunities for active citizenship, local participation in governance
processes and access to quality social services (health, education, water and
sanitation) are also needed and can help free up time for productive activities.


9. The proposed Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) will promote
community development planning that will (i) strengthen inclusive and participatory
processes; (ii) facilitate the involvement of communities in local-level decision-
making bodies; (iii) introduce a culture of saving and improved financial
management at the household and the micro, small and medium enterprise levels
through the promotion of savings groups; and (iv) strengthen local organizations
not only as delivery mechanisms for fishing assets and services but also as more
effective facilitators of a holistic development process within the fishing
communities.

10. The project will complement various ongoing interventions in the country,
particularly: (i) the World Bank-funded Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture
Project in Malange Province; and (ii) the African Development Fund’s Fishery Sector
Support Project dealing with marine and coastal fisheries, which also could
potentially cofinance national inland fishery interventions. In addition, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which is currently involved in other
fisheries activities in Angola, will likely be a partner in AFAP implementation.

11. IFAD has worked in Angola, and specifically in the fisheries sector, since 1991 and
is therefore in a strong position to be an effective partner to Angola as it addresses
its rural development challenges. The Fund also has considerable experience in
economic and institutional development in rural areas. Through AFAP, IFAD will
promote bottom-up approaches for rural development, centred on the capacity-
building of grass-roots organizations. It will also contribute to strengthening central
and local institutions following a thorough needs assessment. In addition, to ensure
effective project implementation, IFAD will tap into its experience from other
projects in the region (e.g. the Pro-Poor Value Chain Development Project in the
Maputo and Limpopo Corridors (PROSUL) and the Artisanal Fisheries Promotion
Project (ProPESCA), both in Mozambique).

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project will be implemented in four provinces in Angola’s central-north region:

Bengo, Cuanza Norte, Luanda and Malange. Component 1 (inland artisanal fisheries
development) will cover two areas: communes north of the Cuanza River, between
Dondo (Cuanza Norte) and the mouth of the Cuanza River (Luanda); and
communes traversed by the Dande and Bengo Rivers, in Bengo and Luanda. Both
areas have a large number of lakes, some of which are seasonally or permanently
linked to those rivers. All fishing communities are located around the lakes and
along the rivers. The component will target an estimated 15,000 people, or about
10,000 fishers and 5,000 processors and small traders.

13. Component 2 (small-scale aquaculture development) will be implemented in the
provinces of Bengo, Cuanza Norte and Malange. It will initially focus on Malange
and later expand to suitable areas in the other two provinces. The component will
target about 800 families, or 724 families engaged in small-scale family fish
farming, 62 in aquaculture as emerging farmers, and 14 as semi-commercial fish
farmers. Geographically, some 678 will be from Malange, 79 from Cuanza Norte
and 43 from Bengo.

B. Project development objective
14. The project’s goal is to reduced poverty in artisanal inland fishing and small-scale

fish-farming households in target communities. Its development objective is
improved food security and nutrition among artisanal inland fishing and fish-
farming households. The project design has incorporated a number of activities that
address climate change issues as they affect fisheries and aquaculture, the project’s
two technical components.



EB 2015/LOT/P.2

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project comprises two technical components:

(a) Component 1: Inland artisanal fisheries development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable inland fisheries sector development and
management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level;

(b) Component 2: Small-scale aquaculture development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable small-scale aquaculture sector development
and management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level.

16. To achieve the outcomes of both components, the project will support activities that
(i) strengthen institutional capacity (national, provincial, local/extension services);
(ii) improve community participation in economic and wider local development
processes; (iii) increase the quantity and quality of fish produced and sold on a
sustainable basis; and (iv) improve market-related infrastructure.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
17. Target groups. The project will conduct a mapping study to determine areas

suitable for aquaculture development. A service provider, in cooperation with
extension workers, will then decide on the target group within each community,
which should include woman-headed households, young and old people, people
with illnesses, and other disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

18. Aquaculture development strategy. The project will work with the target groups
to identify areas where there is potential for aquaculture development, and then
introduce small-scale aquaculture to improve rural communities’ nutritional status
and food security. As the project progresses, it will encourage family fish farmers to
increase their production (for example by applying better technology or by
enlarging their pond surface area) in order to have surplus produce to sell on the
market. It is expected that some farmers will invest profits from fish sales back into
their fish farm (e.g. in improved fish food or more ponds built by hired labour),
“naturally” growing their small subsistence activity into a more commercial
enterprise.

B. Organizational framework
19. The Ministry of Fisheries will be responsible for policy and legislative initiatives

relevant to the project, and will make institutional adjustments in sector
administration and provide broad project oversight. A national project oversight
committee will be established to guide project planning and implementation,
provide high-level advice, review and approve annual workplans and budgets,
review implementation progress and impact, and address key issues. Project
coordination and management will be delegated to the Institute for the
Development of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture (IPA), which will establish a
project coordination unit (PCU) responsible for programming, budgeting, resource
allocation, and monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the Ministry of Fisheries will
coordinate with the provincial governments of the four participating provinces, with
other government bodies, and with NGOs, private firms and individuals
implementing non-core project activities. The Ministry of Finance will play an
important supporting role: it will be responsible for the financial supervision of the
project; coordinate with the local authorities, at provincial, municipal and
communal levels, to ensure that project objectives and outcomes are achieved; and
maintain a dialogue with IFAD, particularly on policy and legislative matters.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. All project activities will be carried out through the joint and coordinated efforts of
IPA project staff, community facilitators (from the service provider), functional
literacy trainers and other stakeholders at the community level. All activities will be
jointly planned and regularly monitored with communities against targets and
expected results.

21. The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be its main management tool
for tracking implementation progress and results. It will generate quality data that
will enable IPA and the Ministry of Fisheries to monitor the project, and it will also
provide information on the development of inland fisheries and aquaculture in the
project area for use at higher government levels. The system will allow IPA to
participate more effectively and knowledgeably in national science councils, and in
national and international forums on rural livelihoods and rural development, food
security, nutrition and poverty reduction, contributing to the existing knowledge
base, planning and policy discussions. The AFAP experience will feed into wider
regional learning on community-driven development, particularly the development
of adequate rural microfinance systems.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be coordinated

by IPA through its Financial Management Directorate (DAF/IPA). The PCU will be
responsible for administrative management, finance and accounting, budget
planning and cash flow, procurement and payments from project accounts. As
appropriate, the Ministry of Fisheries/Office for Studies, Planning and Statistics
(GEPE), together with the Ministry of Finance, will provide budget estimates,
mobilize counterpart funds, supervise, make disbursements and provide other
support needed for DAF/IPA to conduct the project’s financial management. IPA
already has some experience of working with projects funded by development
partners since it is implementing the African Development Bank-financed Fisheries
Sector Support Project.

23. Procurement. The project will follow national procurement procedures to the
extent that these are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. In this
regard, the PCU will be aided by an experienced procurement specialist recruited
along with all other PCU staff. A financial procedures manual will (i) set out the
operational procedures for procurement, management of contracts and payment of
receipts; (ii) describe a contract monitoring system; and (iii) give guidelines for the
creation of a records management system and registry of procurement records.
IFAD will provide support in the project’s first year to avoid possible delays in
project implementation.

24. Internal and external audit. The PCU will contract an internal auditor to ensure
compliance with audit requirements. All accounts, including the designated account
and statements of expenditure for each fiscal year, will be audited by qualified and
experienced independent external auditors acceptable to IFAD. The consolidated
annual financial statements will be compiled by the PCU/IPA within three months
after the end of each fiscal year and the audited financial statements will be
submitted within six months as per the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.

25. Governance. Internal controls will be ensured through the establishment of
separate functions, reconciliation of accounts, supporting documentation
requirements and different approval levels depending on expense amounts. In an
effort to strengthen internal controls, the PCU will produce, and attach to the
project implementation manual as an annex, project financial management
procedures specifying detailed arrangements for the flow of funds, roles and
responsibilities, and procedures.



E. Supervision
26. IFAD will directly supervise all phases of the project jointly with the Government

and in-country partners.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
27. Total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at

US$12.1 million (see table 1). Physical and price contingencies make up 13 per
cent of the total project costs; the foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$0.8 million; and taxes are estimated at US$0.7 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan Borrower/counterpart Total

1. Inland fisheries 5 208 89.3% 627 10.7% 5 835 48.1%
2. Aquaculture 2 335 89.3% 279 10.7% 2 614 21.5%
3. Project management 1 875 95.8% 83 4.2% 1 958 16.1%

Unallocated 1 732 100.0 1 732 14.3%

Total 11 149 91.9% 989 8.1% 12 138 100.0%

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed by IFAD and the Government of Angola. The IFAD loan

amounts to US$11.1 million (92 per cent of total project costs). The Government’s
contribution is estimated at US$1.0 million (8 per cent of total project cost) and will
cover actual costs, taxes and duties. Parallel financing is expected from the
European Commission in the form of a EUR 10 million grant. Table 2 provides a
summary by category of the proposed financing plan; the table, for now, does not
reflect European Commission grant funding.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government IFAD loan Total
Amount % Amount % Amount %

Investment costs
1. Works 52 3.5 1 429 96.5 1481 12.2
2. Equipment and materialsa 71 13.5 454 86.5 525 4.3
3. Trainingb 477 13.6 4 297 91.0 4774 39.3
4. Consultanciesc 80 10.4 692 89.6 772 6.4
5. Salaries and allowancesd 268 11.5 2 054 88.5 2322 19.1
6. Operating costs 41 7.7 491 92.3 532 4.4
7. Unallocated 0 0.0 1 732 100.0 0 14.3

Total 989 8.1 11 148 91.9 12 100 100.0
a Equipment and materials comprises vehicles, boats, motorcycles and equipment
b Training comprises training, studies, meetings and workshops.
c Consultancies comprises local and international technical assistance
d Salaries and allowances comprises project staff and IPA staff.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial and economic analyses were carried out to assess: (i) the financial

viability of the interventions at the beneficiary level; and (ii) the likelihood of
adopting the proposed project interventions. The financial models including family
fish farmer, emerging fish farmer, semi-commercial fish farmer, canoe fishing,
plank boat fishing and enterprise models (including traditional processing and fresh



fish trading) generally show positive financial returns for the proposed aquaculture
and fishery rural economic activities, with the financial internal rate of return
ranging from 34 to 237 per cent.

30. The economic analysis shows an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
12.3 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was undertaken to assess the impact on
economic returns against changes in output (fish price) and key input prices (ice
and feed prices). The analysis shows that the project’s main economic profitability
indicators are more sensitive to changes in the benefits than to changes in the
costs. The production models are more or less equally sensitive to a risk of 10 per
cent increase in production cost as to a 10 per cent benefit decrease, resulting in a
negative net present value (NPV). With a two-year delay, the EIRR is still positive
at 7.2 per cent, but the NPV slips into a substantial negative of 1,125.

D. Sustainability
31. Factors contributing to the long-term sustainability of project outcomes are the

following: (i) the Government’s long-term commitment to addressing rural
development, poverty alleviation and food and nutrition security, and recognition of
the importance and role that the inland fisheries and aquaculture subsectors play in
achieving the stated policy objectives and actions; (ii) adoption of a precautionary
approach to fisheries development capable of being replicated elsewhere in Angola;
(iii) empowerment of communities that will lead to their greater involvement in
local-level planning and management and decision-making processes; and
(iv) knowledge management activities providing the opportunity to generate and
disseminate project-related experiences and lessons learned to other institutions in
Angola and beyond.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The major risks identified in the project are the following: (i) project-supported

activities may contribute to overexploitation of the resource in the absence of
baseline information, a monitoring programme and fishery management actions;
(ii) market demand may be insufficient to absorb the incremental fish production
derived from project interventions; (iii) the absence of climate-change data may
impede the assessment of impacts related to climate change; (iv) there may be
limited government institutional capacity in the sector; (v) service providers may
not be present in the project area; and (vi) fiduciary risks may exist. The
Transparency International score for Angola is 2.3 and IFAD’s Rural Sector
Performance Assessment E(ii) indicator for accountability, transparency and
corruption in rural areas is 2.75, both indicative of high risk. Use of the
Government’s Integrated Financial Management System has benefits in terms of
budgetary control but risks that funds may be slow to be released unless the coding
is accurate. The overall financial management risk at design has been assessed as
high largely because this is the first time IPA and IFAD are working together and
understanding will need to be built. Mitigation measures include: (i) adopting a
precautionary approach towards the expansion of fishing operations; (ii) ensuring
that institutional capacity is strengthened and that participation in local
development processes is improved; (iii) engaging the private sector to implement
some aspects of the project (e.g. hatcheries); (iv) maintaining continued policy
dialogue between government and IFAD; (v) using internationally accepted
standards for financial reporting, and for internal and external audits;
(vi) implementing off-the-shelf accounting software; (vii) preparing a project
implementation manual; (viii) seeking support from international technical
assistance; (ix) recruiting suitably skilled staff with IFAD’S prior no objection; and
(x) installing proper record-keeping and back-up processes.



V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The proposed project is consistent with key IFAD policies and strategies, in

particular with its policies on targeting, rural finance, gender, and the environment,
and with its knowledge management and scaling-up strategy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. This project is fully aligned with government policies and priorities as outlined in the

ECP and ENSAN policy documents. Investments in fishery development will improve
participating households’ livelihoods and food security (addressing the three pillars
of food security – food availability food access and food use).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The project will introduce relevant innovations and capacity-building, and offer

products/services that meet the needs and use the capacities of the different social
groups, age groups, and men and women. Such an approach will allow beneficiaries
to participate according to their needs and capacities, and progress at their own
pace. In terms of scaling up, the project has significant potential for widening
coverage to a larger and more diversified programme; the African Development
Bank, the European Union and the World Bank have expressed interest in
developing a common approach and possibly cofinancing the promotion of the
fisheries and the wider agricultural and rural sectors.

D. Policy engagement
36. Support for a policy dialogue on fisheries and aquaculture development will be

central to this project. This will include support for policy dialogue between IFAD
and the Government through national and international technical assistance that
will address one or more of the following issues: (i) updating of the country’s
aquaculture development strategy, (ii) formulation of new aquaculture regulations
with special attention to the characterization and regulation of small-scale
aquaculture and the introduction of exotic fish species; (iii) development of
incentives for aquaculture; and (iv) policy compliance and law enforcement.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Angola and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

38. The Republic of Angola is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Angola in an amount equivalent to seven million nine hundred and ten
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7 910 000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led
Project

Kingdom of Swaziland

Smallholder Market-led Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Kingdom of Swaziland

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$21.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 8.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$9.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.36 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of three years, with
an interest rate equivalent to one hundred per cent of
the variable interest rate, as determined annually by the
IFAD Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): To be identified

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.8 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$6.6 million

Contribution of private sector: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led Project
(SMLP), as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Swaziland for
the Smallholder Market-led Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Although Swaziland is classified as a middle-income country, with a relatively high

GDP of US$2,415 per capita, 63 per cent of the population live below the national
poverty line and an estimated one in four of the adult population is affected by
HIV/AIDS. The predicament of the most vulnerable worsened during the recent
fiscal crisis, which had an adverse impact on employment and key social
programmes, including basic health and educational programmes. Recent economic
growth, which owes much to higher Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
revenues over the past two years, has not been pro-poor and there are indications
that the terms currently enjoyed by Swaziland in SACU may soon become less
favourable.

2. Poverty in Swaziland is predominantly rural and varies among the country’s four
regions and between different ecological zones. Regionally, the prevalence of
poverty in 2010 was greatest in Lubombo region at 69 per cent, followed by
Shiselweni region at 68 per cent.

3. The main factors contributing to rural poverty are small landholdings and low land
productivity, compounded by frequent droughts that lead to crop failure and loss of
livestock. People are often isolated from markets and information sources and have
limited access to off-farm employment opportunities. All these factors are
aggravated by the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, trapping the poor in poverty
and militating against recovery. Frequent drought has been attributed to climate
change and has led to a decline in Swaziland‘s food production. About a quarter of
the Swazi population is food insecure and dependent on assistance, and a third of
children under five are stunted.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. Poverty and food insecurity are still widespread in rural areas, in spite of the
country’s economic development. The high poverty rates suggest that past
government policies and programmes have not been able to adequately address the
needs of the poor rural population. Smallholder agriculture remains the backbone of
rural livelihoods, while it is often drought prone and characterized by low
productivity and isolation from markets. IFAD projects, namely the Lower Usuthu
Smallholder Irrigation Project (LUSIP), the Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land
Management Project (LUSLM) and the Rural Finance and Enterprise Development
Programme (RFEDP), demonstrate the potential for smallholder farming systems to
(a) cover basic food needs; and (b) enter into remunerative value chains, if the
right inputs, services and market linkages are provided together with a strict focus
on targeting the poor and disadvantaged.

5. The above projects demonstrated the relevance of access to irrigation water for
smallholder crops such as maize, but even more so for potential high-value crops



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

2

such as vegetables. The RFEDP developed a honey value chain, which was adopted
by wholesalers and has become very prominent among farmers with small
landholdings and few livestock. The experience shows that the productivity of staple
crops such as maize can be enhanced through access to irrigation, inputs and
better farming technology, leading to better nutrition and food security among food
deficient households. More advanced, economically active households have strong
potential for entering remunerative value chains with the surplus produce of high-
value crops such as vegetables, which they are able to produce with the support of
dedicated business development services and dedicated wholesalers.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in 25 chiefdoms in the

rainfed Middleveld and Lowveld areas of the Lubombo and Shiselweni regions. It
will target poor smallholder farmers that are (i) food-deficient and living at a
subsistence level; and (ii) economically active and able to sell surplus production.
The farmers will be assisted in increasing their farm productivity and production
through access to irrigation, inputs, training and access to services. Economically
active farmers will sell surplus production to wholesalers to increase income. Along
selected value chains, employment opportunities will be created for young people,
for example in managing collection and information centres. The activities are
tailored to the capacities of smallholders, including women and families affected by
HIV/AIDS.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s goal is to contribute to national poverty reduction. The development

objective is to enhance food and nutrition security and incomes among smallholder
producer families through diversified agricultural production and market linkages.
By the end of the project, rural poverty should be reduced by 20 per cent in the
targeted chiefdoms and food insecurity reduced by 50 per cent in currently food
deficient households. The project’s three major outcomes are: (i) the project
chiefdoms engage in effective planning and decision-making; (ii) soil and water
resources are sustainably managed for market-led smallholder agriculture in the
project chiefdoms; and (iii) smallholder producers in the project chiefdoms supply
crop and livestock products to market partners, while subsistence farmers are
enabled to produce sufficient nutritious food for themselves.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project will have three components:

9. Component 1: Chiefdom development planning. In each chiefdom, community-
based development planning will be the starting point to identify and direct
development activities to the targeted households. To this end, an institutional
framework supporting decision-making by the traditional leadership will (where
needed) be established and strengthened. Community development committees
(CDCs) will be assisted in processing information on the chiefdom’s resource base,
population, any bottlenecks and opportunities, and development options and
priorities for inclusion in a chiefdom development plan.

10. Component 2: Infrastructure for soil and water conservation. Investments in
soil and water conservation at sub-catchment and homestead levels will help
harness irrigation and drinking water resources for both enhanced subsistence and
market-led agricultural production. The infrastructure will be designed for erosion
control and water catchment to improve and safeguard productive land. The main
interventions will focus on preventing silting in water reservoirs and harnessing
run-off for agricultural production. This component will comprise erosion control,
the rehabilitation of approximately 18 existing and construction of approximately
two new small earth dams and the installation of rainwater-harvesting equipment.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

3

11. The process of planning, design, construction and operation and maintenance of the
above infrastructure combines oversight by the CDC, active participation of the
producers benefiting from the infrastructure, and sound engineering services
through existing or hired specialized agencies. The new construction of dams
requires a rigorous planning process, with environmental impact assessments and
checks and balances on engineering and aftercare. Producers benefiting from this
infrastructure will form users’ groups to operate, maintain and guard the
infrastructure.

12. Component 3: Market-led smallholder agriculture. The project will support
smallholder farmers in enhancing their crop and livestock production through
improved access to efficient technical advice, agricultural technology including post-
harvest processing and storage, farm inputs and irrigation. In addition to achieving
higher productivity, especially in the case of food deficient farm households,
economically active households will be linked to markets, including small local
traders and larger wholesalers such as the National Agricultural Marketing Board
(NAMBoard) and Eswatini Kitchen, a private company.

13. The project will concentrate on commodities that respond to the food and income
requirements of farmers and the productive capacity of the project area.
Commodities identified thus far include beekeeping, legumes, vegetables, fruits,
indigenous chicken and goats. In addition, technical support will be provided for
major staple crops such as maize and sorghum to safeguard household food
security.

14. The main approach for developing value chains will involve setting up innovation
platforms, where representatives of wholesalers, buyers, extension services,
business development services, rural finance services and smallholder farmers will
identify together the required improvements and innovations. Measures include
providing market information, estimating market demand, sourcing from new
internal and external markets, business plan development, financial services,
backward and forward linkages between wholesalers/buyers and producers, and
extension services. These activities aim to establish pro-poor value chains by using
existing unmet market demand as the entry point for agricultural development, and
will help gear agricultural practices to the specifics – in terms of quantity, quality
and timeliness – of that market demand, and ultimately raise incomes and increase
food availability among poor rural households.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The Smallholder Market-led Project (SMLP) is a six-year project that uses the
availability of confirmed markets as a driver for promoting smallholder production
for household nutrition and sale of marketable surplus. Both intervention areas
follow a clear value chain development approach that includes all players from
production through to processing, services and marketing.

16. Chiefdom development planning (CDP) is the starting point to involve both food
deficient and economically active households. Investments in soil and water
conservation are the next step to increase productivity in smallholder farms and to
safeguard a sustainable natural resource basis for market-led production. The
involvement of wholesalers such as NAMBoard and Eswatini Kitchen will bring the
essential pull for the smallholders, while they also bring in the essential technical
services for improvements in agricultural production and marketing. Business
service providers, for instance TechnoServe, will bring in the required know-how for
both producers and wholesalers, in terms of technical and business-related aspects
such as business planning and access to finance. The project approach builds on
existing policies, approaches and market demands, and offers an opportunity to
apply them on a larger scale while maintaining a focus on poor rural areas.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

4

17. The choice for market-led development builds on the success of earlier projects,
notably RFEDP, LUSIP and LUSLM, in promoting smallholder agricultural production.
Support in terms of agricultural extension for better crop and livestock husbandry
and better capture of soil moisture and rainwater resulted in larger volumes of
agricultural produce. The surplus produced was, however, absorbed locally, with
little or no produce reaching national markets or sold at national market prices.
Although smallholders clearly have productive potential, national wholesalers are
either unable to cover their markets or have resorted to sourcing their demand
from producers elsewhere. Current demand for agricultural products in Swaziland
has not been linked to the agricultural potential of smallholder producers.

Organizational frameworkB.
18. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead agency for SMLP and will delegate day-

to-day project implementation to the Swaziland Water and Agriculture Development
Enterprise (SWADE), a parastatal with proven experience in the management and
implementation of similar projects. At the outset – to ensure smooth project start-
up – SWADE will be supported and strengthened with short-term technical
assistance on financial management and monitoring. SWADE will establish a
dedicated project implementation unit (PIU), which will work under Ministry of
Agriculture oversight comprising a project steering committee (PSC) and two
technical committees. The PSC will provide strategic advice on project
implementation and review and approve the results-based annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B), procurement plan and financial and technical progress reports. It
will be chaired by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and
composed of high-level representatives of the Ministries of Natural Resources and
Energy, Economic Planning and Development and Finance. Other participants may
include NAMBoard, the Swaziland Environment Authority and other important
stakeholders.

19. The technical committees will guide the PIU with technical advice on CDP and
infrastructure, and on market-led infrastructure. Both committees will host the
relevant ministries, technical agencies and private sector. Project partners will be
engaged under service agreements. Wholesalers already identified include
NAMBOARD and Eswatini Kitchen.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

20. Planning. The main planning tools for SMLP comprise the logical framework, the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework with its indicators and targets, and the
results-based AWP/B. The logframe provides the overall targets for project
implementation at the output, outcome, development objective and impact levels.
The results-based AWP/B breaks down these targets by year and assigns financial
resources by financier.

21. Every year, each project partner will prepare a results-based AWP/B, for
consolidation by the PIU. Guidelines and templates provided in the project
implementation manual will facilitate the planning and reporting process. The
AWP/Bs will be prepared under a participatory approach based on the chiefdom
development plans (see component 1). They will incorporate information from the
M&E systems of the PIU and project partners, and recommendations from IFAD
supervision and implementation support missions. The PSC will approve
consolidated draft AWP/Bs, which will then be submitted to the Government and
IFAD to seek their concurrence.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The project will undertake regular monitoring of
activities, output and outcomes. Regular outcome surveys will provide information
on progress at the household level, and how project activities have led to change
and impact. Chiefdom socio-economic profiles will be used as a basis to monitor
and assess progress and targeting of development activities, as well as periodic



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

5

review of agreements reached between market partners in the innovation
platforms. Project M&E will be based on IFAD’s results and impact management
system (RIMS) and be complemented with indicators and surveys as required.

23. The project will conduct baseline studies using RIMS and multidimensional poverty
assessment tool methodologies. In addition to standard collection of gender and
age disaggregated data, the baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the women
empowerment in agriculture index, which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men at household level. SMLP has also been identified as a
potential candidate for the IFAD impact assessment studies.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and sharing knowledge will be
firmly based on the project’s M&E system. The PIU will issue progress reports on a
quarterly basis to be reviewed by the PSC and technical committees. Besides
project reports, policy workshops and short publications will be prepared on key
lessons learned and disseminated to inform the public and trigger feedback at
national and regional levels.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
25. Financial management. The project’s financial management system will be in

compliance with Swaziland’s and IFAD’s financial regulations and procedures. Under
these procedures, the project will adopt an appropriate financial management
system that will include financial planning through AWP/Bs, financial accounting and
reporting, funds flow management, procurement and audit. The project will ensure
that adequate capacity in terms of human resources and equipment are in place.
The PIU financial management team will open and maintain appropriate accounting
records including books of account, asset and contract registers. The chart of
accounts will be based on government accounting codes to ensure full compliance
with the national system in addition to meeting IFAD requirements of cost analysis
by financier, expense category and component. Previous experience with exchange
visits of financial management staff between countries in the region was successful
in promoting the adaptation of financial management best practice. Financial
statements and reports will be prepared at the end of each quarter for oversight by
the project director. The reports will be consolidated and presented in semi-annual
physical and financial progress reports. SWADE uses the accrual-basis International
Financial Reporting Standards and audits are conducted in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing, the same standards as IFAD. Well-reputed
private-sector audit firms have in the past issued unqualified audit opinions on the
three areas required by IFAD: financial statements, withdrawal applications and the
designated account.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD and any cofinancing funds will be disbursed to the project
through the Ministry of Finance into designated accounts held at the Central Bank
of Swaziland. The accounts will be operated by the authorized representative(s) of
the Ministry of Finance. Separate operational accounts in local currency will be
opened by the project for each funding source, including Government counterpart
funds. Payments of cash expenses will be in line with the approved AWP/B.

27. Procurement. All project procurement of goods, works and services will be carried
out in line with the approved project procurement plan, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act and Procurement Regulations to the extent consistent with
IFAD’s 2010 Procurement Guidelines. The Government procurement legal
framework accommodates provisions of IFAD guidelines where there is conflict.

28. Governance. An enhanced framework for good governance has been developed for
SMLP to ensure: (i) transparency; (ii) accountability in the use of resources; and
(iii) participation, with people having a voice in decisions that may affect them. Key
features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of women and
disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community representatives in local-
level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring of project activities,



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

6

including a complaints mechanism; (iv) internal and external audits of project
accounts; (v) IFAD supervision and support; (vi) regular outcome surveys to
provide information on the coverage and quality of project outputs; (vii) reporting
of results to the PSC, IFAD and national government institutions, with key
information published on a project website; and (viii) a complaints and remedies
mechanism. The framework will support the transparent use of funds and
constitutes a preventive measure against misuse of project funds.

SupervisionE.
29. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, with a focus on: (i) fiduciary

aspects; (ii) achievements and quality of project implementation; and
(iii) implementation support. Direct supervision will be a continuous process
requiring sustained communication and engagement with the Government,
specifically the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance, the PIU, project
partners and the target group. Instruments for guiding and improving
implementation will include continuous policy dialogue with the Government,
adjusting AWP/Bs, revising implementation manuals, supervision and midterm
review missions, and amending legal agreements as appropriate.

30. During the start-up phase, supervision will focus on ensuring that the institutional
arrangements to support project implementation are in place. IFAD will support a
series of workshops and training sessions to sensitize all potential stakeholders,
service providers and beneficiaries to the project objectives and their own roles and
responsibilities. Targeted training during the start-up phase will aim to increase
technical capacities and ensure adequate implementation quality.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
31. Total investment and recurrent costs, including contingencies, over the six-year

project life are estimated at US$21.1 million or 244.1 million Swazi emalangeni
(SZL). The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) project duration of six
years; (ii) cost price inflation at 6 per cent for the project period and 3 per cent per
annum for six years for foreign inflation, in line with International Monetary Fund
estimates; (iii) an exchange rate calculated in constant purchasing power parity
from a base of SZL 10.6:US$1; (iv) government financing or waiver of all taxes on
goods, works and services procured under the project. Taxes have been estimated
using information from the Swaziland Revenue Authority that includes duties and
value added tax; (v) base costs are real costs at July 2014 prices; and (vi) physical
contingencies estimated at 5 per cent for the civil works. Price contingencies are
based on local and foreign inflation. The component estimates are summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector
Government
of Swaziland

Unidentified
financing Total

1. Chiefdom development
planning

700 200 - 600 800 2 300

2. Infrastructure for soil and
water conservation

2 200 - - 1 200 3 000 6 400

3. Market-led smallholder
agriculture

5 600 100 600 2 900 - 9 200

4. Project management 1 100 200 - 1 900 - 3 200

Total 9 600 500 600 6 600 3 800 21 100



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

7

B. Project financing
32. The loan will be provided on IFAD ordinary terms and conditions with a three-year

grace period and an 18-year maturity. IFAD will provide a grant equivalent to
US$500,000 to enhance the project’s start-up capacity, such as designing baseline
and impact studies and establishing the overall project M&E framework and
financial reporting system.

33. The project will be financed by IFAD, the private sector, the Government and
unidentified financiers. The IFAD financing will be in the form of a loan in an
amount equivalent to US$9.6 million and a grant in an amount equivalent to
US$0.5 million, for a total IFAD contribution of US$10.1 million. The Government
will contribute US$6.6 million and the private-sector contribution is estimated at
US$0.6 million. The financing gap of US$3.8 million is expected to be funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or another cofinancier to be identified.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Government
Unidentified
financing Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consultanciesa 4 800 71.4 500 8.1 200 3.6 200 3.3 400 6.5 6 100 29.1
2. Equipment and

materials
1 200 65.5 - - - - 200 14.0 400 20.5 1 800 8.6

3. Goods, services
and inputsb

1 200 86.2 - - - - 200 14.3 - - 1 400 6.6

4. Works 1 300 26.2 - - - - 700 14.0 3 000 60.4 5 000 23.6
5. Operating costs 1 100 86.2 - - - - 200 13.8 - - 1 300 6.2
6. Salaries and

allowances
- - - - 400 6.3 5 100 93.7 - - 5 500 25.9

Total 9 600 45.6 500 2.4 600 2.7 6 600 31.5 3 800 17.8 21 100 100.0
a Includes studies, technical assistance and training.
b Includes vehicles.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. The overall economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at

23 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the net benefit stream,
discounted at 5 per cent based on the Central Bank of Swaziland benchmark
interest rate/discount rate, is SZL 259.9 million (US$24.8 million). The analysis
shows significant net incremental benefits for farmers and rural entrepreneurs in
the project area.

35. An estimated 55,250 households will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 70 per cent or 40,000 households are classified as poor. It is estimated that
30 per cent of the target group will fully take up the project interventions related to
value chain activities, which in turn will lead to substantial increases in incomes and
the availability of nutritious food.

36. Benefits will accrue from: (i) efficient planning and implementation of pro-poor
development activities at chiefdom level; (ii) increased and sustainable access to
water for irrigation and drinking; (iii) increased productivity in livestock, crop and
horticulture production; and (iv) sustainable access to markets, services
(extension, finance) and inputs.

D. Sustainability
37. Project sustainability will be supported by close alignment with the policy and

planning framework in Swaziland. The project will assist in addressing emerging
needs, e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and supplying consumer markets
with national products. CDP is expected to become a simpler tool that is easy to



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

8

apply and fully meets people's needs. Moreover, it will foster transparency in
decision-making and funding for development activities at community levels. The
introduction of soil and water conservation will protect the key resources of
smallholder farmers from degradation and in turn enhance productivity. Efficient
knowledge management will be the key element to distil successful approaches and
disseminate them widely. The Ministry of Agriculture will ensure that extension
services are better equipped and regularly trained to serve the chiefdoms.
Wholesalers such as NAMBOARD are likely to continue investing in smallholder
farmers, provided that the project succeeds in setting up value chains. This will also
encourage other wholesalers to undertake similar arrangements to source
agricultural produce from smallholders. The focus on commodities, already being
produced by smallholders and of high nutritious value, will generate long-term
benefits for the health of rural people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The principal risk areas affecting project execution include:

(i) Slow start up due to limited institutional capacity may reduce the likelihood
of the project reaching its targets. This risk has been mitigated by the
preparation of a draft project implementation plan and a financial
management manual during project design. The Government will finalize the
project manuals before project start-up. IFAD will finance start-up costs up to
US$500,000 equivalent to enhance technical capacity in project management,
especially for baseline surveys, M&E and financial management.

(ii) Non-availability of project financing would lead to a reduction of the
project area from 25 to about 20 chiefdoms. IFAD and the Government are
exploring mobilizing additional funds through PBAS reallocation as well as
cofinancing from GEF under GEF-6. In the case of both financing opportunities
being realized, the GEF funds will be used to increase complementary
activities and/or scale up the geographic scope. The SMLP, with its focus on
sustainable land management and climate-sensitive design, would be an ideal
baseline project for a GEF-6 grant.

(iii) Fiduciary risks. The inherent fiduciary risk in Swaziland is medium, based on
Transparency International and Rural Sector Performance Assessment scores.
Tools for effective financial management are present in SWADE, with strong
capacities in many areas. The challenges encountered in the past pertain to
the application and implementation of the control framework: financial
reporting, budgeting, staffing, mingling of financier and government funds,
and internal audit reports not being acted upon. Close collaboration was
needed on the preceding IFAD-funded project to achieve acceptable financial
management results. Consequently SMLP’s initial fiduciary risk assessment at
design is high, but these risks will be mitigated with technical assistance and
the application of lessons learned, starting with the incorporation of internal
control mechanisms into the financing agreement. Consequently, fiduciary risk
rating is expected to drop to medium during the first year of implementation.
The Ministry of Finance has a strong oversight role in management of external
funds and participates in the PSC. During design, a financial management
manual was prepared to guide the PIU on appropriate management of the
fiduciary aspects of the project. IFAD will provide close oversight through its
supervision and implementation support.

(iv) Reliability of existing market demand has been extensively researched during
project design. The involvement of NAMBoard in a number of the market chains
with smallholders suggests a fair degree of stability. Similarly, Eswatini Kitchen is a
confirmed reliable partner. Existing market demand may also be affected by
production in South Africa and by changes in global demand. The development of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

9

market information system under the project will mitigate this risk by
communicating early, allowing for mitigation measures in case of falling demand.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

39. Project design is compliant with the applicable IFAD policies and strategies. Both a
strategy for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated in the project design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. The IFAD
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has informed the project’s
approach to addressing issues of land tenure insecurity under traditional
authorities. Potential negative environmental impact has been analysed and
mitigation measures designed in line with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
40. Aside from harmonization with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and

Action Plan and with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework, the project
will complement, derive lessons from and sustain positive initiatives emerging from
the Swaziland Agricultural Development Programme cofinanced by the European
Union (EU) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The
project will create space for learning between similar projects, such as the recently
started High-Value Crop and Horticulture Project funded by EU and European
Development Fund.

Innovations and scaling upC.
41. SMLP is based on experiences and lessons learned from its precursors and aims to

replicate successful practices on the largest scale possible in terms of both direct
inclusion of poor rural households and policy influence. The project applies an in-
built learning loop, whereby interventions start off on a small scale, then are
assessed for effectiveness and subsequently fine-tuned for replication on a wider
scale. This applies especially to results and lessons learned on innovation in market
linkages through the innovation platforms established by NAMBoard, Business
Development Services and buyers such as Eswatini Kitchen. Once approaches have
been tested and fine-tuned, the project can help roll out the innovation to the
entire designated project area.

Policy engagementD.
42. The project will inform policymakers on three key policy aspects: (i) efficient local

planning processes for development with CDP simplification; (ii) management of
small-scale irrigation by end users; and (iii) implementation of the new land law.
The project is well positioned to engage with policymakers and other stakeholders
as it can report the needs of smallholders, bring in the farmers’ representatives and
private-sector views, and provide quantitative and qualitative assessments for
policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Kingdom of Swaziland and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

44. The Kingdom of Swaziland is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

10

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Kingdom of Swaziland in an amount of eight million five hundred fifty
thousand euros (EUR 8,550,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland in an amount of three hundred sixty thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 360,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































































(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 

between

MONGOLIA 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED fC'

MON 39229



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement dated 24 October 2008 between the Borrower 
and ADB (“Grant Agreement”), ADB agreed to provide a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in an amount of fourteen million seven hundred twenty thousand 
Dollars ($14,720,000) for the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the Grant 
Agreement (“Original Project”);

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith entered into between the 
Borrower and ADB (“Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide the 
Borrower a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources in various currencies equivalent to ten 
million seven hundred nineteen thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR10,719,000) for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement;

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB’s Ordinary Capital 
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan 
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, 
however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium.
(a) The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge

on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the 
terms specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall



2 
 
 

 

remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB shall apply the 
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.   
 

(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity 
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB 
shall add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the 
Borrower. 

 
(b) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an 
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is 
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread 
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that 
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per 
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on 
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the 
Borrower.  The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall apply the 
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

 
(c) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a 
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge. 
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will 
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to 
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum), 
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which 
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 



3 
 
 

 

commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a 
Surcharge.  The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined 
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall add the 
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

    
  Section 1.02.  Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations, the Grant Agreement and the Special Operations 
Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or 
the context otherwise requires.   
 
 
 

ARTICLE II 
 

The Loan 
 
 
  Section 2.01.   (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.  
 

(b) The Borrower shall onlend a portion of the proceeds of the Loan to the 
Participating Banks for the purposes of Output 1(c) of the Project, under the Onlending 
Agreements, upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB. 
 

(c) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (d) hereinafter.  
 

(d) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (c) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.02.    The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of: 
 
 



4 
 
 

 

(a) LIBOR; 
 

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a 
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations 
and; 

 
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10 as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 

Regulations. 
 

  Section 2.03.   The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum.  Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement. 

    
  Section 2.04.   Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year. 
 
  Section 2.05.   The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.06.  (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of 
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management: 
 

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency; 

 
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and 

 
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate. 

 
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 

is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.  

 
 



5 
 
 

 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 

 
  Section 3.01.  The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 3.02.   The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  Section 3.03.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 of the Special 
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has 
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between 
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are satisfactory to 
ADB. 
 
  Section 3.04.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 
   

Section 3.05.   The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2021 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
 

Particular Covenants 
 

 
  Section 4.01.   (a)   The Borrower shall cause the Project to be 
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, and development practices. 
 
  (b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities, 
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5 
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 4.02.   The Borrower shall make available, promptly as needed 
and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the funds, facilities, services, land and other 
resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. 
 
 



6 
 
 

 

  Section 4.03.  (a)  Whenever applicable, in the carrying out of the 
Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, 
acceptable to ADB to be employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory 
to the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  (b)  The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance 
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods 
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable.  The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to 
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made 
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request. 
 
  Section 4.04.    The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its 
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative 
policies and procedures. 
 

Section 4.05.  (a)  The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate 
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) cause each Participating Bank to maintain the 
Special Account and other separate accounts and records for the Subloan(s); (iii) prepare 
annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (iv) cause each Participating Bank to prepare and submit to the Borrower 
a statement of utilization of funds for the Subloan(s) in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (v) have such financial statements, including the statement of utilization 
of funds for the Subloan(s) prepared by each Participating Bank, audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB; (vi) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report (which 
includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements, statements of utilization of funds, 
use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this Loan 
Agreement and the Onlending Agreements as well as on the use of the procedures for the 
imprest funds and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the 
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, 
if any); and (vii) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in 
the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
 

(b)   The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to (i) 
prepare its own entity-level annual financial statements in accordance with national accrual-
based financing reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements 
audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of 
reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iii) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements) and a 
management letter; and (iv) furnish to ADB through the Borrower, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request; 

 



7 
 
 

 

 
  (c)  ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements referred to in Section 
4.05(a) hereinabove within 30 days of the date of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s 
website. 
 

(d) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(v) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree. 
 
  (e)  The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to enable ADB, 
upon ADB's request, to discuss the entity-level annual financial statements and the 
Participating Bank’s financial affairs where they relate to the Subproject(s) with the auditors 
appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(ii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any 
representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. 
This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Participating Bank, unless the Participating Bank shall otherwise 
agree. 
 
  Section 4.06.  The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. 
 
  Section 4.07.  The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to 
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices. 
 
 
 

ARTICLE V 
 

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity 
 
 
  Section 5.01.   The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: 
 

(a) a party to an Onlending Agreement shall have failed to perform one or 
more of its obligations under an Onlending Agreement;  

 
(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Grant Agreement; and 
 
(c) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.  
 



8 
 
 

 

Section 5.02.   The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: any 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.  
 
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
 

Effectiveness 
 

 
  Section 6.01.   A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations. 
 
 



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By
BOLOR BAYARBAATAR

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



 
 
 
 

 

11 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 
 

 
1.  The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the 
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share).  If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the 
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on 
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total 
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment 
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount 
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies. 
   
 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first  
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows: 
 

(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and 
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule. 
 

(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts 
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the 
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the 
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for 
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies. 

 
3.  Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal. 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.  



 
Schedule 1 

 
 

 

13 

 
5.  If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to 
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount. 



14 
 

 

 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1.  The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).  (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest and Commitment Charges 
 
3.  The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing interest and commitment 
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  ADB shall be entitled 
to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges. 
 
Reallocation 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
  (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
  (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 
Disbursement Procedures 
 
5.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Schedule 2 

 
 

 

15 

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account 
 
6.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals 
shall be made from the Loan Account to the Special Account of a Participating Bank until 
MOF and such Participating Bank shall have duly entered into an Onlending Agreement 
which shall include the terms and conditions set forth in paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to the 
Special Operations Loan Agreement and such Onlending Agreement shall have become 
legally binding upon the Borrower and such Participating Bank in accordance with its terms.  

 
 



16 

Attachment to Schedule 2 
 
 

 

TABLE 
 

 
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project – Additional Financing) 
 

 
Number 

 
Item 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 

Account 
($) 

Category 

1 Value Chain Investment
a
 32,950,000 100% of total expenditure 

2 
Interest and Commitment 
Charges 2,050,000 100% of amounts due 

 Total 35,000,000 
 

a
Subject to the conditions for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2.  
















__________________________________________________________________________
LOAN NUMBER 3267-SRI
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
between
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
and
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
DATED 17 SEPTEMBER 2015
SRI 47381
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
LOAN AGREEMENT dated 17 September 2015 between DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(“ADB”).
WHEREAS
(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Improvement
Program;
(B) by a periodic financing request dated 23 April 2015, the Borrower has
applied to ADB for a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources and a loan from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the
Special Operations Loan Agreement referred to in Recital (C) below;
(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Special Operations Loan
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a loan (“Special Operations Loan”) to the Borrower
from ADB’s Special Funds resources for an amount in various currencies equivalent to fifty
three million five hundred eighty eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR53,588,000) for
the purposes of the Project; and
(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;
NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Loan Regulations; Definitions
Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB's Ordinary Capital
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject,
however, to the following modifications:
(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium. (a)
The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge on the
unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the terms
specified in the Loan Agreement.
2
(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall
remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall apply the
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.
(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall
add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the
Borrower.
(d) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
(e) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
3
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Special Operations Loan Agreement and Loan Regulations have the
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise
requires.
ARTICLE II
The Loan
Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy six million Dollars ($76,000,000) as such
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.
(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.
(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:
4
(a) LIBOR;
(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations;
and
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan
Regulations.
Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15%
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.
Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to
this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:
(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
and
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.
5
ARTICLE III
Use of Proceeds of the Loan
Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions
of this Loan Agreement.
Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.
Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Special
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory
to ADB.
Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.
Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2020 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.
ARTICLE IV
Particular Covenants
Section 4.01. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, and development practices.
(b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities,
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 4.02. The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be
made available, promptly as needed, and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds
of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.
6
Section 4.03. (a) In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower
shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, acceptable to ADB, to be
employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.
(b) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable. The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards,
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.
Section 4.04. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.
Section 4.05. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.
Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial
statements, compliance with the financial covenants as well as on the use of the procedures
for imprest fund(s) and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out
the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of each related
fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter,
all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the
audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.
(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.
(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall
otherwise agree.
Section 4.07. The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices.
7
ARTICLE V
Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity
Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to
perform any of its obligations under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity of the Loan for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan
Regulations: the event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement has occurred.
ARTICLE VI
Effectiveness
Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan
Regulations: the Special Operations Loan Agreement shall have been duly authorized or
ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement, shall have been fulfilled.
Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of
the Loan Regulations.
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous
Section 7.01. Each of the Secretary of MOF, the Deputy Secretary to
the Treasury and the Director General of the Department of External Resources, MOF, of the
Borrower, is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02
of the Loan Regulations.
Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:
8
For the Borrower
Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka
cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources
Facsimile Number:
+94 11 248-4563.
For ADB
Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:
+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.

10
SCHEDULE 1
Amortization Schedule
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
Payment Due Installment Share
(Expressed as a %)

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:
(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule.
(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
Schedule 1
12
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.
5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
13
SCHEDULE 2
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds
General
1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table).
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account
2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.
Reallocation
3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,
(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and
(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.
Disbursement Procedures
4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.
Retroactive Financing
5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made for reimbursement of
eligible expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with consulting services and
procurement of goods, services and civil works, project management, and project
administration, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.
14
Attachment to Schedule 2
TABLE
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
Number Item
Total Amount Allocated
for ADB Financing Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
($) Account
Category
1 Civil Works $54,540,000 51% of total expenditure claimed
2
Mechanical and
Electrical Equipment
$2,090,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
3
Incremental PMU and
PIU Salaries
$450,000 8% of total expenditure claimed
4
Strategic
Communication Plan
$500,000 59% of total expenditure claimed*
5 Training $450,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
6 Unallocated $17,970,000
Total $76,000,000
*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.

