














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2020 | Report No: PIDC30434 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 2 of 18  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Liberia P175263  Liberia: Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(P175263) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST Mar 16, 2021 May 25, 2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Liberia Jeanine Milly Cooper  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve agriculture productivity and access to markets for selected  
value chains in the Project targeted areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 55.00 

Total Financing 55.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 55.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 55.00 

          IDA Credit 55.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 3 of 18  

     

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Liberia is a fragile and conflict-affected country with a high vulnerability to external shocks. Two civil wars 
between 1989 and 2003 destroyed the country’s economy, basic infrastructure, and institutional framework 
resulting in poor living conditions for most of the population. Following over twenty-five years of economic 
contraction, Liberia’s economy began to recover in 2004 with the 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growing rate at an average annual 
rate of 7.4 percent from 2004-2013. However, the outbreak of the 
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in 2014 and a sharp decline in global prices 
for two of the country’s main export commodities (iron ore and 
rubber) disrupted Liberia’s economic recovery, resulting in a 
stagnant real GDP growth in 2015. An incipient recovery began 
around 2017/18 but was short-lived and the GDP contracted again 
by 2.3 percent in 2019.  

2. The COVID-19 pandemic has further exerted increased pressure on 
the economy. Real GDP is expected to contract again by 2.9 percent 
in 2020. During the first half of 2020, output declined in multiple sectors of the economy, including cement 
(45 percent), gold (33 percent), rubber (19 percent), and services (12 percent), reflecting the restriction 
measures implemented to slow the progression of COVID-19 and the weak global environment. A general 
lockdown aimed at containing the spread of the virus was imposed on April 10, 2020 and lifted on July 22, 
2020. Inflationary pressures moderated to 13 percent in June 2020, compared to 29.9 percent in June 2019, 
due to lower fuel prices and tight macroeconomic policy. The depreciation of the Liberian dollar slowed to 
1.5 percent in June 2020 compared to 30.2 percent in June 2019, reflecting an improvement by US$21.1 
million in the trade deficit in Jan-June 2020 period. According to the Central Bank of Liberia (CBL), export 
receipts declined by 4.8 percent in January-June 2020 while the value of imports decreased by 7.4 percent. 
Fiscal policy was also tightened despite the COVID-19 pandemic with the fiscal deficit expected to be 
reduced to 3.7 percent in 2020, down from 6.1 percent in 2019. Nevertheless, the level of the public debt is 
expected to increase in 2020, reflecting mainly the economic contraction and the continued negative trade 
balance. 

3. Poverty remains widespread in Liberia. With a Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of just US$600 in 
2018, Liberia is among the ten poorest countries in the world. It also has high income inequality levels with 
an estimated Gini coefficient of 35.5 in 2016. From 2007 to 2014, Liberia’s per capita GDP growth rate 

Box 1. Liberia key socio-economic data 

(2019) 

Population, total (millions) 

GDP (current US$, billions) 

GNI per capita US$ 

GDP growth (annual %) 

Inequality - Gini Coefficient 

Merchandise imports (% of 

GDP)a 

External debt, total (% of GDP)b 

5.0 

3.07 

580 

-2.3 

35.3 

33.9 

38.5 

Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook & 
Official Data 
Notes 
a Most Recent WDI Value (2016) 
bMost Recent WDI Value (2018) 

 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 4 of 18  

     

averaged 3.3 percent per year, which helped reduce the poverty rate1 from 68.6 percent in 2007 to 38.6 
percent in 2014. However, from 2014 through 2019 per capita GDP contracted causing the poverty rate to 
rise again to 43.4 percent by 2019. In addition, there are acute rural-urban and gender disparities (urban 
population constitutes around 54 percent), driven by unequal access to land and productive assets, 
infrastructure and public services, and markets for both goods and labor. Liberia ranks 176th out of 189 
countries in the 2019 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index. In the 2020 
Doing Business report, Liberia ranked 175th out of 190 economies on the overall ease of doing business2. In 
terms of gender equality, Liberia ranks 97th out 153 countries in the World Economic Forum’s gender 
equality index and 17th out of 34 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. 

4. Liberia’s development and poverty reduction programs are severely constrained by lack of road access. 
With only 750 km of paved roads, Liberia is below SSA average road density. The 2018 World Bank Logistics 
Performance Index ranked the country 143rd out of 160 countries.  Nearly 60 percent of rural Liberians lack 
access to an all-weather road, limiting their ability to participate in economic activities and access vital 
services such as health and education.  Regional trade accounts for only one percent of the total 
merchandise trade, in part because of the poor condition of the key regional corridor in Liberia’s, Trans-
African Highway Seven (TAH7).  Therefore, improving road access is imperative to promote national 
integration and economic growth.  Despite abundant arable land and a hospitable climate for agriculture, 
Liberia faces chronic food insecurity in part because lack of road access and underdeveloped agro-logistic 
services hinder agricultural productivity and depress farm incomes. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

5. Agriculture is the foundation of Liberia’s economy and the key to food security and poverty reduction. 
Agricultural production constitutes the most important livelihood for the average Liberian, involving more 
than 70 percent of the population. The sector accounted for 27.3 percent of real GDP in 2019 (a decline from 
38.8 percent in 2010) and 43.3 percent of total employment (down from 57.4 percent in 1995). Majority of 
farmers grow cereals/staples, including rice (64 percent) and cassava (60 percent), followed by a variety of 
vegetables, such as a peppers (50 percent), bitter balls (44 percent), okra and green leaves (30 percent). 
Most of these famers cultivate an average of 0.7 hectares under rain-fed conditions generating small 
marketable surpluses. Tree crops, especially rubber, oil palm, cocoa and coffee, make an important cash 
crops to smallholder farmers and contribute significantly to the economy. Rubber is the most important cash 
crop in Liberia and accounts for almost 65 percent of total export earnings3. But Liberia imports 50-60 
percent of its staple food requirements, making it vulnerable to global food price volatility.  
 

6. The Government of Liberia (GoL) considers agricultural growth to be critical for reducing poverty. The GoL 
has developed a five-year National Development Plan referred to as the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and 
Development (PAPD). As stated in the PAPD, the government recognizes the need for inclusive and 
sustainable economic diversification to achieve structural transformation and growth, the urgency of 

 
1 Liberia’s poverty rate is measured as percentage of population below the international poverty line of US$1.9/ day in 2011 purchasing-power-parity 
(PPP) terms. 
2 World Bank report on Doing Business: Measuring Business Regulations: 2020. www.doingbusiness.org 
3 Rubber production increased from 46,819 mt in 2018 to 65,743 mt in 2019 (40.4 percent. Annual Report, CBL, 2019. 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 5 of 18  

     

facilitating private sector participation in the economy, and the importance of the agri-food sector as an 
important engine of growth. It has also prioritized the agriculture sector in their commitment to diversify 
the economy and has identified eight priority value chains requiring support under the PAPD 2018–23. These 
include rice, oil palm, horticulture, cocoa, rubber, cassava, poultry, and pig husbandry. 
 

7. Liberia’s agriculture is characterized by a diversified structure of agriculture production. Forest-based and 
tree crop farming systems cover the largest proportion of the land area in Liberia. They include tree crop-
based systems in which vegetables and other food crops are produced on a minor scale, mostly in the central 
belt of the country; root crop-based systems (with cereals) concentrated in the northern region; and fishing 
and land-based mixed cropping enterprises along the coastal belt. The three main structures of production 
are: (i) large plantations that produce major export crops such as rubber, oil palm, and to a lesser, degree 
coffee and cocoa; (ii) domestically owned, medium-sized commercial farms that cultivate industrial crops 
for export and livestock for the local market; and (iii) small household farms that use traditional production 
techniques and limited improved inputs with relatively low levels of productivity and limited access to 
markets. 
 

8. Liberia’s agriculture is characterized by low productivity. The long-lasting conflicts in Liberia have destroyed 
agricultural capital and disrupted food production, further compounding structural impediments and past 
policy failures. Since the end of hostilities, food production has increased, but smallholder yields remain low; 
e.g., in lowland rice production systems, estimated average farm paddy yield is 1.7 tons per hectare, while 
on-farm research produces up to 5 tons per hectare using improved variety and good production practices4. 
Globally, average rice yields in recent years have been at 4.2 kg/ha for paddy rice. Food value chains are also 
undeveloped, and institutions that provide advisory and support services are weak. Despite Liberia’s large 
arable land, it has been estimated that at least 15 percent of the population was severely food insecure. 

 
9. Significant challenges are limiting increased agriculture productivity and value chains development in 

Liberia. These include: (i) limited access to improved inputs and modern practices;  (ii) limited extension 
services; apart from agricultural extension provided by non-governmental organization, government 
agricultural extension services are practically non-existent5; (iii) impaired market access due to limited 
network of roads and lack of compliance with evolving market demands; (iv) weak integration of value chains 
due to insufficient aggregation of agriculture production, and lack of storage, processing, and marketing 
channels; (v) non-existent sanitary and quality controls for agricultural products; and (vi) high levels of post-
harvest losses. In addition, extremely high cost of electricity impedes the development of functioning and 
cost-efficient cold chains, which constraints competitiveness of Liberian fresh exports. Liberia will require 
critical facilities for managing sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) requirements and support to private sector 
players to improve quality management through the adoption of (and certification in) good agricultural and 
agro-industrial practices Data collected for the Enabling Business in Agriculture 2019 Report (EBA) has 
identified significant weaknesses in all areas covered by the report, and Liberia’s performance is found to be 
below the regional average in most areas, most notably in use of quality seeds, application of fertilizers, 
secure use of water, using adequate machinery, application of plant protection measures, sustainable 

 
4 Africa Rice 2018 field Research work in Liberia. 
5 The Ministry of Agriculture has developed a plan to post one extension officer per district, but in many cases these posts are vacant due to lack of 
funding. Also, where extension officers exist, they often lack transport to make field visits. 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 6 of 18  

     

livestock management, and access to finance.  
 

10. Liberia’s Agricultural Sector Investment Plan (LASIP II).  According to LASIP II, covering the period 2018-
2022, the current strategic long-term vision for the agricultural sector is generally to promote an inclusive 
and sustainable agricultural transformation through catalytic investment in agricultural value chains and 
industrialization and resilience to ensure food and nutrition security, environmental health, job and wealth 
creation and inclusive growth. The challenges to this agricultural transformation are:  (i) weak private sector 
and entrepreneurial skill;  (ii) inefficient production systems;  (iii) weak policy and business environment;  
(iv)  significant human resource challenges;  (v) inadequate infrastructure; (vi) insufficient agricultural 
funding;  (vii) low productivity subsistence farming;  (viii) inadequate natural resource management; and 
(ix) very limited agricultural research and development programs constraining adoption of modern practices 
and resulting in stagnant productivity. 
 

11. Poor road infrastructure has significantly hindered the growth of the agricultural sector. Farmers’ ability 
to access valuable markets and improved inputs to increase production is limited by the poor quality of the 
country’s network of roads. During the May–September rainy season, movement from rural areas is 
significantly restrained due to heavy rainfall, especially in lowland swamp areas. As a result, smallholders 
tend to sell produce in local markets where prices are relatively lower. Despite the government’s current 
initiative to rehabilitate main roadways and some key feeder roads in productive areas, more work is needed 
to improve road and bridge infrastructure in remote rural areas. In recent years the GoL promoted a 
comprehensive road network to increase country’s competitiveness including road in southeastern Liberia 
and the development of a coastal road link joining the capital, Monrovia, with Harper, capital city of 
Maryland County.  
 

12. Small and medium-size farmers trying to establish linkages with buyers have limited ability to deliver the 
required quantity and quality of produce in a timely and consistent schedule. International experience 
shows that, even in the segment of emerging commercially-oriented farmers, it has been challenging for 
them to meet the demands and requirements of buyers, including supplying consistent quantities and 
quality of goods complying with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and delivered them on time. These 
small and medium-sized farmers are less capitalized than the larger individual commercial farmers or 
producing firms/corporations, have low technology adoption and limited access to information. They are 
also lacking the equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills to diversify into new products and 
to become reliable suppliers to buyers and industry, in a modern market with increasing demands.  Also, the 
limited size and weaknesses of their organizations creates uncertainties for the prospective buyers and 
constraints the flow of information, thus reducing possibilities for gaining access to remunerative markets.  
 

13. Access to adequate financial services, necessary for supporting investments and increasing farm 
productivity and agribusiness competitiveness, are quite limited. The small number of financial institutions 
provide a limited array of products and services to the agri-food sector (credit extended to agricultural sector 
is estimated at 5.4 percent of total lending in the economy).  Financing for agriculture is mainly limited to 
export crops such as rubber and cocoa, for which foreign investors provide finance for plantation 
development and donor-supported projects channel small amounts of financing through financial 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 7 of 18  

     

institutions.  The main obstacles for small and medium size farmers, are:  (i) unsecure land tenure and limited 
availability of collateral due to absence of other forms of capital accepted as collateral (ii) low levels of 
financial literacy and credit background; (iii) common perception in the financial sector that agricultural is 
too risky and returns are uncertain; (iv) small farm size and low level of organization do not ensure adequate 
volume of supply with consistent quality; (v) limited experience by financial agencies in lending to the sector; 
(vi) financial intermediaries normally lend at short-term and are reluctant to lend for medium- and long-
term investments. 
 

14. Women are major players in the agriculture sector, although facing substantial gender inequalities. They 
comprise approximately 60 percent of the rural agricultural labor force and carry out 80 percent of 
agricultural activities throughout the planting season, including land clearing, planting, harvesting, and 
marketing. Although they play a dominant role in agricultural production, few women are able to own land, 
access loans, or control the income they earn from their labor. Moreover, women have less access to 
productive inputs than men, including skills training, basic tools, and technology. Women’s workloads are 
also increased during less productive periods, when many men migrate to seek work in mines, plantations, 
and urban areas, leaving women to care for their families and farms.  
 

15. Climate change and shifting cultivation are the most significant environmental threats in Liberia. Liberia’s 
susceptibility to negative climate impacts has significantly increased due to a combination of low agriculture 
productivity, climate vulnerability risks, population pressure and unsustainable natural resource 
management. According to data of the climate change vulnerability index, Liberia is among the top 20 most 
vulnerable countries in Africa. Major climate related changes including an average temperature rise (1-2 
degrees Celsius), modified rainfall patterns, and more frequent extreme weather events (such as flooding 
and drought) are predicted to occur over the next decades. These changes may result in heat stress, 
reduction of food crops and fodder crop production both in quality and quantity, and higher susceptibility 
to pests and diseases. Given the climate sensitivities of multiple engines of growth, agriculture, natural 
capital, and infrastructure, the urgency for Liberia to ramp up climate-smart development at scale and across 
the growth spectrum is an imperative. Moreover, due to the availability of land and forests, farmers tend to 
shift cultivation to new plots annually to increase production rather than implementing improved 
agricultural management techniques, which contributes to deforestation.  Low income populations struggle 
more than others to cope with and adapt to climate change and natural hazards, increasing their risk to fall 
deeper into poverty. 
 

16. GoL recognizes that transformation is required in the food and agriculture sector to maximize its 
contribution to economic growth and poverty reduction. Within the framework of its Pro-Poor Agenda for 
Prosperity and Development, the GoL is focusing on three fundamental issues: (i) improved national food 
and nutrition security with the objective to increase food availability and production in order to spur local 
economic development and food security; (ii) enhanced agricultural productivity, competitiveness, and 
linkages to markets; focusing on strengthening efficiency, promoting innovation, fostering sustainability, 
and leveraging opportunities in national and external markets; broadening and strengthen private sector 
participation; increasing public investments (mainly in rural infrastructure); and creating an enabling 
macroeconomic environment; and (iii) strengthened human and institutional capacities with the thrust to 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 8 of 18  

     

establish effective and efficient public sector frameworks in agricultural planning and coordination; reduce 
risks and improve coping mechanisms; mainstream gender and youth in agriculture and rural development 
and ensure sustainable use of natural resources. 
 

17. The proposed Rural Economic Transformation Project (RETRAP) supports the GoL Pro-Poor Agenda for 
Prosperity and Development and the MoA three-year strategy plan for the Agriculture sector with a focus 
on: (i) institutional development and the promotion of inclusive and competitive value chains (cassava, 
rubber, poultry, and piggery). It also supports the GoL achieve its commitments under the Comprehensive 
African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP), which commits the country’s government to investing 
more in the agriculture sector. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

18. Country Partnership Framework (CPF) Pillars.  The proposed Project is in consonant with the three pillars 
of the CPF (FY19-FY24) for Liberia, including (i) strengthening institutions and creating an enabling 
environment for inclusive and sustainable growth; (ii) building human capital to seize new economic 
opportunities; and (iii) narrowing the infrastructure gap to foster more equitable nationwide development. 
It is also contributing to achieving the country’s UN Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goal 1 (End 
poverty in all its forms everywhere), Goal 2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and 
promote sustainable agriculture); Goal 9 (Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, 
including regional and trans-border infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-
being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all); and Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impact: by enhancing productivity that implies the efficient use of inputs, including 
water and land; enhancing awareness and promoting climate smart agriculture measures).  
 

19. The proposed project supports IDA19 policy priorities (Gender, Climate, Governance, Jobs, FCV). The 
project will support the following key agendas: (i) Economic transformation and job creation: by supporting 
sustained increases in agricultural productivity and a shift to commercial enterprises, the strengthening of 
efficient value chains and the development of a thriving rural economy which will in turn create quality 
employment in upstream and downstream activities servicing agriculture; (ii) resilience building and food 
security: by enhancing resilience of domestic agricultural production systems through the promotion of 
climate smart technologies6; and (iv) Gender inclusion: by helping removing the constraints in access and 
ownership of productive resources faced by women as well as support their access to information, financial 
services and technologies (for production, processing and marketing).  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve agriculture productivity and access to markets for selected  
value chains in the Project targeted areas. 

 
6 The project will also contribute to the WBG’s Africa Climate Change Business Plan and to reaching CIV’s climate change mitigation and adaptation targets articulated 
in the Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC). 

 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 9 of 18  

     

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

20. The following key performance indicators are proposed to measure the project outcomes: 
a) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services, disaggregated by gender (Number) - Core 

Results Indicator (CRI); 
b) Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology; disaggregated by gender (Number). 
c) Increase in yield among project beneficiaries, disaggregated by key targeted commodity (Metric 

tons per hectare).  
d) Increase in volume of annual sales (Metric tons) for the target commodities produced by the 

beneficiary farmers’ groups;   
e) Number of direct project beneficiaries (Number); disaggregated by type and gender 

(Percentage). 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

21. The project addresses important challenges to developing agri-food value chains in Liberia. 
These include:  (i) weak capacity of support institutions for delivery of agribusiness services; (ii) poor 
organization of smallholder farmers; (ii) low agriculture productivity due to limited access to 
improved technologies, modern inputs, and advisory services; (iii) weak access to markets due to 
inadequate post-harvest, transport, and marketing infrastructure; and (iv) limited private sector 
investment in production, processing capacity and value-added activities.  To address these 
challenges, the project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for value chain 
actors by applying a three-fold approach: (i) strengthen critical institutions overseeing the 
development of the sector; (ii) intervene at various level of the supply chain via capacity building 
and investment subprojects focused on improving agriculture productivity and resilience of the food 
system to climate change, thus enhancing market access; and (iii) improvement of rural access and 
agricultural marketing through the upgrading of roads, construction of short-span critical cross-
drainage structures, and improvement of agro-logistics centers.  
 

22. Targeted priority value chains. Cassava, rubber, poultry, piggery and vegetable value chains where 
selected for Project support.  These value chains will complement the value chains which are already 
supported under the World Bank-funded Smallholder Agriculture Transformation and Agribusiness 
Revitalization Project (STAR-P – P160945): rice, oil palm, and horticulture. The selection was based on two 
sector scans7, 8  which assessed a range of development impact criteria; including: (i) evidence-based 
market demand for selected commodities; (ii) high growth potential, demonstrated by positive 
growth trends of the value chains, scope for expanding production and increasing sales, and scope 
for value addition through processing; (iii) potential for poverty reduction9; and (iv) project-related 
aspects, including existing infrastructure and complementarities with other projects in the country. 

 
7 Netherlands Enterprise Agency, 2017. Sector Scan-Liberia Agriculture Sector. 
8 World Bank, International Finance Corporation, and GoL. 2017. Agricultural Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project: Sector Scan 

Report. 
9 Potential for poverty reduction is based on locally available raw materials and skills, new job opportunities created, low entry barriers for small-scale 

entrepreneurs, and prospects for women and youth. 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 10 of 18  

     

Vegetables production (home gardens) will also be supported because of its importance in 
generating incomes for women and for nutrition diversification at the household level (See Annex 1 for 
further details). 
 

23. Geographical focus and phased approach. The Project is expected to operate in 10 out of the 15 Counties 
of Liberia (see Annex 2): (i) Group 1: covering the Bong, Lofa, Nimba, Grand Bassa, Bomi, Grand Cape Mount, 
Grand Gedeh and Maryland counties, which offer comparative advantage for the production of cassava; (ii) 
Group 2: covering the Counties of Montserrado, Nimba, Bong, Margibi, Bomi, Sinoe and Maryland counties, 
with advantages for rubber production;  (iii) Group 3:  covering the Regions of Grand Cape Mount, Bomi, 
Montserrado, Bong and Margibi for poultry/piggery production.  The Project would give priority to counties 
where farmers organizations already exist, and where there are market opportunities (processing factories, 
close to urban areas, border-outlets, etc.), before moving to counties without any existing farmers 
organizations. The final selection of the project’s intervention location for the selected value chains will be 
determined during project preparation in consultation with key value chain stakeholders.  
 

24. The project builds on the design features of the Smallholder Agriculture Transformation and Agribusiness 
Revitalization Project (STAR-P, P160945). The proposed project builds on the experience gained under the 
STAR-P Project, expanding the “Productive Alliance” approach to promote new selected value chains. This 
approach support producer organizations by bringing together: (i) a group of  farmers producing a particular 
product; (ii) one or more (potential) buyers for that product; and (iii) other partners involved along the value 
chain providing services or undertaking some processing required by the final buyer/s (e.g., aggregation, 
handling, storage, processing). These entities, or participating members of the “alliance” are connected 
through a business proposition, or “business plan”, which assesses the capital and service needs of the 
producer association, and proposes improvements that would allow them to upgrade their production 
capacities and skills to strengthen their linkage with the markets.  The public sector is normally engaged in 
providing an enabling environment and, in many occasions, supporting the participating member preparing 
investment proposals, as well as providing adequate financing for implementing the proposal. Global 
experience has shown that the approach help solving multiple constraints by providing integrated solutions 
adapted to local conditions and explores the existence of significant motivations perceived by partners in 
the alliance and significantly contributes to increasing stability in prices, assured sales, as well as 
improvements in product quality and, hence, have resulted in increased revenues.   
 

25. In addressing identified value chain constraints and in partnership with IFC, the Project will include a 
spectrum of actions for Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD). These actions, to be further 
developed during preparation, may include: (i) increasing the space for private sector activity; (ii) improving 
the policy and regulatory environment; for instance through establishing partnerships between operators 
within the value chains, and improving farmers – buyers contractual arrangements; (ii) facilitating access to 
finance for agribusiness development (provision of matching grants) and supporting agri-entrepreneurs to 
develop “bankable” and viable business plans;  (iii) supporting essential public goods and services such as 
strengthening human capital, agricultural research/extension services, and public infrastructure (roads and 
market information) contributing to enhance market access; and (iv) technical assistance to financial 
institutions to strengthen their capacity for diversifying their financial products and expanding their 
outreach, as well as to address the lack of financial literacy in the group of potential beneficiaries.  



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 11 of 18  

     

 
26. Scaling-up and disseminate innovative agricultural technologies:  Farmers’ access to localized, relevant and 

timely information on crop management and market intelligence is critical to achieve project objective. In 
this context, mobile-based rural advisory services (RAS), has potential to drive greater productivity gains 
than traditional methods of extension and reduce information asymmetry on market prices etc. The project 
will identify and assess existing examples10 of relevant modern and innovative solutions implemented in the 
country and provide financial support to customize such products for the project-supported producer 
organizations.  

 
27. The Project will also focus on other cross-cutting priorities.  These are; especially: (i) taking gender issues 

and empowerment of vulnerable groups (women and youth) into account in the context of broad  social 
safeguards measures (ii) promoting mitigation and adaptation to climate change and adherence to 
environmental sound actions as well as giving priority to climate smart technologies enhancing resilience; 
and (iii) promoting inclusion of products for improving nutrition at household level; and (iv) giving priority 
to adoption of technologies reducing GHG emissions. The project will set targets for participation by women 
and youth and will prioritize subprojects that have the potential to generate full-time rural employment 
opportunities. When selecting subprojects for investment, the project will mainstream resilient and low 
carbon activities to help address agricultural vulnerability and reduce agricultural emissions of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs). The project will also promote climate-smart agriculture (CSA) approaches as well as best 
practices and technologies for water resource management to improve climate resilience. With regards to 
nutrition, the project will promote home gardening and simultaneously support the dissemination of 
information on sound nutritional practices among beneficiaries, particularly for women and children.  

 
 

1. Description 
 
Project Components 

 

28. Component 1: Improving the enabling environment, enhancing support services for agribusiness 
development and strengthening producer organizations (IDA US$3.5 million). The objective of Component 
1 is to improve the enabling policy and regulatory environment necessary for private businesses to increase 
investment and commercial activities and enhancing delivery of quality support services that can foster an 
inclusive and competitive development of this sector. The project will invest in development and 
maintenance of an Integrated Agriculture Business Information and Intelligence Information System (IABIIS) 
to improve service delivery capabilities of MoA.  At the same time, the project will be supporting farmers in 
the formation of producer organizations (in areas where they are not present and assessed as feasible), as 
well as in developing their skills in technical, administrative/managerial and marketing activities. The 

 
10 Examples such as a) partnership between The Cookshop (a Liberian online food delivery startup) and GROW Liberia Program (agri-business and 
investment advisory program) to operate a Market Information System for agricultural commodity prices for farmers to post and review products and prices. 
The partnership leverages GROWs existing partnerships with the Monrovia Vegetable Sellers Association and the Farmers Union Network (FUN), and 
Cookshop’s existing relationships with over 40 food retailers including restaurants, hotels and supermarkets; b) Power Gari, a nutritionally fortified cassava-
based porridge, produced with R&D support of a Silicon-Valley based food-tech company, developing plant-based food products; https://nextbillion.net/low-
tech-high-impact-food-production-africa/  
 

https://nextbillion.net/low-tech-high-impact-food-production-africa/
https://nextbillion.net/low-tech-high-impact-food-production-africa/


 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 12 of 18  

     

component will finance combinations of specialized technical assistance, training, works, goods, consulting 
and non-consulting services, and operational expenses, as detailed below.  
 

30. Subcomponent 1.1: Improving public agribusiness services. This intervention aims at enhancing the 
capacity of selected public services that are critical for enabling agribusiness; principally, Ministry of 
Agriculture (MoA), Cooperative Development Agency (CDA), Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI), 
Soil and Crop laboratory, and the National Standard Laboratory (NSL, with national responsibility for testing 
food quality). The project will undertake a functional review of these entities and recommend solutions for 
improving the quality of their services. The focus will be on strategies and solutions for enhanced growth 
and entrepreneurship in the agribusiness sector; formulating interactive and demand driven knowledge, 
innovation and extension system with a focus on climate-smart technologies; promotion of investments in 
the sector (encouraging women and youth entrepreneurship); enhanced governance and partnerships 
across the value chains, and management of agribusiness development programs/projects. In principle, it 
will also support MoA to operationalize the sector’s approved acts on seeds, food safety, pesticide, fertilizer 
and the national rice development strategy, updating and enforcement of standards in the agriculture 
sector; this will include the provision of technical assistance, training, and equipment; and (ii) establishing 
an agriculture database to support monitoring, research, policy-making and allocation of resources by 
counties. The system shall ensure that farmers, allied institutions of MoA (such as CARI, NSL) and private 
sector partners have a shared platform for data access, knowledge sharing and to avail advisory/financial 
benefits. The component will finance system design and maintenance, purchase of IT infrastructure, on-
boarding of competent human resources and requisite IT service providers.  
 

31. Subcomponent 1.2: Enhancing value chain coordination and public-private dialogue-(PPD). The Project 
will: (i) conduct a stakeholder mapping exercise as the basis to put in place a representative and inclusive 
Private Public Dialogue (PPD) mechanism; (ii) support the establishment and operation of this mechanism, 
including training of main stakeholders on its effective use to improve the performance of targeted value 
chains; and (iii) support increased consultations among the value chain stakeholders (especially women), 
through  regular forums to discuss the various constraints of the sector, review and update the government 
sector strategy, develop a shared vision and harmonized approach to minimize potential conflict, 
mainstream climate change in the programs, devise mechanisms for coordinating donor assistance and 
creating an enabling environment for private and public investments. It will also support establishing an 
Agribusiness Growth Delivery Unit (AGDU) as an agribusiness strategy incubator and strategic advisory arm 
of MoA.  
 

32. Subcomponent 1.3:  Strengthening Producer Organizations.  This subcomponent will address the need to 
enhance capacities of targeted Farmers-Based Organizations (FBOs) to be able to address critical limiting 
factors to facilitate effective access to markets and sustainable integration with formal and lucrative value 
chains and providing support for taking advantage of investment opportunities. It will comprise financing of 
technical assistance, training and capacity building of beneficiaries and their organizations, as well as 
services for facilitating complementary services (financial, specialized technical assistance, inputs, 
certification services, etc.).  Assistance will cover assistance to establish new organizations in areas where 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 13 of 18  

     

they are absent (but it is feasible and there are clear competitive advantages) and legal assistance to their 
formal registration. 
 

33. Component 2: Enhancing Competitiveness and Market Access through Productive Alliances (IDA US$15 
million). The objective of this component is to promote the development of organizations of small and 
medium-sized agricultural producers participating in “productive alliances” with selected partners with the 
aim to be able to operate competitively in selected value chains, with strengthened and more reliable 
linkages with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks. The basic approach is to 
promote investments and collective actions, with the aim of gaining economies of scale, enhancing 
bargaining power, facilitating knowledge sharing, and reducing costs of production and service delivery.  The 
activities included in these subprojects could comprise eligible works, goods, and services required by 
different partners participating in the subproject to achieve measurable targets in terms of product/service 
specifications (such as quality, quantity, and delivery conditions) agreed with their respective prospective 
buyer or customers, within the framework of a joint business plan. 
 

34. Subcomponent 2.1:  Pre-Investment Activities.  This subcomponent will support pre-investment activities 
to: (i) promote the project concept and increase outreach to potential FBO beneficiaries, commercial 
partners, and private financing entities, as well as identify productive alliances among FBOs and commercial 
partners; (ii) identify potential business opportunities on the part of the productive alliance; (iii) prepare 
business plans and proposals for Investment Subprojects reflecting the identified opportunity; (iv) build 
capacity among technical service providers to enhance the quality of the services provided to the productive 
alliances;  (v) support project-related studies to promote specific, prioritized value chains and evaluate the 
potential for business plan investments to contribute to climate change mitigation and resilience and to the 
economic inclusion of otherwise marginalized groups.  These investment initiatives (Subproject proposals) 
will be demand-driven and with clearly demonstrated benefits.  Facilitators and Community Development 
Officers (CDOs) will be engaged for a maximum of 2 years of the project period to facilitate the preparation 
of Subproject proposals for farmers’ groups and their participating partners. Capacity building will be 
provided for Facilitators, Services Providers, Farmers Groups and other Producer Associations. 
 

35. Subcomponent 2.2:  Investment Subprojects Supporting Productive Alliances.  This subcomponent will 
provide technical and financial support (matching grants) for the implementation of technically feasible, 
financially viable, economically profitable, socially responsible, climate resilient and environmentally 
sustainable investment Subprojects, which will help producing a consistent and timely supply of quality 
produce to buyers, while helping to provide a reliable income to allied producers organizations and their 
partners participating in the “alliance”. The implementation of these investment subprojects will make 
possible sustainable increases in productivity and improvements in quality of the products offered in 
accordance to market demands.  The Subprojects will be prepared in a participatory fashion with support 
by the Project together with the potential beneficiaries (farmer organizations and their allied partners, such 
as aggregators, processors, technical service providers, lenders, etc.).  Sub-projects with a clear impact on 
agricultural production resilience, using climate-smart technologies e.g. zero tillage, the use of soil and water 
conservation techniques such as tied-ridging, and of integrated soil fertility management options such as 
composting, and efficient use of mineral fertilizers would be particularly targeted and prioritized. 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 14 of 18  

     

 
36. Eligible expenditure under these Subprojects include: (i) civil works (for example, lowland rehabilitation; 

clearing of bushland; construction of post-harvest, storage, and processing facilities; and small-scale, 
efficient irrigation systems); (ii) goods, such as productive equipment (for example, farm machinery, 
processing equipment, storage units, and transport vehicles); (iii) incremental working capital (for example, 
for improved inputs); (iv) technical assistance and business advisory services supporting the implementation 
of the subprojects and enhancing organizations’ administrative and managerial capacities.  Investment 
proposals by farmers’ organizations and agribusinesses that integrate climate-smart approaches throughout 
the value chain, such as intercropping and conservation agriculture (which will increase crop diversification); 
use of climate-resilient seeds and varieties; methods to retain soil nutrients and prevent soil erosion; 
improved water management for extreme warm weather; flood-resilient design of production; and efficient 
pest and disease management; alternative sources of energy;  water and wastage re-use systems, saving 
energy of implementing mitigating approaches reduce GHG emissions, will receive priority and may qualify 
for additional bonus financing. 

 
37. These Investment Subprojects will qualify for receiving matching grant through three dedicated windows to 

support the development of value chains in selected commodities and supporting different types of 
beneficiaries, but all integrated into a single Subproject.  The matching grant from the Project will cover a 
part of the overall cost of implementing the Subproject, making necessary for the beneficiaries to come up 
with their counterpart contribution (in cash).  The level of required counterpart financing will depend on the 
type of beneficiary and the amount of the investment to be undertaken (ranges will be fully determined 
during preparation and included in detail in the Project Operational Manual).  These windows are: 

 
(a)  Window A, which will support to smallholder farmers organizations, targeting organized smallholder 

farmers organizations that are eligible to receive matching grant funds as co-financing.  In areas where 
the targeted beneficiaries are not organized, jointly with the Ministry of Agriculture, other government 
agencies and NGOs active in project areas, the project will support the formation of producer and agro-
based organizations.  The main beneficiaries of this window are small producers and other organized 
vulnerable groups, such as women entrepreneurs and women-led producer organizations and youth, 
who will be encouraged to participate through a targeted information campaign. 

(b) Window B, supporting commercially oriented farmers that are also service providers.  This window will 
contribute directly to boost agricultural production that will ensure there is a reliable supply of produce 
along the supply chain.  Priority will be given to those commercially oriented farmers that (a) work with 
smallholder farmers by transferring new technologies and provision of technical assistance; (b) adapt 
technologies that address binding constraints and risks in agriculture, such as climate change; (c) create 
formal partnership with value chains to ensure access to markets and research organizations to ensure 
the transfer of new technologies; (d) create jobs; and (e) contribute to food security.   In cases where it 
is not possible to work with organized farmers, these larger commercially-oriented farmer or service 
providers may be the vehicle to channel funding for investments to be made at the producing level, as 
well as to channel the technical assistance and the improved inputs. 

(c) Window C, supporting all other partners or participating members of an alliance (integrated in a single 
Subproject), such as private business and enterprises providing any aggregation, processing or service 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 15 of 18  

     

that is essential to the success of the Subproject according to the demands of the buyer/s and, at the 
same time, requiring a new investment to adapt its operations in order to comply with the buyer/s 
demands. 
 

38. Component 3: Agro-logistics and Infrastructure Investments (IDA US$31.5 million). The objective of this 
component is to improve access to markets through the rehabilitation of existing roads, construction of 
short-span critical cross-drainage structures, and improvement of agro-logistics centers. Expected outcomes 
from such investments are improved quality of products and reduced post-harvest losses, reduced 
marketing costs and better connection between producers and buyers, and improved competitiveness of 
the domestic production in supplying of food products to major consumption centers and export points. 

 
39. Subcomponent 3.1: Roads.  Complementing the planned road works works financed as part of  the South 

Eastern Corridor Road Asset Management Project (SECRAMP; P149279) under which a total of 100km length 
of road between Ganta and Tappita is to be rehabilitated, the Project will support the rehabilitation of 40 
km section of the 112 km long Tappita - Zwedru road11. The project will use Output- and Performance-Based 
Road Contracts (OPRC) under Design, Build and Transfer (DBT) methodology and will also finance the 
associated consultant services.  According to a conceptual design carried out, the proposed design includes 
a full construction of the road to a two-lane carriageway with bituminous surfacing along the existing right-
of-way, with a 20-year design life.  The conceptual design study anticipates reduced vehicle operating costs 
and reliable year-round access resulting in significant increases in additional traffic generated. As part of the 
road design, the project will also incentivize contractors to choose materials and implement processes that 
generate less emissions, adopt engineering and structural measures and bioengineering involving the use of 
vegetation either alone or in conjunction with other civil engineering structures. Once rehabilitated, it is 
expected that the road will play a key role in improving market access for farmers, businesses, traders and 
agro-processors and transport service companies and unlocking the agricultural potential of the entire 
south-eastern region. 
 

40. Subcomponent 3.2: Agro-logistics.  With regards agro-logistics interventions, the project will facilitate the 
preparation of a national agro-logistics program to outline the policy framework and identify the main 
infrastructure networks required to enable proper transport and distribution of agricultural/agro-industrial 
products. It will also finance investments including: (i) construction of a number of open market sheds and 
small storage facilities; (ii) construction of selected infrastructure that require specialized handling agri-
produce; and (iii) construction of market internal path-ways, drainage infrastructure, toilets and clean water 
facilities. The infrastructure to be rehabilitated or established under the Project would incorporate design 
standards ensuring their resilience to the main local risk factors (geophysical conditions and climate change) 
and their potential for climate co-benefits (e.g. improved energy efficiency, use of renewable energy, etc.). 
Detailed locations of these infrastructures and their operation and management would be identified and 
discussed during project preparation. 

 

 
11 Currently, the Ganta -Tappita stretch, almost halfway to Zwedru, is under financing from from GoL, World Bank and Liberia Reconstruction Trust 
Fund (LRTF) sources (Ganta-Saglepie, 39km financed by GOL, and Saglepie-Tappita, 61km financed by WB/LRTF) under the South Eastern Corridor 
Road Asset Management Project (SECRAMP).  The AfDB is also financing the paving of the stretch from Zwedru to the Ivorian Border in the South. A 
gap of about 85km is still under discussion for financing by donors in the next round of allocations. 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 16 of 18  

     

41. Component 4: Project coordination and Management (IDA US$5 million). The aim of this component is 
twofold: (i) ensuring that GoL is better equipped to respond to crises and emergencies; and (ii) establishing 
appropriate coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and communication regarding Project 
implementation. The Project will finance the creation and operation of a National Coordination Office (NCO) 
within MoA, through provision of appropriate staffing and operating resources. The NCO will be responsible 
for: (i) ensuring effective planning, implementation and monitoring of the Project activities; (ii) fiduciary 
management and environmental and social safeguard compliance; (iii) effective coordination with 
participating stakeholders and partners; (iii) evaluating the Project’s final results, outcomes, and impacts on 
value chain actors; and (iv) ensuring efficient knowledge management and effective communication on 
project activities. 
 

42. Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component – CERC (IDA: US$0.0 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as may be presented 
in the future. The CERC is one of the Bank’s contingent financing mechanisms available to Borrowers to gain 
rapid access to Bank financing to respond to a crisis or emergency. It is included as a Project component that 
is designed to provide swift response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, defined as “an event 
that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact associated 
with natural or man-made crises or disasters.” The mechanism for the triggering of the CERC will be included 
in the Credit Agreement, which will require (inter-alia), the preparation of a CERC Manual detailing the 
applicable fiduciary, environmental and social, monitoring, reporting, and any other implementation 
arrangements necessary.  Provided the World Bank Group agrees with the emergency assessment, this 
component would allow the government to request the World Bank to reallocate uncommitted resources 
from other project components to this component in order to cover emergency response and recovery costs 
or, eventually, to channel additional financing that may become available because of the emergency. 

 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  
 
 
 

Environmental Risk Rating 
 
The environmental risk rating for the proposed project is substantial. The classification is based on the potential 
environmental risks and impacts, the sensitivity of the recipient environment and the capacity of the implementing 
agencies to manage the risks. The project’s adverse environmental risks and impacts will mainly emanate from 
interventions under Components 2 and 3. The Matching Grant (MG) scheme under Component 2 might trigger 
agricultural commercialization, expansion of farmlands, expansion and/or renovation of agricultural infrastructure such 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 17 of 18  

     

as warehouses, processing facilities, electricity connectivity etc. Land clearing associated with farming and provision of 
infrastructure could contribute to deforestation, forest degradation, destruction of natural habitats, soil erosion and 
depletion of biodiversity. Agricultural intensification could trigger extensive use of pesticides with adverse repercussions 
on human health and biodiversity. The proposed support to poultry and piggery industry will produce animal waste 
(manure) which could contaminate ground and surface water as well as contribute to green-house gas emissions if 
poorly managed. Similarly, effluents from processing facilities e.g. cassava processing under the MG scheme could 
contribute to water contamination, eutrophication and unsightly scenes in communities. The risks associated with 
surface water contamination from pesticides and effluents from processing facilities could transcend communities and 
may have far reaching consequences, if not properly managed. These potential risks will be further assessed along with 
appropriate mitigation measures in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be prepared for 
the project prior to appraisal. The proposed road improvement of 40 km under Component 3 might result in 
environmental, occupational, and community health and safety risks. The risks and impacts will generally range from 
minor to substantial but mainly localized. The Ministry of Agriculture will implement the project in collaboration with 
other ministries. Environmental safeguard capacity varies among ministries with no experience in the implementation of 
the ESS.  
 
Social Risk Rating 
 
The social risk rating for the proposed project is substantial. The classification is based on the potential project social risks 
and impacts, the country context social sensitivity issues and the capacity of the implementing agencies to manage the 
risks. The project social risks include risk of conflicts within communities, agribusiness service providers and project if 
selection of beneficiaries is not transparent. Risk of exclusion of poor households and vulnerable groups and elite capture 
of project benefits (e.g. the Matching Grants, provision of farm inputs, access to information on crop management and 
market intelligence), poses substantial risk. Similarly, risks and impacts associated with temporary and permanent land 
acquisition for rural agribusiness infrastructure (e.g. warehousing, processing facilities etc.) and road rehabilitation are 
anticipated. In particular, economic or physical displacement is anticipated under the proposed rehabilitation of a 40km 
section of the 112km long Tappita - Zwedru Road. Other social risks include potential legacy issues related to impacts of 
previous road construction activities on Project Affected People (PAP) and communities along the proposed road corridor 
to be rehabilitated. While use of local labor is anticipated, use of migrant workers and risk of use of child labor and/ or 
forced labor cannot be ignored. The risk of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassments (SEA/SH) is possible 
given the country context and social sensitivity issues and focus of project interventions in rural areas with possibility of 
men and women working in unsupervised conditions. Risks of spread of communicable diseases including spread of 
COVID-19 are anticipated given the project interventions will be implemented in counties where potential for spread of 
infectious diseases cannot be ignored. 
 
  

.  
CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Adetunji A. Oredipe, John Kobina Richardson 

Senior Agriculture Economist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 
The World Bank  
Liberia: Rural Economic Transformation Project (P175263) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 18 of 18  

     

 

Republic of Liberia 

Samuel D  Jr Tweah 

Minister 

dtweah@mfdp.gov.lr 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Jeanine Milly Cooper 

Ansu Abraham Metzger 

National Project Coordinator 

ametzger@moa.gov.lr 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Adetunji A. Oredipe, John Kobina Richardson 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director: Khwima Lawrence Nthara 18-Dec-2020 
    
 
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 
 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2021 | Report No: PIDA31193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 2 of 22  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Yemen, Republic of P176129 Yemen Food Security 
Response and Resilience 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

18-Mar-2021 27-Apr-2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing United Nations 
Development Programme, 
World Food Programma, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization 

World Food Programme, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization, United 
Nations Development 
Programme 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the availability of and access to food and nutritious diets, both in the 
short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance Yemen's capacity to respond to 
food insecurity. 

 
Components 

Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production infrastructure and building climate resilience 
Increasing Production and Sale of Nutritious Crop, Livestock and Fish Products 
Improving the Nutritional Status of Vulnerable Rural Households 
Capacity building for food security management and climate resilience 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 127.00 

Total Financing 127.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 3 of 22  

 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Grant 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 27.00 

          Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 27.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Violent conflict, now in its seventh year, has crippled Yemen’s economy and created an 
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Oil exports, the main source of government revenue and foreign 
exchange, came to a virtual halt in 2015 due to repeated sabotage of vital infrastructure and increased 
insecurity. The resulting wide-scale suspension of basic public services and civil service salary payments, 
rapid currency depreciation, and shortages of imported goods weakened the non-hydrocarbon sector and 
left many Yemenis without a regular income. More than 50 percent of Yemenis between the ages of 18 
and 24 were unemployed in 2017 (United Nations Development Program 2017). A liquidity crisis hit the 
country in mid- to late-2018 with the local currency depreciating significantly and food prices rising, 
making food virtually unaffordable to many households. External assistance financed imports of food and 
other necessities and helped stabilize the economy in 2019 but was largely depleted by early 2020 and 
foreign reserves were not replenished. Some respite was provided through IMF financing in late spring 
and summer of 2020.  
 
2. The macroeconomic policy environment differs spatially due to the bifurcation of 
administration between areas of control. In the areas controlled by the internationally recognized 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 4 of 22  

 

government (IRG), significant revenue underperformance and continued monetization of the fiscal deficit 
have undermined macroeconomic stability. Oil prices remain low, eroding the government’s hydrocarbon 
revenue. Non-oil economic activity has suffered significantly from COVID-19 related trade slowdown, 
desert locust outbreaks and exceptionally heavy rainfalls, which have caused intense flooding, 
infrastructure damage and human casualties in 2020. The severe revenue shortfall has led to expenditure 
compression. Since early 2020, salary payments to public sector workers have seen frequent delays. 
Payables to suppliers (mostly to energy suppliers) have continued building up, disrupting fuel imports and 
electricity supply. The complete ban on using new banknotes since December 2019[1] has resulted in two 
exchange rates, complicating trade and financial flows across Yemen. The DFA’s fiscal policy operates 
under a cash-constrained budget. The collection of corporate profit and sales taxes and customs revenue, 
the three largest revenue sources, was affected negatively by COVID-19 related trade slowdown and 
movement restrictions, and administrative disruption caused by flooding. In 2020, the DFA disbursed half-
month salaries to public sector workers under its controlled areas every other month 1. 
 
3. Over 24 million people (or 83 percent of the total estimated population) are food insecure2, 
including a staggering 16.2 million people in IPC Phase 3+ requiring urgent emergency assistance. Food 
insecurity in Yemen is driven by constrained food production, supply and distribution and households’ 
diminishing purchasing power. An estimated 4.3 million people have fled their homes since the start of 
the conflict, and 3.3 million remain internally displaced. Hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition are 
among the most pressing and overwhelming challenges Yemen now faces, at a scale that is not being fully 
met by national authorities and the international development and humanitarian communities. Low food 
access has resulted from a combination a high household dependence on food imports, high food prices 
and significantly reduced household income. It is estimated that Yemen imported 8 percent less wheat 
per month between January and May 2020 than during the same period in 2019 due to limited funds, 
which is an insufficient imported amount of wheat to meet the 2020 consumption requirement.  
 
4. Socio-economic conditions deteriorated further in 2020, significantly worsening poverty. 
Distortions created by the fragmented institutional capacity and the divergent policy decisions between 
the areas of control have compounded the economic and humanitarian crisis. This dramatic deterioration 
of conditions in Yemen means that an estimated 80 percent of the population (around 24 million) were 
living below the poverty line even before COVID-19 pandemic crisis (World Bank 2019). The likely result 
based on anecdotal evidence is a contraction of the economy from an already low base in 2020. In addition 
to monetary poverty, it is estimated that up to 80 percent of households experience overlapping monetary 
and non-monetary deprivations (World Food Program 2020). 
 
5. Multiple indices point towards a significant gender gap, with Yemeni women having a lower 
standard of living than men, and less access to education, health, productive employment and food 
security than men (World Bank 2014). The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures Yemen’s GII value as 
0.8343 vs. the world’s average at 0.439.  Yemen ranks 153 out of 153 countries, meaning Yemen has the 
most massive gender gap in the world, in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Report4 by the World Economic 

 
[1] Notes printed after September 2016 when the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) headquarters was moved to Aden. 
1 The Yemen Macro-Poverty Outlook, the 2020 Annual Meetings Edition. 
2 IPC Phase 2 and above.  
3 The Borgen Project, 2018. 
4  The Global Gender Gap considers the economic participation, education, health and political empowerment of all genders. 

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf


 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 5 of 22  

 

Forum. International Labor Organization (ILO)- modeled estimates5 suggest that 46 percent of women 
work in agriculture (versus only 27 percent of men). Yet far fewer women participate in the labor market 
and in productive employment, with only 6 percent of women participating in the labor force compared 
to 72 percent of men. One out of four women in the labor market are unemployed (24 percent) compared 
to 12 percent of men. Vulnerable employment is high for all but especially for women; 68 percent of 
women fall in this category compared to 44 percent of men. Income inequality is stark: for every dollar a 
man makes in Yemen, a woman is estimated to make only thirty cents6. In 2011, the adult literacy rate 
was 80 percent for men and 45 percent for women, but among youth aged 15-24, these rates were 96 
and 72, respectively7 8. Finally, while men face a higher direct burden of war through fighting and battle 
deaths, women are disproportionately affected by the indirect and often lasting effects of conflict (World 
Development Report 2011, Buvinic et al. 2012, Justino 2018) that exacerbate existing gender-based 
deprivations and development shortfalls. 
 
6. Economic and social prospects for 2021 and beyond are highly uncertain. With the ongoing 
difficult political and security situation, socio-economic conditions will remain difficult. Urgent progress 
to address the current restrictions of access to supplies and fuel imports would improve public service 
provision and the operational environment for humanitarian operations. Ceasing hostilities and eventual 
political reconciliation, including the return of unitary macroeconomic policy implementation, are 
prerequisites for reconstructing the economy and rebuilding social fabric. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
7. Yemen’s agriculture supplies around 15 – 20 percent of its food needs due to limited agricultural 
land and water resources and poor agricultural practices. However, agriculture—including fisheries and 
livestock—is the backbone of Yemeni livelihoods and the most important non-oil sector of the economy, 
even as its contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has decreased during this period of severe 
economic disruption. Agriculture’s share of GDP contracted from 10.3 percent in 2010 to 4.03 percent in 
20189. Agricultural land is less than three percent (3 percent) of Yemen’s land area (FAOSTAT) and supplies 
around 15 - 20 percent of its needs for food. The principal agricultural systems are in the rainfed highlands 
characterized by terraced agriculture for coffee, fruits, grains and qat10 and extensive livestock (meat) 
production. Horticulture and field crops predominate in the plains, using groundwater for irrigation. 
Groundwater resources are very limited, fossil and non-renewable, and agriculture accounts for up to 90 
percent of groundwater use. The current annual renewable freshwater resources in Yemen are estimated 
at 80 m3 per capita versus an 8,900 m3 per capita global average. Yemen therefore falls well below the 
absolute scarcity threshold of 500 m3 per capita11. Up to 85 percent of food consumed is imported, mostly 
staples, such as wheat, rice, oil, sugar and milk. Yemen has self-sufficiency in some cereals (sorghum, 
millet, and barley), while 90 percent of wheat is imported. The agricultural sector accounts for a large 
portion of non-oil domestic exports and supports livelihoods through agricultural and livestock 
production. Over three thirds of Yemenis depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.  

 
5 World Bank Data.  
6 The Borgen Project. 
7 World Bank: data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic. 
8Description of Yemen’s education system is summarized in Annex 2.  
9 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/share_of_agriculture/ 
10 Qat is a mild stimulant leaf chewed for recreation, and for which up to 40 percent of total water resource use is dedicated 
11 Dire Straits: The Crisis Surrounding Poverty, Conflict, and Water in the Republic of Yemen, World Bank, 2017. 

https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/share_of_agriculture/


 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 6 of 22  

 

 
8. Agriculture is very important for job creation and food security, especially for women, yet 
women have less access to agricultural assets and higher food insecurity. Women have a major role in 
agricultural production; up to 87 percent of rural women are involved in agriculture sector activities (FAO), 
yet women rarely have land ownership rights and they commonly relinquish inherited land rights to male 
family members. It is estimated that only 13 percent of women are agricultural landholders (UNDP). 
Women working in agriculture face many constraints, such as limited access to land ownership, finance, 
markets, livelihood activities, and information, aside from legal and cultural restrictions on economic 
independence. It is estimated that only 2 percent of women have access to a formal bank account or 
mobile financial provider compared to 11 percent of men (which is also low). According to UNOCHA, 
female-headed households are more at risk of food insecurity due to scarce work opportunities for them. 
Women are generally excluded from economic transactions in the local markets. When food is scarce, 
women are the first family members to eat less as a coping mechanism, even though they continue to do 
hard work, including in the fields. Lack of official papers are an obstacle for women, boys and girls when 
registering for humanitarian assistance distribution. Restrictions in mobility (for security and cultural 
reasons) are often an obstacle for women and girls to go to humanitarian distribution points. Given the 
agriculture sector’s importance in producing food for consumption and commercialization, and 
generating incomes, it will continue playing an important role in households’ coping strategies and is 
expected to play a leading role in post-conflict recovery and reconstruction12. 
 
9. Vulnerability to climate change and pest outbreaks are exacerbating Yemen’s dire food 
insecurity, creating a crisis within a crisis. Yemen is highly vulnerable to climate change, further 
threatening food security and intensifying the development of locust swarms. By 2060, mean annual 
temperature is expected to increase by 1.2oC to 3.3oC, and the rate of warming is projected to be more 
rapid in interior regions than in coastal areas. Sea level rise will result in increased coastal flooding and 
possible damages to infrastructure and ecosystems, leading to sea-water intrusion affecting the country’s 
already fragile freshwater balance. Climate change has already triggered the strongest alterations in water 
temperature in the Indian Ocean in 60 years. Warmer seas also create more extreme rainfall as well as 
stronger and more frequent cyclones, providing ideal conditions for desert locusts to hatch, breed, and 
disperse widely. Fall Armyworm breeding areas are also increasing in Yemen as a result of ecologically 
favorable conditions, including extensive rains, with several governorates affected. 
 
10. Despite the agricultural sector’s importance, agricultural productivity remains low and the 
conflict has severely disrupted access to markets, transportation and distribution. Yemeni farmers 
operate around 1.18 million farms, with an average land holding of 1.36 ha (FAO). About 75 percent of 
agricultural production comes from the highlands, home to 60 percent of the population. While 
productivity has always been low, conflict has worsened production conditions, resulting in a shortage of 
inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and fuel, damage to agricultural machinery, irrigation systems and storage 
facilities along with a deterioration of water, sanitation and electricity services, and a breakdown of 
logistical chains. These disruptions, coupled with the relatively small and fragmented land holdings, have 
been preventing the sector from making a larger contribution to rural incomes and addressing food trade 
imbalances. The insufficient availability of inputs and post-harvest losses have been exacerbated by 

 
12 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/Employment_in_agriculture/ 

https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/Employment_in_agriculture/


 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 7 of 22  

 

inadequate marketing systems, low human resource capacity, and lack of infrastructure and access to 
markets. 
 
11. Acute malnutrition is among the world’s highest, and both underlying acute and chronic 
malnutrition will adversely impact the country’s human capital outcomes in the long term. Prior to the 
2015 escalation of conflict, Yemen already had one of the world’s highest malnutrition levels. In 2021, 
over 2.25 million children under the age of five in Yemen are threatened with acute malnutrition. Of those 
children, 395,000 are expected to suffer from severe acute malnutrition and could die if without 
treatment. The projected figures in the IPC nutrition analysis13 mark a 16 percent increase in acute 
malnutrition and a 22 percent increase in severe acute malnutrition among children under five compared 
to last year’s estimate. This is the highest number on record in Yemen. An additional concern are the more 
than one million pregnant and lactating women who are projected to suffer from acute malnutrition 
during 2021 in Yemen. Acute severe malnutrition14 has immediate effects, including greater susceptibility 
to diseases like cholera, wasting and a whole range of other poor physical and mental health outcomes. 
Malnutrition impacts on children is particularly severe, as it results in long term declines in cognitive 
development, along with poorer health outcomes in both short and longer terms. This looms as a longer-
term societal issue. According to UNICEF, a shocking 46 percent of all children in Yemen are stunted. At 
this rate, malnutrition will create a lost generation. Undernutrition is particularly prevalent in rural areas, 
related to lean seasons or food security crises, and in areas remote from food aid. This suggests that 
enhanced, rural household-focused nutritional awareness, combined with improved local production can 
improve nutritional outcomes. 
 
12. Several aggravating factors that emerged in the spring and summer 2020 have been driving a 
worsening of the food security situation. Those factors include:  
 

(a) Widespread floods. In most of the governorates, the 2020 agriculture season started in March with 
strong rains, which lasted into August and led to heavy floods across the country. The floods resulted 
in substantial damage to cultivated lands and infrastructure and affected agricultural activities such 
as horticulture and livestock. Floods coincided both with harvesting and planting, resulting in damages 
to the standing crops and delayed planting activities. Destruction of water infrastructure alone (not 
including impacts on crops and livestock) is estimated at US$50 million (FAO). The estimated recovery 
and reconstruction needs for the short- and medium-term are between US$763 million and US$932 
million15. 
 

(b) Desert locust invasion. Yemen is one of the main breeding grounds of desert locust swarms, with 
swarms developing across the entire year and in multiple locations. The rains created favorable 
conditions for desert locusts to reproduce, resulting in extensive damage to cultivated crops. 
Residents and farmers in selected governorates reported a huge number of locusts invading farms, 
cities and villages, devouring important seasonal crops such as dates and causing heavy losses. The 
World Bank’s estimates put the damages and losses for the 2020 agricultural season at US$ 222 
million.  

 
13 Yemen: High levels of food insecurity persist | IPC Global Platform (ipcinfo.org)  
14 Severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very low weight for height (below -3z scores of the median WHO growth standards), 
by visible severe wasting, or by the presence of nutritional oedema (WHO). 
15 Yemen Dynamic Needs Assessment (DNA): Updated 2020 (World Bank). 

https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ipcinfo.org%2Fipcinfo-website%2Falerts-archive%2Fissue-34%2Fen%2F&data=04%7C01%7Clevke.groher%40wfp.org%7Ce86d9cd3ea3e494a131208d8d24e8c3d%7C462ad9aed7d94206b87471b1e079776f%7C0%7C0%7C637490582106175894%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C1000&sdata=USpcsPe3%2Fby%2FurFf%2BD%2BKHXCUY%2Fo3U5Dmo4psA1VbdjU%3D&reserved=0
http://www.ipcinfo.org/ipcinfo-website/alerts-archive/issue-34/en/


 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 8 of 22  

 

 

(c) Livestock disease incidences and prevalence in 2020. The above normal and intense rains created 
conducive environments for disease vectors to multiply and easier disease transmission of livestock 
diseases, resulting in increased outbreaks. In livestock, suspected outbreaks of Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), sheep and goat pox (SGP) in areas of low/absence of 
vaccination coverage, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and other disease conditions have devastated 
livestock population, increasing vulnerability of livestock dependent population to food security 
shocks. 
 

(d) Well below-average cereal harvest in 2020. The total cereal production in 2020 was estimated at 
365,000 tons, almost 25 percent below the five-year average. Rural food crop production is expected 
to continue declining unless action is taken. With reduced food imports, higher food prices and for 
most households significantly reduced income earnings, the result will be lower food access. 
 

(e) The COVID-19 pandemic continues its spread across Yemen, negatively impacting food supply chains 
and food trade and contributing to sharp food price increases. By early March 2021, Yemen had 
reported 2,436 COVID-19 cases with 660 deaths, although it is likely COVID-19 cases are significantly 
under-reported. Market functionality and logistics in many areas have been hampered due to curfews 
and other COVID-19 pandemic prevention measures, greatly affecting farmers’ access to markets. 
Although farmgate prices did not change, poor market access has resulted in high post-harvest losses 
of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing channels to sell their 
produce, resulting in lower incomes. Movement restrictions and high input costs could further affect 
the next planting season. Negative coping strategies observed amongst pastoralists, such as selling 
herds, could continue without assistance to secure the upcoming planting season and to preserve 
productive assets in rural areas. In the coming months, localized and temporary increases in COVID-
19 control measures are expected in areas where higher numbers of cases are suspected, with further 
disruptions to trade and access to food and income. 
 

(f) Food price increases have continued through a combination of rapid currency deterioration, COVID-19 
pandemic impacts on the agri-food sector and lower food imports. Food represents a large share of 
poor households’ consumption expenditures, estimated between 60 to 70 percent. The disruptions 
to supply chains of locally produced foods are resulting in postharvest losses, and informal food flows 
across land borders are expected to continue at reduced levels relative to the pre-conflict period. 
Trade across land borders will likely remain difficult as continuing insecurity is now compounded by 
border closures due to COVID-19. As a result, the cost of the minimum food basket (MFB) increased 
by more than 20 percent during February 2020 – January 202116. For instance, wheat flour price 
gradually increased throughout 2020 and in November 2020 was 27 percent higher than at the same 
time previous year17. At the same time, incomes in the informal sector have dropped dramatically, 
remittances are also down sharply, and from December 2019 to June 2020, the local currency (Yemeni 
riyal) lost an average of 19 percent of its value against the US dollar18.  

 
16 MENA Crisis Tracker, January 20, 2021.  
17 FEWS NET Yemen Food Security Outlook Update, December 2020. 
18 IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS JULY – DECEMBER 2020; Issued July 2020. 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 9 of 22  

 

13. The ability of Yemen’s physical food markets  to operate varies across the country. Yemen’s food 
market landscape is  fragmented and market ability to operate depends on the security situation.  In many 
areas, markets are operating reasonably well and are reasonably well stocked, however, in many food 
insecure areas poorly operating markets and dis-functional logistics are among the reasons contributing 
to the food insecurity.  The Yemen Joint Market Monitoring Initiative19 regularly monitors market 
operations in 56 districts in 16 governorates. They report that price inflation is the most commonly 
reported constraint faced by the assessed vendors when obtaining fuel, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) items, food items, and water trucking services. Among the vendors interviewed, results showed 
86.2 percent saw price increases as the key constraint. Other constraints listed by respondents were 
insecurity (17.7 percent), demand shortages due to the population’s low purchasing power (14.9 percent), 
transportation difficulties (12.8 percent), with supply shortages only mentioned by 2.4 percent of 
respondents. Yet farmers report worsening access to markets due to the COVID-19 restrictions. 
Horticulture farmers, mainly women, are selling a highly perishable commodity and rely on this income to 
sustain their families. Poor market access has both, kept the farmgate prices steady, but also resulted in 
high post-harvest losses of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing 
channels to sell their produce, resulting in lower incomes. Another significant factor that negatively 
impacts overall private sector operations is fuel scarcity and its trading in the black market at double the 
price, which have disrupted the production process, service delivery, decreased working hours, and 
increased costs of production, transportation, storage and marketing20. 
 
14. Climate change is already worsening the existing challenges and negatively impacting all four 
dimensions of food security: availability, access, stability, and utilization of food. Food availability is 
compromised by projected yield declines due to temperature and precipitation patterns change. Climate 
change also compromises food access by affecting consumers' purchasing power through price increases 
as a result of climate change. Climate change affects food utilization primarily by reducing food safety 
through a higher incidence of food-borne diseases and the spread of novel pests and diseases. Regarding 
food stability, the risks to food and nutrition security are exacerbated by the expected increase in the 
frequency and intensity of climate-related events. Furthermore, according to the World Bank's 
Groundswell report21, climate change will scale up internal climate migration. The poorest people in rural 
areas will be forced to move due to slow-onset climate change impacts, including decreasing crop 
productivity, shortage and deterioration of water’s quantity and quality, and rising sea levels. Therefore, 
actions geared towards building improved and climate-smart agri-food systems will contribute to 
increased food security, climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 
15. Food security situation forecasts for the first half of 2021 predict that food insecurity across the 
country will intensify due to the continued, combined effects of the aggravating factors described in 
paragraph 12 above, a warning uniformly sounded across the UN agencies working in Yemen, including 
the FAO, UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP)22. This includes large areas of the country 
previously in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) moving to IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), with the share of the population in IPC 
Phases 3 and 4 significantly increasing by June 2021. The number of people likely to experience high levels 
of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) is estimated to be nearly 16.2 million (54 percent of the 

 
19 Yemen Joint Market Monitoring Initiative, January 2021 Situation Overview.  
20 Yemen Socio-Economic Update, October 2020. 
21 Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate Migration, The World Bank, 2018. 
22 3.2www.unicef.org/yemen/press-releases/yemen-sees-return-alarming-levels-food-insecurity, July 22, 2020 

http://www.unicef.org/yemen/press-releases/yemen-sees-return-alarming-levels-food-insecurity


 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 10 of 22  

 

total population). Food insecurity is more severe both in areas with active fighting and bordering areas 
with limited access. It is particularly affecting Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and marginalized groups 
such as the landless laborers and the Mohamasheen23. Food insecurity is also severe in areas where 
people survive on low and irregular sources of income and low access to public services. The population 
in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) are found in five districts of Al Jawf, Hajjah and Amran. The governorates 
with the highest proportion of IPC Phase 4 districts (>75%) are located in Al Dhale’e, Al Jawf, Hajjah, Marib 
and Rayma Governorates. Each of the governorates of Al Hudaydah, Dhamar, Hajjah, Ibb, Sana’a City and 
Taizz have more than one million people in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. The upcoming “lean” season, 
between March and June 2021 is expected to aggravate this situation. 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 
16. The Project Development Objective is to improve availability and access to food and nutritious 
diets, both in the short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance 
Yemen’s capacity to respond to food insecurity. 
 

Key Results 
 

17. Progress toward the achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 

Outcome 1: Short-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved  

• Percentage of households (HH) with improved Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), of which 
female-headed households;  

• Percentage of women in beneficiary households with minimum dietary diversity; 

• Percentage of children (6-23 months) consuming minimum acceptable diet.  
 

Outcome 2: Medium-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved 

• Increase in the volume of food/agricultural products commercialized/sold by beneficiaries, of which 
by female beneficiaries.  
 

Outcome 3: Country capacity to respond to food insecurity strengthened 

• Food security preparedness improved, through the adoption of the food security preparedness plan 
and the use of the EO monitoring tool.  

 
 

 
23 Mohamasheen or “the marginalized ones” is a minority of African descent who suffer from caste-based discrimination and 
have long been characterized by deep-seated poverty and exclusion. 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 11 of 22  

 

D. Project Description  
 

 
18. Component 1: Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production 
infrastructure (US$20.0 million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). 
UNDP will implement this component through the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public 
Works Project (PWP). The  SFD will  take the lead in implementing the CFW program, which will provide 
employment opportunities directly to beneficiary laborers from the communities in the project area. The 
PWP will implement small-scale infrastructure-related works through selected locally sourced contractors 
which are also expected to create employment opportunities for the communities. Both organizations 
have extensive experience implementing their respective responsibilities under a number of other 
interventions, including under several Bank-financed projects.  It is expected that 85 percent of the 
component financing will be allocated for CFW activities, which the remaining 15 percent would be 
channeled through the PWP. Component 1 activities will be implemented in close collaboration with the 
FAO to ensure that they are closely coordinated with the productive investments made under Component 
2. Component 1 would ensure immediate access to food for an estimated 26,500 food-insecure 
households by creating temporary employment opportunities through a Cash-for-Work (CFW) program, 
focusing on restoring damaged public and collective productive assets, including those affected by the 
recent floods. The project would target youth (18 – 32 years of age) through the community outreach 
programs and encourage them to participate in the CFW program. The Component will also seek to 
support employment generation activities targeting women. 
 

19.  Component 1 activities would directly contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions. Implementing climate-resilient irrigation and water conservation and 
management practices will restore degraded lands (including terracing) and affected water infrastructure 
for subsequent productive, climate-smart technology use in agricultural production and allow 
beneficiaries to earn much needed income from their repair and maintenance through cash-for-work. An 
estimated 15,700 farmers will have improved access to water infrastructure, irrigation networks and 
rehabilitated lands. These actions also contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation by 
increasing carbon sequestration and improving water management. The Component will finance 
beneficiary compensation, estimated as US$660 per household per six month period, and the operating 
costs of SFD and PWP. The detailed criteria for beneficiary selection will be included in the Project 
Operations Manual (POM), and care will be taken to ensure that the beneficiaries of this Component are 
not engaged in parallel Bank-financed projects24. 
 

20. Component 2: Increasing production and sale of nutritious crop, livestock and fish products 
(US$33.0 million, including US$10.0 million from GAFSP and US$23.0 million from IDA). This Component 
will be implemented by FAO. The Component would allocate resources to provide key support for 
smallholder farmers and producers to invest in productive assets and help improve their capacity to better 
commercialize their products and enter new markets. The Component would support: (1) restoring 
climate-smart local food production to increase household access to food and food availability in local 
markets, and (2) improving farmer’s access to markets for staple and high value cash crops (such as 
horticultural crops and coffee), by strengthening value chains’ vertical and horizontal linkages, to increase 
incomes for beneficiary households. Component 2 would collaborate with IFC in developing selected high 

 
24 SFD is the main implementing agency for CFW components and sub-components under Bank-financed projects.  



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 12 of 22  

 

value agricultural value chains, building value chains between the project-supported farmers/agricultural 
producers and IFC’s advisory services and investment clients25. This component is therefore expected to 
restore climate-smart agricultural production while also stimulating the local economy and promoting the 
production of nutrient-dense foods (e.g., horticulture, pulses, meat (chicken and livestock), dairy and fish). 
This component would finance two types of support packages. Detailed criteria for beneficiary selection 
and implementation arrangements will be included in the POM. 
 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Restoring climate-smart agricultural production (US$15.0 million, including 
US$ 5.0 million from GAFSP and US$10.0 million from IDA). The Input Package for agricultural producers 
will promote climate-smart agricultural production focusing on smallholder’s re-engagement in 
horticulture, crop and livestock farming, bee-keeping and fish production. Producers would receive 
support to restart or expand production, including input starter packages for crops, animal feed, improved 
forage seeds, equipment and inputs to start fish farming, bee-keeping kits, farm equipment such as fodder 
choppers and small dairy equipment, energy efficient post-harvest handling and storage facilities. The 
Input Packages will be supported by complementary climate-smart practices supporting diversified 
production and climate resilience—for instance, by introducing improved varieties and plantings and ways 
to preserve and manage grasslands. The Sub-component will also provide extension support to producers, 
including training and advisory services through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) on good agricultural practices, 
enhanced animal husbandry and feeding practices  and climate-smart technologies. SFD, which has 
extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported under this Component, will 
work alongside FAO to restoring and enhancing access to  some agriculture inputs. It would also 
strengthen access to supporting services to ensure maximum benefits from those assets, including 
extension services to be supported under Component 4, veterinary services (including vaccinations for 
animals) thought Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWS) and General Directorate for Animal Health 
and Quarantine (GDAHWQ), and mechanical services support.  
 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Promoting value addition and sale of nutritious food products (US$20.0 
million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). The second package of 
interventions (Value Addition Package) will provide in-kind grants to support enterprising producers, 
processors and traders to scale up, add value to their products, improve product quality and aggregation, 
consolidate production, and access local and regional markets with their products. The sub-component 
will work with the value chain participants to structure the value chain, providing both training and 
advisory support in technical aspects (aggregation, development of linkages with farmers, product quality 
and others), business skill capacity building, and provide beneficiaries with key assets (equipment, 
machinery and working capital), enabling them to increase the quality and commercialization of food 
products. In areas with high caseloads of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), the project will build 
capacities of farmers with agriculture techniques, value chain development and maintenance of local 
infrastructure, to improve mutual trust, understanding and collaboration between displaced and host 
populations. SFD, which has extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported 
under this Sub-component, will work alongside FAO to increase the farm-gate value and nutritional 
content of some agricultural products through provision of improved technologies and practices for key 
horticulture crops. The equipment and machinery provided under the sub-component will be climate-
smart and more environmentally friendly than conventional technologies. Most of the equipment and 
machinery is expected to be procured, imported and distributed to the value chain/value addition 

 
25 One such opportunity for a black sesame value chain has already been identified. 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 13 of 22  

 

beneficiaries by FAO. Some of the value chain activities may also cover the beneficiaries who received 
support under the SAPREP and ECRP.  
 

23. Sub-component 2.2 will support key value chains mostly focused on the local market, including 
beans and cereals, vegetables, dairy, livestock and fish value chains. To increase production, improve 
product quality, extend shelf-life, reduce food loss, and improve energy efficiency, the component will 
complement the Input Packages by providing in-kind grants for value chain development, post-harvest 
enhancement and value addition activities. The size of in-kind grants will depend on the type of 
beneficiary financed – a group or individual, as well as on the nature of the activity. Larger-scale 
investments, such as seedling centers, post-harvest centers, hydroponics, dairy processing facilities, etc., 
will be implemented though groups of beneficiaries. For group beneficiaries, the upper value of the in-
kind grants should not exceed a maximum of US$70,000 per group. The only exception to this maximum 
size limit may be groups engaged in milk collection and dairy processing where construction of 
infrastructure is necessary. Given the high start-up costs, the maximum value of such in-kind grants should 
not exceed a maximum of US$120,000 per group. Individual beneficiaries who will receive support for 
activities such as beekeeping, poultry production, horticulture production and processing, food 
preservation, agro-logistics services and other income-generating value-addition activities, the grant shall 
not exceed US$2,000 per individual beneficiary. All in-kind grant financed by the project should be 
supported by a business idea description, description of the market, value chain arrangements and 
financial viability. The length of the business idea description should be commensurate with the size of 
the in-kind grant. Detailed description of the in-kind grants is in Annex 3. 
 

24. The component will also support investments and technical assistance in selected high-value, 
high-growth value chains (such as coffee, fruits and nuts, and poultry and eggs26), some of them in 
collaboration with IFC and aiming to generate IFC and/or private sector investments. This should generate 
higher employment and household incomes, improve access to food, and allow for higher diversification 
of household diets. To ensure that the products are delivered to the market, and to create additional jobs, 
selected small-scale agro-logistics service providers may also be supported. The component will prioritize 
the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
enhance resilience to climate change. SMEPS will be working alongside FAO and IFC to ensure knowledge 
transfer on value chain development and support to build SMEPS’s capacity to engage in similar activities 
in the future. To further review and strengthen opportunities for development of value chains, the Sub-
component will also finance studies in two areas: (1) A fisheries and coastal 
aquaculture needs assessment and a fisheries and coastal aquaculture stock assessment; and (2) agro-
logistics constraints and solutions for selected value chains. The sub-component will also support limited 
small-scale laboratory equipment for selected Universities to support the value chain development 
activities. 
 
25. Component 3: Improving the nutritional status of vulnerable rural households (US$49.3 million, 
all IDA). Sub-component 3.1 will be implemented by FAO and Sub-component 3.2 and 3.3 will be 
implemented by WFP. This component would aims at improving the nutritional security of very vulnerable 
(Sub-components 3.1 and 3.3) and moderately vulnerable (Sub-component 3.2) households through a 
variety of instruments, including: (1) targeted nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities and facilitating 

 
26 Based on the results of application of the Agricultural Investment for Development Analyzer (AIDA) model by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).  



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 14 of 22  

 

uptake by poor households of appropriate dietary and nutrition practices, in particular improving nutrient 
intakes of pregnant mothers and children under two, (2) promoting women’s entrepreneurship activities 
and improving the diets of the female-led households, and (3) improving nutrition in vulnerable 
households with malnourished women and children. Component 3 beneficiaries may also include the 
Cash-for-Nutrition beneficiaries under the ECRP, to ensure that they receive support allowing them to 
start their own production of food or improve nutritious diets on a more sustainable basis.  
 
26. Sub-component 3.1: Promoting kitchen gardens and backyard production for improved diets 
(US$10.0 million, all IDA). FAO will implement this Sub-component which will target beneficiary 
households that have received malnutrition treatment and prevention services referred to under Sub-
component 3.3, former beneficiaries of the Cash-for-Nutrition programs under the ECRP, households with 
pregnant mothers and children under two, and other eligible households with a similar vulnerability level. 
The Sub-component will provide inputs (vegetable seeds, chicken, etc.) for households to establish kitchen 
gardens and backyard production of nutritious food items (vegetables, eggs, and meat). It is estimated 
that the sub-component will reach 20,000 beneficiary households. Beneficiaries would also receive two 
types of training. For improving backyard production, they will receive training on best and climate-smart 
agricultural production practices. The Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop 
and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. To 
maximize the nutritional value of available food, training sessions will be offered to beneficiaries of this 
sub-component on how to maximize the nutritional value of foods when preparing family meals. Also, the 
project will use different communication channels to spread nutrition messages to trigger behavioral 
change in target populations. Since women are the main family caretakers, mostly women beneficiaries 
are expected to partake in these activities, however, the training will be open to both women and men. 
 
27. Sub-component 3.2: Promoting women’s rural entrepreneurship for improved nutrition and 
food security (US$14.3 million, all IDA). The Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and will focus 
on promoting women’s entrepreneurship to generate higher income and improve nutritious diets and 
food security at the household level. WFP’s resilience and livelihoods interventions will mainly target 
moderately food-insecure people to prevent them from slipping into further food insecurity. WFP will 
work with national NGO partners and provide Food for Training to food-insecure women, especially 
targeting those who are heading their households in rural communities. The training will develop their 
skills, aimed at restoring or establishing their livelihoods, and starting their own businesses. The support 
in most cases will range from six to nine months (at the monthly payment of US$105), giving participants 
access to various trainings, such as skill development, business development and management, digital skills, 
entrepreneurship, improved nutrition and life-skills (e.g. health practices) while they are supported by a 
monthly allowance. Once trainings are completed and a business plan submitted, the women would 
receive a start-up grant to start diversified income generating activities (both agricultural and non-
agricultural). The grant amount per individual will not exceed US$800. Increasing the productive capacity 
and livelihoods potential of rural women, especially in agriculture and food production, will help sustain 
their food and nutritional security when the assistance period ends. Similar to 3.1, for agricultural 
activities, the Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. WFP’s comprehensive 
approach also includes training and support related to gender-based violence, awareness on preventing 
infectious disease spread, and child-care, nutrition and health practices. Participants will be encouraged 
to work together in joint business ventures with an estimated 3 participants per business, although the 
number may vary based on participant preferences and conditions for joint ventures in the targeted areas. 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 15 of 22  

 

It is expected that around 7,910 women will participate in the training, establishing an estimated 2,637 
businesses.  
 
28. Sub-component 3.3: Providing nutrition assistance to treat and prevent malnutrition (US$25.0 
million, all IDA) for pregnant and lactating women and girls (PLWG) and children under 5 years old. This 
Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and constitutes an integrated malnutrition prevention and 
treatment response. WFP will provide blanket supplementary feeding with specialized nutrition products 
to children aged 6–23 months and PLWG to prevent acute and chronic malnutrition in the project area 
districts prioritized for integrated famine response. Elsewhere, WFP will provide targeted supplementary 
feeding to malnourished children aged 6–59 months and PLWG girls to treat moderate and acute 
malnutrition across the country. Beneficiaries of targeted supplementary feeding will be screened in local 
health centers, through community health volunteers and screening campaigns organized by the Ministry 
of Public Health and Population (MOPHP), using mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) and weight-for-
height measurements. This is accompanied by social behavior change communication (SBCC), designed to 
reduce barriers to adequate infant and young children feeding practices and healthy eating and hygiene 
habits. The SBCC campaign will target PLWG, health workers and caregivers, and also other decision 
makers and influencers within the community such as parents-in-law, husbands and local leaders. 
Messaging will focus on ensuring that responsibility for the care of children is shared within the household 
and not only limited to women. During the project period, around 195,000 beneficiaries are expected to 
be reached through the  Treatment Program, including 150,000 acutely malnourished children under the 
age of five and 45,000 acutely malnourished pregnant and lactating women and girls, as well as around 
277,000 beneficiaries through the Prevention Program, including 150,000 children under the age of two 
and 127,000 pregnant and lactating women and girls. 
 
29. Component 4: Capacity building for food security management (US$6.0 million, all IDA). FAO 
will lead implementation of this component in cooperation with other partner organizations as described 
below. This component includes a set of activities that are expected to significantly strengthen the 
capacity of both the private (households) and public sectors for food security crisis planning and response: 

 

(a) Developing an evidence-based Food Security Preparedness Plan (FSPP). The FSPP development 
will be co-led by the World Bank (financed under a separate budget) and the FAO, and will be 
carried out in a highly participatory manner, consulting with the main line ministries and 
Institutions involved in the agricultural sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, the private 
sector; and civil society including international and local NGOs. This FSPP will be prepared within 
six months of project effectiveness and it will be reviewed by the World Bank’s Technical Expert 
Group on Food Security. The FSPP implementation will be monitored on a regular basis 
throughout the project period.  
 

(b) Establishing a satellite-based Earth Observation (EO) crop and pasture monitoring and early 
warning system for detecting climate-induced hazards. This tool would support monitoring 
agricultural production, providing information to the GOY for decision-making regarding food 
imports planning. The data generated by the EO Tool will also feed into the FSPP implementation. 
The EO tool will initially be housed by FAO and arrangements to transfer to the appropriate agency 
will be identified during the project Mid-Term Review (MTR). The project will be designed in a 
manner to ensure its use for the intended (civilian) purpose only.  



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 16 of 22  

 

 

(c) Strengthening agriculture extension services by financing capacity building of the existing 
extension services, including current extension services staff, Community Animal Health Workers 
(CAHWs) and other extension service agents working in the communities. A significant number of 
women, enrolled on the basis of selection criteria which will be reflected in the POM, will be 
trained as extension workers, agricultural technicians, and CAHWs under this activity and 
recruited to be part of FFS.  
 

(d) Piloting alternative agricultural production technologies will introduce alternative, climate smart 
land- and water-efficient agricultural production technologies for producing nutritious crops (soil-
less technologies, such as hydroponics and aquaponics) by financing technology pilots and 
demonstrations in areas where previously, production would not have been possible, due to 
limited land resources. 

 
30. Component 5: Project Management and Knowledge Management (US$16.7 million, including 
US$3.2 million from GAFSP and US$13.5 million from IDA). This component would cover the costs 
associated with project management for all three Implementing Agencies (FAO, UNDP and WFP), 
recognizing the particularly challenging operating conditions in Yemen. Covered implementation costs 
include financial management, procurement, monitoring the project’s environmental and social 
safeguards, communication and stakeholder engagement, and overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
Additionally, M&E is expected to be strengthened by using the Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and 
Supervision (GEMS) and by carrying out an additional impact assessment (in collaboration with IFPRI), to 
assess the suitability and impact of project interventions. This component would also finance a third-party 
monitoring (TPM) mechanism and establishing and maintaining a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
 
31. For real-time data collection and analysis, the project will implement the Geo-Enabling method 
for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS). The GEMS method enables project teams to use open-source 
tools for in-field collection of structured digital data that automatically feeds into a centralized M&E 
system and Management Information System (MIS). The integrated data can include any kind of 
indicators, based on tailor-made forms; photos, audio, videos; time and date stamps; and GPS coordinates 
that allow for automated geo-mapping of the information. Using these tools systematically allows the 
project to enhance the transparency and accuracy of project planning as well as M&E and third-party 
monitoring throughout the project cycle. Moreover, GEMS allows for establishing a digital platform for 
remote supervision, real-time safeguards monitoring, and portfolio mapping for coordination across 
project components as well as with other operations in the region.  
 
32. Integration of COVID-19 response. The project will use its resources (such as field consultants) to 
integrate COVID-19 awareness and preventive measures in the training events and awareness campaigns 
planned for beneficiaries. Awareness raising and training events will follow precautionary measures 
described in workshop/training protocols, as well as enforce and maintain adequate distancing during 
control, distribution, training, payment, and other project activities. These will also be held in locations 
and during times that are convenient for women. The project will work with local communities, female 
and male consultants, and beneficiaries to reach households with awareness and hygiene materials (such 
as masks, hand sanitizers and other relevant consumables) that will be developed to resonate with women 
and men’s different roles and behaviors at home and in society. The decision on which hygiene materials 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 17 of 22  

 

to procure will be made in coordination with the Bank-financed COVID-19 health emergency project in 
Yemen.  .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
Environmental Risk Rating 
 

33. The environmental risk is considered Substantial given that the project will support several 
interventions that might be associated with environmental risks and impacts and the implementation 
agencies' ESF capacity remains limited. Environmental risks and impacts are expected to be site-specific, 
reversible, and generally of low magnitude that can be mitigated following appropriate measures; 
nonetheless, based on the implementation experience of ongoing projects, particularly those involving 
labor-intensive interventions, and the identification of significant Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
gaps, there is a significant risk for fatal incidents or serious injuries to occur under the project, particularly 
under the interventions of component 1 (Alleviating immediate food security needs by improving 
household incomes) since the activities under this component will provide temporary work opportunities 
to a large number of local community members, with little or no knowledge or experience in applying OHS 
measures. 
 
34. Furthermore, there is a risk of COVID-19 transmission among community workers if worksites are 
not managed appropriately and injuries due to the potential explosion of a remnant of war (ERW). 
Component 1 will also support the rehabilitation of small-scale rural land and water infrastructure and 
access roads to isolated villages/communities, therefore improper management of materials that will be 
used for the rehabilitation activities might lead to the generation of waste and open dumping in the 
environment. In addition, the project might support some interventions such as rehabilitation of terraces 
and construction of hydroponics which might increase the use of pesticides (the project will not finance 
procurement of pesticides) and fertilizers which should be applied and disposed of adequately and in a 
controlled manner.  

 

35. It is mentionable that the project will have several positive impacts including through supporting 
the hydroponics and aquaponics which will enhance the economically - environmentally friendly and 
sustainable development solution for the beneficiaries and will pilot interventions which are of high 
productivity and save land and water consumption for irrigation. This may encourage other farmers to 
replicate this intervention at a larger scale and spreading scientific knowledge to other farmers 
countrywide. 
 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 18 of 22  

 

Social Risk Rating 
 

36. The proposed project is expected to bring significant social benefits to the targeted communities. 
It will contribute to the alleviation of food security and improvement of household income through the 
Cash for Work program, support restoration of local food production and increase the sales of crops and 
livestock and promote diversified nutrient crops.  Particular attention and efforts would be given to the 
promotion of youth and women participation and maximizing their benefits through dedicated 
subcomponents under the project.   
 
37. The project could face possible adverse social impacts and risks. The proposed interventions in 
farmland and irrigation works are of rehabilitation and maintenance nature.  They are planned to take 
place within their existing footprints and are expected to be quite small in scale. Therefore, land 
acquisition or resettlement needs are not anticipated under the project.  A negative exclusion list will be 
developed for the project. However, these activities could have potentials for labor-related impacts and 
risks, such as possible child labor, forced labor, discriminatory practices in recruitment, occupational 
health and safety issues, and GBV/SEA risks, and even possible conflicts within potential beneficiary 
communities.  The project faces a potential risk of elites or better-connected individuals or groups 
capturing project benefits, affecting poor and vulnerable groups receiving their due share of project 
benefits.  These could include the elderly, poor farmers, women, and individuals displaced by the ongoing 
conflict. The overall country security situation poses another challenge for the project and is a key risk for 
the project implementation. In addition to the general conflict and security situation the country faces, 
the project may face possible conflicts among local communities, interested groups, and factions over 
project benefits distribution. Given the above, the project's social risks are considered Substantial. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
38. The project would be implemented by three UN Agencies, FAO, UNDP and WFP, ensuring project 
activities reach throughout both the South and the North of Yemen. Each Agency will implement part of 
the project based on their mandate and relevant experience: 
 

(i) FAO is the specialized UN agency responsible for and well positioned to respond to 
emergencies in agriculture and food security, including crop and food supply monitoring and 
needs assessments, evaluations of agricultural relief requirements, and mobilizing assistance 
and resources to restore agricultural activity. The FAO has prior experience in supporting the 
implementation of Bank-financed projects on the ground in Yemen (since 2017 it has led the 
implementation of SAPREP toward satisfactory achievement of results and more recently it 
became the Implementing Agency for the Desert Locust Response Project; P174170). SAPREP, 
implemented in collaboration with SFD,  supported a set of similar activities, including the 
CFW instrument implementation, support to agricultural production by providing input kits 
and ensuring access to associated services (such as animal health services). The project’s 
implementation performance rating is Satisfactory. Given their prior experience in 
implementing SAPREP, FAO is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. FAO has put in place enhanced M&E mechanisms to supervise local 
implementation partners and has also been using TPM. 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 19 of 22  

 

(ii) UNDP is the UN’s development agency and it is committed to supporting the peacebuilding 
initiative in Yemen, political stability and enhanced local governance. UNDP has built a 
successful partnership with the World Bank in implementing the CFW activities of the ECRP. 
The project works in 317 districts out of 330 districts of Yemen. UNDP is partnering with the 
SFD and PWP and their community networks to deliver services. Given their prior experience 
in implementing the ECRP, the UNDP is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. UNDP established an M&E system to ensure proper project management, 
assuring stakeholders and providing accountability and is also using a TPM mechanism to 
monitor project implementation. UNDP communicates with the World Bank team monthly on 
project implementation and to address  emerging challenges. UNDP had a good collaboration 
with FAO on water resource management, aimed at enhancing access to water in agriculture 
and improving the effective use and management of scarce water resources in Yemen.  

(iii) WFP is the food-assistance branch of the United Nations and is the world's largest 
humanitarian organization, the largest one focused on hunger and food security, and the 
largest provider of school meals. In Yemen, in addition to food and nutrition interventions, 
such as school feeding programs, WFP is also engaged in livelihoods development activities 
through a range of instruments, including Food-for-Assets and Food-for-Training in close 
cooperation with FAO. WFP’s vulnerability, mapping and assessment (VAM) expertise 
conducts joint nation-wide food security and livelihood assessments which inform the 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) for Yemen, as well as regular food security 
and price monitoring and analysis. WFP is an existing Implementing Agency under the World 
Bank-financed Restoring Education and Learning Project (P175036), engaged in school 
feeding activities, and it has therefore some exposure to the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements.  
 

39. The Country Representation Offices of the three UN Agencies will be responsible for the overall 
implementation of their respective activities and coordinating all relevant activities at the sub-national 
level, supported by the regional office staff who will monitor the activities in different governorates. 
The FAO will be the lead agency for the implementation of the project and will be a recipient of both IDA 
and GAFSP financing. Both UNDP and WFP will receive IDA financing. Each UN Agency will be responsible 
for the technical implementation of the relevant components and sub-components (as indicated in the 
PAD), as well as all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, monitoring and reporting. The UN 
Agencies will help ensure financial and technical accountability of the implementing partner organizations 
(such as SFD, SMEPS and PWP) and ensure appropriate training and capacity building of the staff of the 
implementing partner organizations. The FAO would have a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in 
Sana’a, and technical staff deployed in its Aden sub-office and other decentralized hubs to ensure day-to-
day project management, including all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, and monitoring and 
reporting. UNDP and WFP will assign dedicated staff to support project implementation and ensure timely 
and relevant contributions to the PCU work. This proposed structure would build on the experience with 
previous grants implemented by FAO in the country. Moreover, the FAO team in Sana’a is backstopped 
by a dedicated team of technical experts at Regional (Cairo) and Headquarters (Rome) level in line with 
the Level 3 fast-track procedures established due to the emergency situation in Yemen. 
 
40. Coordination. The three selected organizations are currently working in Yemen and exchanging 
information as part of their participation in partner meetings. The three UN Agencies will set up a formal 
project Coordination Committee for increased efficiency and efficacy, including to coordinate activities 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 20 of 22  

 

with and among the Implementing Partners. This committee will hold meetings on a regular basis 
(suggested monthly) to best coordinate their activities, evaluate progress, address bottlenecks and 
consolidate annual work plans. Frequency of meetings, attendance, communication tools, etc. will be 
developed in the POM. Collecting and reporting on indicators (including methodology, tools, devices, etc.) 
to inform the results framework and progress on implementation will be discussed and agreed among 
implementing partners with the support of the Bank. A mechanism will also be established to brief the 
authorities at various levels on regular basis on the project results and challenges of implementation.  
 
41. Local partners with prior extensive experience in implementing similar projects will have key 
implementation roles. The PWP and SFD would play a key role as the local implementing partners for 
Component 1, SFD and SMEPS would support implementation of small-scale value chain activities, 
provision of technologies and practices for some horticulture crops and restoration of agriculture inputs 
under Component 2, alongside FAO. The SFD and PWP are the key local partners in implementing the 
ongoing ECRP, SAPREP and DLRP, and they would lead the implementation of Component 1. SMEPS would 
contribute to the value chain development under Component 2. Selecting national institutions for these 
roles would contribute to building national capacity for community-based interventions. For activities that 
would be implemented by SFD, SMEPS and PWP, UNDP and FAO would provide technical guidance and 
backstopping as required. Under the CFW program of Component 1, SFD will be in charge of working with 
beneficiaries on the CFW program, while the PWP will implement the activities related to restoration of 
small-scale agricultural infrastructure in the cases it requires involvement of professional contractors, to 
ensure communities have access to good quality assets. SMEPS will ensure technical assistance to the 
value chain development activities. Additional personnel will be recruited to cover any skills or human 
capacity gaps as assessed during the project preparation. All staff are required to have satisfactory 
expertise, experience, and qualifications. All three national institutions have capacity and experience 
spanning over 20 years in undertaking participatory and community-based development activities 
involving women and men from local communities. 
 
42. Project Operational Manual (POM). A detailed POM and a separate CfW Transfer Manual will be 
prepared for all project components by effectiveness. The POM and the CfW Transfer Manual will be 
subject to the World Bank’s no objection.  
 
43. Financial Management and Procurement arrangements. The project’s financial management 
(FM) arrangements will be governed by the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) 
between the World Bank and the UN Agencies, which provides for the use of the UN’s Financial 
Regulations. For procurement, FAO will follow its own procurement procedures as Alternative 
Procurement Arrangements, as provided under the World Bank New Procurement Framework Policy 
Section III. F. This implementation arrangement is sound, since the procurement procedures of FAO were 
assessed and found acceptable to the World Bank under agreements with UN agencies. 
 
44. Implementing partners will prepare budgeted Annual Work Plans of implementation and a 
detailed procurement plan (in agreement with the World Bank). This budgeted Annual Work Plan will be 
prepared no later than four months after project effectiveness. It will highlight the activities to be 
implemented for the subsequent 12 months by component and sub-component with intended results, 
timeline, budgets and planned procurement activities. It will also identify issues / implementation 
bottlenecks and relevant remedial actions and outline key responsibilities. In the context of COVID-19 and 
virtual missions (video/audio), the budgeted Annual Work Plan will be the common communication 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 21 of 22  

 

interface between implementing partners and the World Bank to regularly monitor activities of each 
component, evaluate progress and discuss corrective actions or changes as needed. 
 . 

   
CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Sandra Broka 
Senior Agriculture Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

United Nations Development Programme 

Auke  Lootsma 

Resident Representative UNDP Yemen 

Auke.lootsma@undp.org 
 
 

World Food Programma 

Laurent  Bukera 

Representative and Country Director, WFP Yemen 

laurent.bukera@wfp.org 
 
 

Food and Agriculture Organization 

Hussein  Gadain 

FAO Representative in Yemen 

Hussein.Gadain@fao.org 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

World Food Programme 

Laurent  Bukera 

Representative and Country Director, WFP Yemen 

laurent.bukera@wfp.org 
 
 

Food and Agriculture Organization 

Hussein Gadain 

FAO Representative in Yemen 

Hussein.Gadain@fao.org 
 
 

United Nations Development Programme 

Auke Lootsma 

Resident Representative UNDP Yemen 

Auke.lootsma@undp.org 
 

 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 22 of 22  

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Sandra Broka 
 

  Approved By 

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director: Tania Meyer 31-Mar-2021 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2020 | Report No: PIDC30653 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 2 of 12  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ghana P175588  Ghana Productive 
Safety Net Project 2 
(P175588) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST Jan 25, 2021 Mar 30, 2021 Social Protection & 
Jobs 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Ghana Ministry of Gender Children 
and Social Protection, 
Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural 
Development (MLGRD) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To support the Government to expand and enhance social safety nets that improve the incomes and productivity of the 
poor 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 3 of 12  

     

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. The Republic of Ghana, with a population of about 30.4 million, is classified as lower-middle-income with a per 

capita income of US$5,413 (in 2017 PPP dollars) in 2019. Ghana achieved its current income status through strong, 

sustained economic growth. The country’s per capita income grew by an average of 1.5 percent per year between 1990 

and 1999, by 2.8 percent per year between 2000 and 2009, and by 4.3 percent between 2010 and 2019 (peaking at 11.3 

percent in 2011). Ghana’s economic growth performance during the 2000s is mainly attributed to the sharp increase in 

prices for its main commodity exports, cocoa and gold, and the start of commercial oil and gas production in 2011. 

 
2. The country’s favorable economic growth performance has been accompanied by a substantial reduction in the 

prevalence of poverty. Based on the national food poverty line, the extreme poverty rate fell from 36 percent in 1991/92 

to 16.5 percent in 2005/06 to 8.4 percent in 2012/13, allowing Ghana to meet the United Nations Millennium 

Development Goal of halving poverty by 2015.  

 
3. In 2016/17, measured using the international poverty line of $1.90 per day per person in 2011 PPP dollars, Ghana’s 

poverty rate was 13.6 percent. This level of poverty is substantially lower than the average level for Sub-Saharan Africa. It 

is also lower than the average for lower-middle income countries.1 Measured using the country’s official poverty lines, 

Ghana’s overall poverty rate in 2016/17 was 23.4 percent, whereas its extreme poverty rate was 8.2 percent.   

 
4. Poverty levels appear to differ markedly across areas within Ghana. Poverty levels are substantially higher in rural 

areas than in urban areas. In 2016/17, the overall poverty rate in rural areas was 39.5 percent, five times higher than the 

corresponding rate in urban areas, at 7.8 percent. The extreme poverty was 15.6 percent in rural areas, while it was just 

1 percent in urban areas. Overall and extreme poverty rates in 2016/17 are also markedly higher in the administrative 

regions of Volta, Upper East, Northern, and Upper West than in other parts of the country. These high-poverty regions are 

situated in the northern and eastern parts of Ghana.  

 
5. Spatial patterns in where infrastructure, services, and markets are lacking show strong overlap with the spatial 

pattern in where poverty levels are high, suggesting that these factors may be constraining households from achieving 

 
1 World Bank 2018, forthcoming.  



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 4 of 12  

     

sufficiently high incomes to escape poverty.2 High-poverty regions also face adverse ecological conditions, which are 

considered to play an important role in constraining growth, development, and poverty reduction.3     

 
6. In recent years, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed, and the association between economic growth and 

poverty reduction has weakened. The COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying global economic crisis also serve as a major 

setback to Ghana’s prospects for further reductions in poverty.  

 
7. In October 2020, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that Ghana’s real GDP for 2020 will grow by 

0.9 percent.4 In contrast, in October 2019 (before the pandemic), the IMF had forecast real GDP growth of 5.6 percent for 

Ghana in 2020.5 Micro-simulations suggest the pandemic and the Government of Ghana’s measures to control the spread 

of infection (mainly the partial lockdown of Ghana’s largest cities of Accra and Kumasi in April 2020) have contributed to 

large increases in poverty.6 They show that Accra, Kumasi, and other urban areas were hardest hit. They also show losses 

across the population, with larger losses (in percentage terms) for richer than poorer households, and the accrual of large 

losses by farm and nonfarm households in areas that were not locked down, due to interlinkages among markets. 

 
8. A telephone-based national survey of sample households conducted in June 2020 confirms that Ghanaians have 

suffered widespread and acute economic distress amid the pandemic.7 A majority of respondents said they had 

experienced a loss in income since mid-March 2020 when the Government began to introduce restrictions to control the 

local spread of infection. Those who received self-employment income were more likely to report a loss in income than 

those who received wage earnings. Those who received remittance income or other private transfers were more likely to 

report a loss in income than those who received cash or in-kind assistance from the government or nongovernmental 

organizations.  

 
9. In terms of how households were affected by the pandemic, 75–77 percent reported that they were severely 

affected by the suspension of schooling or by an increase in food prices, while 37–44 percent said they were severely 

affected by an increase in the price of nonfood goods and services or by a fall in the price of outputs. In addition, 23–25 

percent reported that they were severely affected by business failure or loss of employment.8,9 Only 1–5 percent of 

households had received any formal assistance, such as from government, NGOs, employers, or insurance.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
10. Over the 2000s, the Government of Ghana, with development partner assistance, has progressively introduced, 

expanded, and strengthened social protection programs targeted at the poor and vulnerable. Ghana’s main social 

protection programs as defined by the National Social Protection Policy (2015) comprise (i) the Livelihood Empowerment 

 
2 World Bank 2018. 
3 Ibid. 
4 IMF 2020. 
5 IMF 2019.  
6 Amewu et al. 2020 (this study was updated and published in June 2020); Issahuku and Musah Abu 2020 (this study was distributed for comment 

in August 2020). 
7 Ghana Statistical Service 2020. 
8 Households can report multiple ways they were affected. 
9 Whether these reported effects differ from trends reported during the March–June period in past years has yet to be investigated. 



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 5 of 12  

     

Against Poverty (LEAP) cash transfer program, (ii) the Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) program, (iii) the Ghana School 

Feeding Program (GSFP), (iv) the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), and (v) the Education Capitation Grant.  

 
11. The Government has progressively invested in strengthening the design and delivery of its flagship safety net 

programs. Specifically, the LEAP Cash Transfer program was initiated in 2008 to provide unconditional cash transfers to 

needy households in impoverished areas of the country. The program originally used geographic and categorical targeting 

to identify needy beneficiary households. In recent years, these forms of targeting have been supplemented by proxy 

means test (PMT)-based targeting, applied after categorical targeting. Benefits are distributed every two months, through 

payment points in or near LEAP communities; benefits can also be collected from local branches of partnering financial 

institutions or through ATMs. The program currently reaches 332,000 needy households across the country. The estimated 

program coverage rate ranges from 1.5 to 5 percent of the population based on alternative sources of data (national 

household survey data, government administrative information). The program is highly pro-poor: 74 percent of 

beneficiaries are either extreme or moderate poor. Benefits are currently a function of eligible members in the household. 

Although the Government of Ghana (GoG) has revised the benefits up two times since program inception, benefits remain 

unindexed to price inflation. As such, the average benefit level as a proportion of total consumption of beneficiary 

households was 12.8 percent in 2016/17, lower than the proportions typically observed in cash transfer programs in other 

countries that have been documented to have had sizeable positive impacts on welfare.10 

 
12. In addition, the Labor Intensive Public Works program was initiated in 2011 and offers temporary labor earnings 

opportunities during the agricultural off-season to needy households. In so doing, it also supports the creation, 

rehabilitation, and maintenance of public or community infrastructure. Typical public works activities relate to rural feeder 

and access roads, basic water infrastructure (small earth dams and dugouts), and environmental degradation and climate 

change mitigation activities (reforestation and afforestation, catchment and watershed protection, and biodiversity 

conservation), collectively determined by local officials and communities and consistent with their medium-term 

development plans. Overall responsibility for administering LIPW lies with MLGRD. LIPW is currently targeted at districts 

and communities with the highest poverty levels. Within selected communities, individuals (one per household) self-select 

into the program. At least 60 percent of participants are expected to be women, achieved through community 

sensitization, outreach, conductive work activities, working conditions and hours, and amenities. Participants can work a 

maximum 90 days per year during the agriculture off-season, for up to two consecutive seasons. LIPW wages are pegged 

at the national daily minimum wage, which is adjusted yearly. Private contractors are contracted to manage the works. In 

the current fiscal year, the program has supported 32,300 households in 80 districts, mainly in northern Ghana. Ninety 

percent of LIPW works sites have been in rural communities. 

 
13. More recently, the GoG also piloted a Productive Inclusion (PI) program to enhance the income-generating 

potential of the poor and vulnerable in northern Ghana. It provided training in life, general business management, and 

specific enterprise/livelihood development skills. It also provided business capital grants amounting to the cedi equivalent 

of US$200 (provided in tranches after beneficiaries completed the full set of training). The pilot PI program reached 7,200 

beneficiaries, compared to an original target of 3,150 beneficiaries; 80 percent of beneficiaries were women, compared 

to an original target of 50 percent. Important lessons learned from the pilot included the need for a well-designed and -

implemented digital program MIS, greater information and facilitation for beneficiaries to access productive inputs and 

 
10 Davis and Handa 2015.  



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 6 of 12  

     

output markets, and further capacity building of actors at the district and community levels engaged in implementation. 

A tracer study of PI program beneficiaries under GSOP is currently underway.   

 
14. The GoG’s commitment to Social Protection is further evidenced in the establishment of the Ministry of Gender, 

Children, and Social Protection (MoGCSP) in 2013, with the mandate to coordinate social protection programming. In 

2015, a National Social Protection Policy was approved by the Government, which sets the vision and guides efforts in the 

sector, including increased financing and harmonization of programs and increased coordination across key ministries 

involved in the social protection sector, namely MOGCSP, the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 

(MLGRD), Ministry of Education, and the National Health Insurance Authority (NHIA) and across different government 

administrative levels (national, regional, and district). 

 

15. The Government has also introduced several system-level reforms and innovations to strengthen program 

delivery performance. Central among them is the continued rollout of the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR), a 

national social registry; use of digital benefit payment systems; the use of digital program management information 

systems (MIS’s) covering the full program delivery chain; and the rollout of an integrated unified citizen engagement and 

grievance redress system, called the Single Window Citizen Engagement Service (SWCES). These reforms and innovations 

have improved program implementation performance, including transparency and integrity.  

 
16. These program and system-level improvements have been supported by various World Bank projects. Specifically, 

the $139 million Ghana Social Opportunities Project or GSOP (P115247), which was implemented between 2010–18, 

supported the Government in administering and strengthening LEAP, LIPW, and the pilot Productive Inclusion program. 

GSOP was rated by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) as either satisfactory or substantial across all dimensions 

examined.11 The Ghana Productive Safety Net Project (GPSNP - P164603), which is currently under implementation by the 

Government, is a $60 million IPF operation that builds on GSOP. GPSNP became effective in July 2019 and supports the 

Government to strengthen its social safety net system toward improving the welfare and productivity of the poor. GPSNP 

is also supported by the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office (UK FCDO) through a 

Recipient- and Bank-Executed Trust Fund of £21 million.12 The project’s support has been coordinated with that of other 

development partners, including the European Union (EU), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the United 

States Agency for International Development (USAID). The project comprises of five main components: (i) Productive 

Inclusion, (ii) LEAP Cash Transfers, (iii) LIPW program, (iv) SP Systems Strengthening, and (v) Project Management.  

 
17. These IDA-financed projects have contributed to strengthening the design and implementation of the LEAP 

program and its underlying system, including the capacity of the MoGCSP, the MLGRD, and other government and private 

actors involved in implementation. Recent such initiatives have included the development and implementation of a digital 

LEAP MIS, PMT formula and PMT-based targeting, and digital payments.13 Under LIPW, improvements have included a 

digital program MIS; digital wage payments; capacity development of district officials, private contractors, and community 

facilitators; and information, communication, and engagement (ICE) activities, including grievance redressal. The projects 

have covered the full program costs of works contracts and beneficiary wages.  

 

 
11 IEG Review Team 2019.  
12 Formerly, the United Kingdom Department for International Development (UK DFID). 
13 World Bank 2018, 2019.  



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 7 of 12  

     

18. In addition, the PI program is currently being scaled up in northern Ghana under the GPSNP, incorporating 

measures to improve program implementation based on lessons learned from GSOP. The program targets some of the 

poorest districts and rural communities. Within these communities, LEAP and LIPW households receive preferential 

treatment for PI participation. Under GPSNP, the PI program aims to reach a total of 18,000 beneficiaries; at present, 

8,000 beneficiaries are receiving training and are expected to receive the first tranches of their capital grants shortly. As 

under the pilot, most beneficiaries are women, driven by a combination of endogenous household decision-making 

regarding which members work where and conducive program rules and procedures.  The PI program supports both farm 

and nonfarm income-generating activities; the former is supported through links to the World Bank’s Ghana Commercial 

Agriculture Project (P162525). Behavioral interventions to support improved financial decision-making of PI beneficiaries 

and their households are also being tested with the assistance of ideas42, an international nonprofit consulting firm 

focused on behavioral program design. The welfare effects of the PI intervention are being evaluated by the World Bank 

based on a randomized phase-in design.  

 

19. Systems Strengthening was also supported through these projects. Specifically, the GNHR was established to 

improve targeting for social protection programs and other poverty alleviation initiatives in Ghana. Launched in 2015 

under GSOP, GNHR completed data collection for two out of the three targeted regions. Under GSOP, GNHR completed 

data collection for the Upper East and Upper West Regions, the poorest regions in Ghana. Subsequently, through GPSNP, 

GNHR completed data collection for 400,000 households in October 2020 in three Northern Regions,14 and currently 

preparing to begin data collection in two additional regions – Volta and Central. GSOP and GPSNP were both instrumental 

in developing a fully functional management information system to track enumeration activities, including the use of 

geographical information systems. The GNHR system was also used to collect emergency data during the COVID-19 

pandemic when data was required to identify poor and vulnerable people within the lockdown areas who needed support. 

 
20. The Government initiated the SWCES in 2017 to streamline grievance redress mechanisms for social protection 

beneficiaries, but also to address other vulnerabilities handled by the MoGCSP. The SWCES includes (i) a toll-free hotline 

which receives calls from across the country, with agents responding between 8am and 5pm on weekdays, and a voice 

mail system after hours and on weekends; and (ii) a digitized referral directory, which is continuously updated. During the 

COVID-19 pandemic in Ghana, the call center was instrumental in receiving grievances from vulnerable individuals who 

required food aid during the lock down period.  A total of 1,315 out of 1,978 cases were from individuals who required 

aid. 

 
21. GPSNP has also supported the Government in developing and implementing an information, communication, and 

engagement strategy in relation to the pandemic for social safety net beneficiaries and communities and implementing 

health protective measures in the program delivery chain to protect personnel, beneficiaries, and communities from 

COVID-19 infection, including measures to comply with infection mitigation directives by the Government. 

 
22. GPSNP was restructured in August 2020 to intensify the Government’s social safety net response to the pandemic. 

Specifically, funds have been reallocated within the project to allow for previous and planned emergency cash transfers 

to existing LEAP program beneficiaries and to new beneficiary groups. The reallocation also allowed for, among other 

things, accelerated, intensive efforts under GNHR and SWCES. To date, the project has disbursed $40 million, and expects 

to exhaust its financing by March 2022.  

 
14 Ghana’s administrative system had 10 regions during GSOP implementation but expanded to 16 at the onset of GPSNP. As such GNHR will have 

to reach all 16 regions of Ghana, instead of the previous 10. 



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 8 of 12  

     

 
23. The Government has requested GPSNP 2 toward the following ends: 

 

• Scale up PI, LIPW, and LEAP to cover more households that are poor, vulnerable, or hard-hit by the COVID-induced 
economic crisis in both rural and urban areas; 

• Strengthen the social protection program delivery infrastructure, including the completion of GNHR; 

• Continue the further integration of ICT solutions into the program delivery chain, including monitoring; and 

• Integrate structures and processes that improve the shock-resilience and -responsiveness of the social protection 
system. 

24. These directions consistent with the priorities and directions of the Government’s overall COVID response. They 

are also consistent with the aims and directions in the World Bank’s Board documents WBG COVID-19 Crisis Response 

Approach Paper – Saving Lives, Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on Track and Protecting the Poor and Vulnerable: 

Social Response Framework for COVID19.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
25. The World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Ghana, published in 2018, identifies four pathways 

toward the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in 

Ghana. These pathways comprise (i) addressing inequality and vulnerability, (ii) improving macroeconomic management 

and economic diversification, (iii) increasing better-quality jobs and opportunities, and (iv) strengthening governance and 

government effectiveness.15 Consistent with this SCD, the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Ghana, 

currently under preparation, identifies three focus areas: (i) improving equitable access to services for improved human 

capital development, (ii) enhancing conditions for diversified growth and job creation, and (iii) promoting resilient 

development. Under these focus areas, specific objectives have been formulated.  

 
26. The proposed efforts under GPSNP 2 to strengthen and expand cash transfers, productive inclusion (cash grants; 

business and life skill training; savings support; access to inputs, services, and markets), labor-intensive public works 

(involving rehabilitation of water resources infrastructure, forestation, and conservation), and health insurance to needy 

households are consistent with the objectives of all three CPF focus areas. Specifically, the project’s proposed efforts are 

in accordance with the following CPF objectives: (i) improved utilization of health services for the poor and vulnerable 

(objective 1.2), (ii) improved connectivity for access to markets and productive opportunities (objective 2.1), (iii) increased 

financial inclusion and access to financial services (objective 2.3), (iv) enhanced market relevant skills and income 

opportunities (objective 2.4), (v) improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management (objective 3.2), and (vi) 

improved household preparedness for shocks (objective 3.3).  

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To support the Government to expand and enhance social safety nets that improve the incomes and productivity of 
the poor 

 

 
15 World Bank 2018.  



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 9 of 12  

     

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

1. Number of households that receive the full set of support through the Productive Inclusion (PI) program and start 
a new, or enhance an existing, income-generating activity  

2. Number of households that participate in the Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) program 
3. Number of households that receive cash benefits from the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) 

program 
4. Number of social protection programs that use data from the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR) to 

target benefits and services to intended beneficiaries 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
27. The proposed GPSNP 2 will be an IPF of $100 million, spanning four years. It is composed of six components (with 

tentative allocations) as follows:  

• Component 1: Productive Inclusion program (US$15 million) 

• Component 2: Labor-Intensive Public Works program (US$25 million) 

• Component 3: Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty program (US$25 million) 

• Component 4: Social Protection System Strengthening (US$28 million) 

• Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Capacity Building (US$7 million) 

• Component 6: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 

 
28. Components 1-3 represent the main interventions supported by GPSNP 2. Components 4 and 5 underpin the main 

interventions by supporting social protection system functioning and improvement. Important initiatives such as GNHR, 

SEWES, and the extension of health insurance coverage are reflected under the system-related components, as are, more 

generally, monitoring and evaluation; information, communication, engagement, and grievance redressal; capacity 

development across implementing ministries and administrative levels (national, region, district, and community); and 

reforms to the system to enhance shock resilience and responsiveness. Component 6 offers built-in flexibility to the project 

to rapidly reallocate financing to support needed relief and recovery initiatives for the poor and vulnerable in the event 

of a future disaster or crisis that affects the country.         

Project Beneficiaries 
29. The interventions under GPSNP 2 aim to protect and raise the welfare of poor and vulnerable households across 

Ghana. Reaching the poor and vulnerable will follow, in part, from targeting interventions to the poorest communities, in 

both rural and urban areas. Direct beneficiaries of some of the programs (for example, LIPW and PI) will be at the individual 

level. The digital MIS’s for the various programs, GNHR, and sample-based field surveys by contracted third parties will 

provide beneficiary information at both the household and individual levels, allowing for breakdowns of beneficiary 

numbers by different socioeconomic and demographic characteristics (for example, location, gender, age, disability status, 

welfare status).  

 
30. Over the project implementation period, GPSNP 2 will support the Government to reach the following cumulative 

beneficiary numbers: (i) 45,000 households under PI, (ii) 45,000 households under LIPW, and (iii) 400,000 households 

under LEAP. GPSNP 2 will also support the extension of NHIS coverage and facilitation services to access and use health 

services to PI, LIPW, and LEAP beneficiary populations.        



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 10 of 12  

     

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.  

 
The Environmental Risk Rating is moderate. The environmental risks and impacts expected from the LIPW subprojects, such 
as rehabilitation and maintenance of small earth dams, dugouts, and rural feeder and access roads; cultivation of fruit trees 
and tree crops as part of the climatic change initiatives and provision of water, household toilets and community solid waste 
collection services will present low to moderate environment risks. The potential risks and impacts are, however, specific 
and may include erosion, siltation, flooding, dust generation, road safety hazards, waterborne diseases, generation and 
disposal of spoils and waste, and health and safety issues. Cultivation of fruit trees and crops may require the use agro-
chemicals. These expected risks and impacts are envisaged to be low to medium in magnitude, temporary, site-specific and 
largely reversible.  
 
The Social Risk Rating is moderate. This classification is based on the potential social risks and impacts and the capacity of 
the implementing agencies to manage the risks and impacts. The project builds on experiences and lessons from the 
ongoing GPSNP (P164603) and successor project GSOP (P115247) and seeks to improve productivity, social inclusion, 
expanding income earning opportunities to poor households, and providing relief to extremely poor households due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
While the project activities are expected to have positive impacts, some social risks and impacts are envisaged. The 
proposed project activities are small-scale; however, the activities that may generate social risks include the proposed 
rehabilitation and maintenance of rural feeder and access roads and small earth dams and dugouts; construction of of 
WASH facilities and provision of cash grants and cash transfers to extremely poor households. Other social risks and impacts 
envisaged include project ability to manage local labour issues and localized economic displacement arising from land use; 
addressing community health and safety issues, ensuring social inclusion and preventing elite capture of project 
interventions; and putting in place robust framework for Stakeholder engagement and addressing grievances and SEA/SH 
prevention. 
 

 
  

.  
CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Christabel Ewuradjoa Dadzie, Dhushyanth Raju 

Senior Social Protection Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 11 of 12  

     

 

Republic of Ghana 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Gender Children and Social Protection 

Afisah Zakariah 

Chief Director 

afisah.zakariah@mogcsp.gov.gh 
  

 

Cynthia Mamle Morrison 

Minister 

mpraba1964@gmail.com 
  

Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD) 

Hajia Alima (Hon) Mahama 

Minister 

mahamaalima@gmail.com 
  

 

Augustine Collins Ntim 

Deputy Minister 

a.cntim@yahoo.co.uk 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Christabel Ewuradjoa Dadzie, Dhushyanth Raju 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Country Director: Agata E. Pawlowska 17-Dec-2020 
    

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Ghana Productive Safety Net Project 2 (P175588) 

 
 

  
Nov 25, 2020 Page 12 of 12  

     

 
 
 
 
 


















































Language: English


 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 
 

PROJECT:   SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT 

FOR FOOD AND NUTRITION SECURITY(SADFONS) 

PROJECT 

 

COUNTRY:  REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA  
 

 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT  

January 2021 
 

 

APPRAISAL 

TEAM 

Team 

Leader 

Mark EGHAN Principal Agricultural Economist AHAI.1 

Team 

Members 

Philip DOGHLE Principal Financial Mgt. Officer SNFI.2 

Daniel OSEI-BOAKYE Senior Procurement Officer SNFI.1 

Charlotte NOUDJIEU 

CHEUMANI 

Principal Environmental and Social 

Safeguards Specialist 

SNSC 

Moses Duphey Environment Consultant SNSC 

Philip BOAHEN Chief Agricultural Policy Economist AHAI 

Alex S. YEANAY Fragility & Resilience Officer COLR 

Tidiani OUEDRAOGO  Gender Expert RDGW 

Erkan OZCELIK Economist FAO 

Jaap VANDEPOL Agronomist FAO 

Ahmed RAZA Nutritionist FAO 

Barbara Jordan VICENTE Economist FAO 

Ajmal MEHNAZ Agriculture Policy Officer FAO 

Jobson MOMO Agronomist FAO 

Emmanuel KAPEE Policy Support FAO 

Nusula Kizito Nassuna Principal Legal Counsel PGCL.1 

Director 

General/ 

Director 

Marie-Laure AKIN-OLUGBADE Director General RDGW 

Martin FREGENE Sector Director AHAI 

Managers Laouali GARBA Sector Manager AHAI.2 

Orison AMU Country Manager  COLR 

Ken JOHM Regional Sector Manager AHAI-W 

Andrew MUDE Lead  AHFR.0 

Peer 

Reviewers 

Vinda KISYOMBE Senior Agriculture Economist RDGS.2 

Nathalie Gisabo GAHUNGA  Chief Gender Officer RDGW 

Farida SULEIMAN Senior Investment Officer AHFR.2 

Rebecca DADZIE Senior Agribusiness Officer AHAI.1 

Nnaemeka KORIE Consultant Analyst AHAI.0 

 Rimma Dankova Senior Adviser FAO 



 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

LIBERIA 

 

 

 

 

 

SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD AND 

NUTRITION SECURITY (SADFONS)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

RDGW/AHAI/COLR/AHFR/PGCL DEPARTMENTS                       

 

 

 

 

June 2021 

  
  
  
  

  
  
 P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u

th
o
ri

z
e
d
  

    
  
  
  
  
  
  



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

                                                                                                                                              Page 

TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................ i 
Currency Equivalents .................................................................................................................. i 
Fiscal Year .................................................................................................................................. i 
Weights and Measures ................................................................................................................ i 
Acronyms and Abbreviations ..................................................................................................... i 

Grant Information .....................................................................................................................iii 
Client’s information ..................................................................................................................iii 
Project Summary ....................................................................................................................... iv 
Project Timeframe ................................................................................................................... vii 
I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE ............................................................................ 1 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives .................................................... 1 
1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement .................................................................................. 2 
1.3. Donors coordination........................................................................................................ 3 

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 4 
2.1. Project components ......................................................................................................... 4 
2.2. Technical solutions retained and alternatives explored .................................................. 7 
2.3. Project type ..................................................................................................................... 8 

2.4. Project cost and financing arrangements ........................................................................ 8 
2.5. Project’s target area and population ................................................................................ 9 

2.6. Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation ............... 10 
2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design ........................................ 10 

2.8. Key performance indicators ...................................................................................... 11 
III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY ............................................................................................... 11 

3.1. Economic and financial performance ........................................................................... 11 

3.2. Environmental and Social impacts ................................................................................ 12 
IV – IMPLEMENTATION ...................................................................................................... 15 

4.1. Implementation arrangements ....................................................................................... 15 
4.2. Monitoring .................................................................................................................... 17 

4.3. Governance ................................................................................................................... 17 
4.4. Sustainability................................................................................................................. 17 

4.5. Risk management .......................................................................................................... 18 
4.6. Knowledge building ...................................................................................................... 18 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY............................................................... 19 
5.1. Legal instrument ........................................................................................................... 19 

GAFSP Grant and ADF Grant to the Republic of Liberia. .................................................. 19 
5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention ........................................................... 19 
5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies .................................................................................... 19 

VI – RECOMMENDATION ................................................................................................... 19 

 

 

Appendix I. Liberia’s comparative socio-economic indicators 

Appendix II. Table of ADB’s portfolio in the country 
Appendix III. Map of Liberia 
Appendix IV. Progress Toward Achieving the SDGS 
 
 



 

i 

 

Currency Equivalents 
As of December 2020 

 

UA   =  LRD 225.285 

UA   =  USD 1.43009 

US$  = LRD 157.532 

 

Fiscal Year 

01 July – 30 June 

 

Weights and Measures 

 

1metric tonne  = 2204 pounds (lbs) 

1 kilogramme (kg) = 2.200 lbs 

1 metre (m)  = 3.28 feet (ft) 

1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inch (“) 

1 kilometre (km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 

 

Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 

ADF African Development Fund 

AfDB African Development Bank 

ASRP  Agricultural Sector Rehabilitation Project  

ASWG Agricultural Sector Working Group 

BPS Borrower Procurement System 

CARI Central Agricultural Research Institute  

CSA  Climate Smart Agriculture  

CPIA Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 

CSP Country Strategy Paper 

DIME  Development Impact Evaluation  

DP Development Partners  

ECOWAS    Economic Community of West African States 

EPA     Environmental Protection Agency 

ESIA Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

ESMF Environmental and Social Management Framework 

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESSS  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 

FFS  Farmer Field Schools  

FBO Farmer Based Organization 

FM Financial Management 

FSNS National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy 

FY Financial Year 

GAFSP  Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 



 

ii 

 

GAC General Auditing Commission  

GoL Government of Liberia   

GRM Grievance Redress Mechanism 

IFR Interim Financial Reports 

IMF  International Monetary Fund  

IPM Integrated Pest Management 

ISFM Integrated Soil Fertility Management 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

EU  European Union 

EIB European Investment Bank  

GIZ German Development 

JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 

JAS Joint Assistance Strategy 

SAP System of Applications and Products 

SIDA Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 

IP Implementation Progress 

ISTS Integrated Safeguards Tracking System 

LASIP II  Liberian Agriculture Sector Investment Plan 

LATA Liberia’s Agricultural Transformation Agenda   

MoA Ministry of Agriculture 

NEPAD  New Partnership for African Development  

NTF  Nigeria Trust Fund 

ODA Official Development Assistance 

PAPD Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development 

PCN Project Concept Note 

PCR Project Completion Report 

PSC  Project Steering Committee  

RMCs Regional Member Countries  

SAPEC Smallholder Agricultural Productivity Enhancement & Commercialization 

SNS Department of Environmental and Social Safeguards and Compliance 

TSF Transition States Facility 

TYS Ten Year Strategy 

UA Unit of Account 

UNCT  UN Country Team  

  



 

iii 

 

Grant Information 

Client’s information 

 
RECIPIENT:     Republic of Liberia 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:   Ministry of Agriculture 

 

 

Financing plan 

 
Source Amount (USD) Instrument 

 

GAFSP  

 

8.2 Million 

 

Grant 

ADF 15 0.43 Million (UA 0.3 million) Grant 

Government Contribution 0.45 Million In-kind 

TOTAL COST 9.08 million  

 

 

Key financing information 

 
 

Grant currency 

 

US$ 

Interest type* Not Applicable 

Interest rate spread* Not Applicable 

Commitment fee* Not Applicable  

Other fees* Not Applicable 

Tenor Not Applicable 

Grace period Not Applicable 

FIRR, NPV (base case) US$ 17.13 million 

EIRR (base case) 23.7% 

 
*if applicable 

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

 
 

Concept Note approval  

 

June, 2020 

Project approval June, 2021 

Effectiveness July, 2021 

Completion March, 2026 

Last Disbursement July, 2026 

 

 

 



 

iv 

 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and 

Nutrition Security (SADFONS) project seeks to improve food and nutrition security and reduce 

poverty of targeted rural populations in Liberia. This will be achieved through (i) increased 

agricultural productivity and production of smallholder farmers (with a focus on food crops 

such as rice, cassava, and vegetables), (ii) improved smallholders’ value addition, market 

access and income, and (iii) strengthening the capacity of the government institutions, farmers 

and producer organizations. The Project area will cover six counties over a five-year period. 

The project consists of three components, namely: (i) Support smallholder agricultural 

productivity and market access, (ii) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity building and (iii) 

Project management and coordination. The total project cost is estimated at US$ 9.08 million, 

of which the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) will finance US$ 8.2 

million, African Development Fund UA 300,000 (US$ 429,027) and the Government of 

Liberia (GoL) US$ 453,000. 

 

Needs Assessment: The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition 

Security (SADFONS) project is designed within the context of the Liberian Agriculture Sector 

Investment Plan (LASIP II). LASIP II has five main strategic objectives which are (1) to 

sustainably and reliably access adequate, nutritious, and needed food for utilization of a healthy 

living; (2) to develop and support competitive value chains and market linkages; (3) to 

strengthen agricultural extension, research and development for enhancing sustained 

productivity growth; (4) to adopt agricultural practices that maintain the ecological and 

biological integrity of natural resources and (5) to improve governance and institutional 

capacity to implement programs and projects. The project aligns and supports the LASIP II 

regarding its objective to mainstream nutrition considerations in agriculture and development 

programmes.  

 

Bank Added Value: The Bank’s comparative advantage and added value in this project are 

derived from its accumulated experience in financing the on-going Smallholder Agricultural 

Productivity Enhancement & Commercialization (SAPEC) project and past projects in Liberia, 

which includes a number of infrastructures- and capacity building-related interventions. The 

project will provide opportunities not only to leverage lessons learnt in enhancing the 

development of the proposed investments but will also provide the Bank, as the supervising 

entity of the GAFSP grant, an ideal platform for partnering with FAO which is the supervising 

entity for the Technical Assistance in the project. The Bank’s partnership with other technical 

and development agencies such as the Consultative Group of International Agricultural 

Research (CGIAR) system, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Finance 

Corporation (IFC), World Bank (WB) and others is an asset that the Bank can draw upon. 

 

Knowledge Management: The Project shall develop a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 

System. Knowledge will be captured using analysis of the M&E database, supervision 

missions, mid-term reports, and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the 

stakeholders within and outside the production areas. In addition, knowledge would be 

disseminated by showcasing the Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, 

blog posts, short documentaries on the Bank’s website, etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will 

serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information sharing learning tools empowering 

farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, share knowledge and 

experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension agents.



 

v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 R E S U L T S  F R A M E W O R K   

A 
 

PROJECT INFORMATION 
❚ PROJECT NAME AND SAP CODE: SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD 
AND NUTRITION SECURITY (P-LR-AA0-010) 

❚ COUNTRY/REGION: Liberia / RDGW 

❚ PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE: To improve food and nutrition security and reduce poverty of targeted rural population in Liberia 

❚ ALIGNMENT INDICATOR (S): Improved food and nutrition security and reduced poverty of rural communities 

B  RESULTS MATRIX 

RESULTS CHAIN AND INDICATOR DESCRIPTION 
RMF/ADOA 
INDICATOR 

UNIT OF MEASUREMENT BASELINE (date) 
TARGET AT 

COMPLETION (date) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 1: Increased agricultural productivity 

1.1: Yield of rice, cassava and vegetables  □ Mt/ha 
Rice 2.48 Mt/ha 

Cassava 10.2 Mt/ha 

3.5 Mt/ha 

25 Mt/ha 

Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 2: Increase volume of agricultural production 

2.1: Production volume of rice, cassava and vegetables  □ Mt 
Rice - 0 

Cassava - 0 

29,050 Mt (40% by 

female); 91,800 Mt (40% 

by female) 

Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 3: Increased minimum diet diversity 

3.1: Stunting amongst children under five □ Percentage 32.1 28 
Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

1. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 1: Strengthening of sustainable crop production and intensification 

1.1: Volume of breeder seeds multiplied ☑ Mt 0 200 

Project Reports, MoA 
reports, Household surveys 

1.2 Volume of foundation seeds produced   ☑ Mt 0 1500 
1.3 Area  of land under irrigation rehabilitated ☑ Ha 0 208 
1.4 Area of land under cultivation  ☑ Ha 0 7,000 
1.5 Mechanization centres set up ☑ Number 0 1 
1.6 Farmers receiving productivity enhancement support ☑ Number 0 8,000 (40% female) 

2. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 2: Value Addition and Market Linkages 

2.1 Beneficiaries of credit guarantee ☑ Number 0 400 (40% female) 

Project Reports,  
MoA reports, 

Household surveys reports 

2.2 Post-harvest facilities, storage centres and market-related 
installations  

☑ Number  5 8 
2.3 Agricultural production processed ☑ Percentage 0 80 
2.4 Farmer Based Organizations trained  ☑ Number 0 60 
2.5 Contracts signed by off takers ☑ Number 0 24 



 

vi 

 

3. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 3: Strengthening participatory farmer advisory services 

3.1 Farmer field schools (FFS) established ☑ Number 0 320 

Project Reports,  
MoA reports, 

Household surveys 

3.2 FFS Master Trainers trained  ☑ Number 0 10 
3.3 Lead farmers (ToF) trained as facilitators of FFSs on climate 

resilence Agricultural and sustainable land management Practices 
☑ Number 0 160 

3.4 Producer Organizations’, including women farmer organizations 

capacity built 
☑ Number 0 60(40% women 

organizations) 

3.5 People reached with social behavior change communication (BCC) 

campaigns  □ Number 0 10,000 
3.6 Persons trained in nutrition enhancing activities, products and 

services 
☑ Number 0 13,000(60 % women) 

3.7 People receiving improved nutrition training  ☑ Number 0 30,000(school children) 
(50% women) 

3.8 Persons trained on SRI and other climate-smart agricultural practices   ☑ Number 0 200 (40% women) 
4. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 4: Support to national food safety and security 

4.1 National Standard laboratory refurbished ☑ Number 0 1 Project Reports 
4.2 Food safety policy frameworks developed/ updated □ Number 0 1 Project Reports 

5. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 5: Strengthening the capacity of MoA in investment planning and implementation 

5.1 Establishment of a unified M&E system at MoA ☑ Number 0 1 
Project Reports,  

MoA reports, Household 

surveys 

5.2 Agribusiness and investment policy dialogues with private sector 

partners □ Number 0 5 Project Reports,  
MoA reports 

5.3 MoA staff receiving post-graduate training ☑ Number 0 5 
6. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 6: Capacity development of agricultural research institutions 

6.1 Seed laboratory equipped ☑ Set 0 1 Project Reports,  
MoA reports 

 

  



 

vii 

 

Project Timeframe 

 

 

Task Name 

2021 2022 2023 2024 - 2025 2026 

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 

Negotiations                    

Board approval                    

Signing of Grant Agreement                    

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement for grant                    

Project launch                    

Technical coordination meetings                    

Project work plans and budgets                      

Technical Design Review/Baseline data update                    

Prepare bid documents and contract awards for works, goods and services                    

Contracts execution for works, goods and services                    

Quarterly reports submission                    

Bank’s supervision missions                    

Financial audit                    

Annual E&S compliance Audit                    

Mid-term review                    

Impact assessment and technical audit                     

Project completion reporting                     



 

 1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA FOR 

THE SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD AND 

NUTRITION SECURITY 
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation for approval of the proposed GAFSP 

grant of US$ 8.2 million and ADF grant of UA 0.3 million to finance the Smallholder Agriculture 

Development for Food and Nutrition Security Project in Liberia. 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1. The Government unveiled a development strategy in 2018, the Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity 
and Development (PAPD), which was further elaborated in the second edition of the Liberian 

Agriculture Sector Investment Plan (LASIP II) and the 2019 National Food Security and Nutrition 

Strategy (FSNS). The PAPD strongly emphasizes the role of a diversified and competitive agricultural 

sector for the economy and for improving food and nutrition security. Its stated main goals are for 

Liberia to achieve “a more competitive and diversified agricultural sector that promotes value chains 

for food self-sufficiency, increased exports, job creation, and livelihood opportunities” by 2023. The 

PAPD emphasis the importance of the successful implementation of LASIP II and prioritizes the 

strengthening of production and processing of locally consumed food products (rice, cassava, 

vegetables) as well of main export agricultural products (oil palm, cocoa, rubber). 

 

1.1.2. The PAPD responds to Liberia’s wide-ranging sources of societal, economic and environmental 
fragility in various ways. By increasing production and processing of rice, cassava and vegetables, food 

security and nutrition is being strengthened and the high incidence of undernourishment and stunting 

among children will be decreased. Moreover, the high import bill of rice (218 Million      USD in 2017) 

would be reduced, decreasing fiscal deficits and local currency depreciation. As a major factor for 

integrating value chains, the Government of Liberia is committed to improving the road and electricity 

network, giving priority to road corridors for transporting agricultural produce. Upscaling production 

and processing would increase economic growth and strengthen the private sector. Further actions of 

addressing economic fragility are the reactivation of the Agriculture and Cooperative Development 

Bank to improve access to agricultural finance, and the implementation of the Land Rights Act to 

strengthen land rights in the agriculture sector. By emphasizing the importance of implementing LASIP 

II the GOL equally commits to strengthening the capacity of public administration and policy 

framework. Environmental and climate fragility will be e addressed by the adoption of climate-resilient 

agriculture. 

 

1.1.3. The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition Security (SADFONS) 
project is designed within the context of LASIP II. LASIP II has five main strategic objectives which 

are (1) to sustainably and reliably access adequate, nutritious, and needed food for utilization of a 

healthy living; (2) to develop and support competitive value chains and market linkages; (3) to 

strengthen agricultural extension, research and development for enhancing sustained and climate-

resilient productivity growth; (4) to adopt agricultural practices that are resilient to climate change and 

maintain the ecological and biological integrity of natural resources and (5) to improve governance and 

institutional capacity to implement programs and projects. The project aligns and supports the LASIP’s 

II objective to mainstream nutrition considerations in agriculture and development programs.  

 

1.1.4. The project is aligned with the National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy (2015) which 
focuses on increasing availability, access and utilization of food and strengthening the institutional 

system to achieve these objectives. In addition, the project is aligned with the National Policy and 

Response Strategy on Climate Change (2018). It supports the implementation of the National 

Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA), by promoting climate-smart agricultural production 

techniques and supporting the conservation of forest areas. 

 



 

 2 

1.1.5. The proposed project responds to the issues of food and nutrition security, and persistent 
poverty emphasized  in the government’ PAPD National Development Plan 2018-2023. The Plan 

prioritizes agriculture as central to economic transformation, supporting the development of priority 

value chains, including rice, cassava and horticulture, with specific focus on women and youth. This 

agenda is further elaborated in LASIP II 2018-22 that identifies food and nutrition security; 

development of competitive value chains and market linkages; agricultural extension and research; 

sustainable production and natural resource management; and governance and institutional 

strengthening as main areas for priority investments in the country. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 Food and nutrition security are a critical factors in preserving peace and stability in Liberia and 
can be achieved through inclusive agricultural development that accelerates productivity and income 

growth among smallholders and improves agriculture livelihoods. The proposed project will contribute 

to the implementation of the government’s vision to improve food and nutrition security by investing 

in solutions that directly benefit smallholder farmers who are held back by the quality of inputs, 

machinery and infrastructure for irrigation, storage, processing and marketing. The project will expand 

access to improved inputs, promote technology transfer, improve food safety and facilitate the provision 

of research and climate-smart advisory services to farmers.  

 

1.2.2 The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2019 – 2023 aims to support private sector driven 
economic diversification and strengthen economic governance. Accordingly, the CSP is articulated 

around the following two priority areas for Bank support: Priority Area 1 – Economic diversification 

through improved transport and energy infrastructure; and Priority Area 2 – Improving economic 

governance and enhancing private sector development. In addition, special emphasis will be placed on 

the following aspects: 1) strengthening resilience to fragility; 2) capacity development; 3) gender and 

women’s empowerment; 4) youth economic empowerment 5) environment and climate change; and 6) 

regional integration and trade (especially within the Manu River Union). The proposed project is fully 

aligned with these strategic areas where the CSP places emphasis; building resilience of vulnerable 

population, supporting youth development and empowering women. 

 

1.2.3 The proposed project contributes directly to objectives of the Feed Africa Strategy of the 
African Development Bank and the ADF-15 priorities. As part of the Bank’s High 5 Agenda and the 

objectives of “Feed Africa,” the Bank is elaborating a strategy for its support to the four specific goals 

of CAADP (i) contribute to eliminating extreme poverty in Africa by 2025; (ii) end hunger and 

malnutrition in Africa by 2025; (iii) make Africa a net food exporter; and (iv) move Africa to the top of 

export‑orientated global value chains where it has comparative advantage. The project contributes to 

ADF-15 strategic pillar II: human, governance and institutional capacity development for inclusive 

growth and job creation. 

 

1.2.4 The project is aligned with the Bank’s Jobs for Youth Strategy (2016-2025), the ENABLE 
Youth Programme, and the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan (2018-2025). The proposed operation 

is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and supports its twin objectives of inclusive 

growth and transition to green growth. The Project is also aligned with the Bank’s Strategy on 

“addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa”, which promotes inclusiveness and resilience 

building.   

 

1.2.5 The project will leverage on prior Bank investment in Liberia through the Agriculture Sector 
Rehabilitation project (ASRP) and Smallholder Agricultural Productivity Enhancement & 

Commercialization (SAPEC) project. The SAPEC project has achieved substantial results in improving 

food security and increasing farmer household incomes. The proposed project will build upon approach, 

lessons and target groups of the SAPEC project, and aims at consolidating and sustaining its achieved 

results.  The consolidation is especially required in lowland development sites where irrigation and 

roads development interventions will be coming into implementation towards the end of the SAPEC 

project.  



 

 3 

 

1.3. Donors coordination 

             

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size    

  GDP Exports Labor Force    

  [Agriculture] [36%] [71.28%] [70%]    

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**    

  Government Donors 

 

[IFAD] 
 

[46%]    

 [US$ 2.4 million] [US$ 25.69 million] [AfDB] [27%]    

 [24%] [76%] [World Bank] [14%]    

    [FAO] [13%]    

  Level of Donor Coordination    

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups Yes    

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches No    

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** Member    
* as most appropriate ** Years [yr1 to yr2] *** for this sector or sub-sector **** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no 

involvement 

 
1.2.6 The Liberia National Aide and NGO Policy of 2020 provides a framework for donor 
coordination that ensures the advancement of the principles of the Paris Declaration (2005), the Accra 

Agenda for Action (2008) and Busan Partnership for Effective Development Corporation (2011). The 

policy is set to improve the effectiveness of aid, ensure aid mobilization in a coordinated way with a 

wider reach, produce more visible results and closer collaboration with NGOs. This Policy serves as a 

reference for the Government of Liberia and Development Partners in the management of official 

development assistance. Various donor coordination groups exist, and these include: Cooperating 

Partners Group (CPG), UN Country Team (UNCT), Budget Support Working Group, PFM Donor 

Coordination Group, Sector Working Groups on Energy, Transport, Agriculture, and Water, Sanitation, 

and Hygiene (WASH). These forums provide the Bank with a platform to engage in dialogue with 

development partners and the Government of Liberia (GoL) on a range of issues, including economic, 

financial, social development and sector-specific ones.  

 

1.2.7 There are a number of Development Partners (DPs) active in Liberia and these include AfDB, 
World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), USAID, EU, GIZ, JICA, China, Sweden and SIDA. 

Liberia remains highly donor-dependent. Estimates show the development partners’ share of the total 

government expenditure rose from 64% in FY2012/2013 to 76%in FY2014/2015. The Ebola Virus 

Disease (EVD) crisis explains this increase. The increase in ODA placed Liberia among the top four 

recipient countries in the world. The post-EVD period has seen declining donor transfers and grants 

from 60% to 20% of GDP.  

 

1.2.8 To help safeguard food systems that were being disrupted by COVID-19, the Bank prepared 
the Feed Africa Response to COVID-19 (FAREC) document to collaborate and partner with the 

different donors on the ground. This project will also seek close collaboration with the ongoing World 

Bank-funded STAR-P project and IFAD Tree Crop Extension Projects I and II that also focuses on food 

security, nutrition and income generation in Liberia. The project will also collaborate with the WFP the 

implementation of the Home-Grown School Feeding Program (HGSFP) in the areas where the proposed 

project will provide the basis for increased smallholder agricultural production, and where the increased 

food supply could be met by the demand from the HGSF program. A close collaboration is also foreseen 

with the ongoing UN Women and UNFPA projects in the target counties to ensure that women farmers 

receive the necessary support to effectively benefit from the proposed investments. The project will 

explore collaboration with IFC to engage with the private sector in strengthening the agricultural input 

distribution networks. 



 

 4 

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1. Project components 

2.1.1 The project development objective is to improve food and nutrition security and reduce poverty 
of targeted rural populations in Liberia. This will be achieved through (i) increased agricultural 

productivity and production of smallholder farmers (with a focus on food crops such as rice, cassava, 

and vegetables), (ii) improved smallholders’ value addition, market access and income, and (iii) 

strengthening the capacity of the government institutions, farmers and producer organizations. 

Component 1. Support to enhancing smallholder agricultural productivity and market access 

2.1.2 Sub-Component 1.1. Strengthening of sustainable crop production and intensification: 
The project activities will be implemented in both upland and lowland areas, increasing the productivity 

of cassava, rice and vegetables production. The project will support the rehabilitation of irrigation 

schemes for rice cultivation in a total of 130 ha of lowland areas. The rehabilitation will include 

stabilization of existing irrigation infrastructures for rice and vegetable production for improved water 

availability in the rice-producing counties of lowland areas and will include earth and layout works, 

water control and small irrigation structures.  

 

2.1.3 The project will establish a farm mechanization centre to provide equipment maintenance and 
repairs within the project area. The centre will be established under the Central Agricultural Research 

Institute (CARI) and concentrate technical skills and resources that can be supplied at request on a cost-

recovery basis, to ensure continued repair and service of machinery. It will act as a Centre of Excellence 

for mechanics and repair persons, where they can learn new knowledge and skills for serving their 

communities. A cost recovery model will be applied at the outset of the project, to ensure the 

sustainability of the centres’ operations beyond the project implementation period.   

 

2.1.4 The project’s activities on the development and strengthening of smallholder farmers’ capacity 
will start with the development of training modules for master trainers and farmer field school 

facilitators (lead farmers). The training modules will be refined to supplement and build on existing 

farming knowledge and experiences while also reflecting modern farming techniques. These modules 

will build on the cumulative knowledge of farmers, using control groups and trial & error techniques to 

share and shape future sustainable and climate-resilient farming practices. Farmers will remain 

custodians of their own knowledge, embedded within communities, helping to perpetuate improved 

practices going forward.  

 

2.1.5 The project will, in turn, support the implementation of an extension model based on the 
participatory, lead farmer approach. This approach utilizes the experience of the farmer field schools 

(FFS), for improved rice, cassava and vegetable production, and also improved access to inputs such as 

seeds, marketing opportunities and skills and nutritional status. The limited number of public field 

extension officers in the counties are not enough to reach out to all the farming households with the 

needed extension support, so the lead farmer approach helps to fill in voids. A total of 160 FFS 

facilitators working in pairs and trained by the project, will implement one FFS per year, for four years.  

 

2.1.6 The project will build the capacity of lead farmers at the county level, through training of master 
trainers. Two master trainers/county extension officer (ideally one female and one male) are trained per 

county. The master trainers will train lead farmers as FFS facilitators and manage the needed extension 

support and backstopping support (including FFS activities) at the county level. Each master trainer 

goes through one cropping season (4-5 months long) training. While the training of 10-12 master 

trainers is envisaged under this project, up to 30 trainees can be trained per training, allowing for the 

project to accommodate other projects to join the TOMT (training of master trainers) on a cost-sharing 

basis. This would leverage the capacity building of the project and contribute to further embedding the 

lead-farmer FFS (farmer field schools) approach across more counties, within Liberia (refer to Annex 

C5 in volume II) 

 

2.1.7 The Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI) will support the development of the seed 
supply system to increase farmers’ access to certified seeds, by training selected farmers on seed 



 

 5 

multiplication techniques at their centre and by providing the needed support to set-up local seed 

/planting material multiplication farms in their communities. CARI will work with various seed grower 

groups and encourage and support the participation of private seed producer businesses and agro-input 

dealers to enable them fully to undertake the production and distribution of the certified seeds in Liberia. 

 

2.1.8 FAO will provide technical assistance to the MOA for the execution of FFS activities. The 
MOA will lead the process by developing training manuals for the FFS to which the FAO through its 

national staff (an agronomist) will provide further technical backstopping by facilitating FFS activities.  

FAO will provide supervision, reporting and evaluation support services for the completion of the FFS 

activities. 

 

2.1.9 Sub-Component 1.2. Value Addition and Market Linkages: The project will support 
interventions for the development and strengthening of smallholder market access and value chain 

linkages. The project will strengthen the linkages between smallholder farmers and six micro-hubs for 

primary processing of cassava and rice, with the help of four aggregation centres located near micro-

hubs. The micro-hubs currently lack the management and operational capacities needed to consistently 

supply value addition services to smallholder farmers and to fully utilize the already installed processing 

machinery. The project will provide the additional financial support for a specified period during the 

lifetime of the project, on a declining basis, while concurrently building management and operational 

capacities to turnover independently. 

 

2.1.10 The project will enhance access to agriculture finance through the establishment of a ringfenced 
facility dedicated to financing for various value chain actors. The World Bank financed project STAR-

P is financing the establishment of innovative financial product to provide credit guarantee to medium 

scale value chain actors, applying a competitive rates and flexible payment plan that address the needs 

of each value chain actor. This project will complement the effort of the World Bank by contributing 

resources to the Credit Guarantee Fund to be established under STAR-P project. This “seed money” 

will be housed in a financial institution to be selected with guidance from the Central Bank of Liberia 

using a competitive process acceptable to the Bank. The credit guarantee will be operated to de-risk 

lending to the agriculture sector.  

 

2.1.11 The project will expand and equip the standard lab for food quality and safety testing. This will 
improve the quality of food products for Liberians and the possibilities going forward – for import and 

export of quality produce. After the completion of the investment, the lab will have higher capacity for 

performing standard tests for food safety. The lab is hosted by the National Standards Laboratory, with 

ease of access all year round.  

 

Component 2. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity building  

 

2.1.12 Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening participatory farmer advisory services: This sub-
component will support institutional strengthening of extension service delivery, by continuing to 

engage the trained lead farmers as change agents for knowledge sharing, while encouraging ownership 

of the process by the FBOs for sustainability, with support by the MoA. As a complement to the FFS, 

group strengthening training courses will be implemented to improve group cohesion and internal 

functions. Informal groups that begin to formalize their operations into a FMO, to organize formal 

(purchasing and sales) functions for the group members, and may qualify for equipment support, along 

with existing FMOs. Inter-regional exchange visits will remain a vehicle for cross-learning among 

groups.  

 

2.1.13 The project will support communities in improving farmers awareness, production and 
consumption of diverse nutritious foods, especially among nutritionally vulnerable groups

1
. Enhanced 

access to input provision, such as seed provision to smallholder farmers, with the support of FFS lead 

farmers trained in nutrition enhancing activities, will facilitate production of vegetable food by 

smallholder farming families. In peri-urban areas, the provision of 5,000 kitchen garden demos and kits 

 
1 Nutritionally vulnerable groups in the case of Liberia include: children under the age of five, children and 

adolescents between the age of five and 19 and women of reproductive age. 



 

 6 

to peri-urban households will help to enhance consumption of nutritious foods, especially among 

nutritionally vulnerable groups, through nutrition education and by diversifying local food production. 

The close proximity of peri-urban households to food markets is considered an advantage that may 

allow some households to sell their produce at markets for enhanced income generation as a result of 

enhanced production. Sensitization sessions with recipients of kitchen garden kits will aim to 

communicate the importance of consumption of healthy diets, to reinforce the message and benefits of 

the vegetables, so that consumption benefits remain with the family and not only result in increased 

incomes.  

 

2.1.14 In addition to the enhanced production and consumption of households in receipt of improved 
inputs and production knowledge, the project aims to cast a message among a wider net of women and 

children on basic nutrition, hygiene and health, and on the importance of consumption of healthy diets. 

To increase the scale of outreach, the project will develop, deploy strategy, deploy harmonization of 

messages and monitor a social behaviour change campaign. The project will provide nutrition training 

sessions for 30,000 school children enrolled in the National School Feeding Programme and facilitate 

sessions on nutrition enhancing activities at the UN Women trainings that will impact 5,000 women 

beneficiaries.  

 

2.1.15 Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening the capacity of MoA in investment planning and 
implementation: The project will support the capacity strengthening of the MoA in the planning of 

sustainable agricultural investments, including trainings on system of rice intensification (SRI), Climate 

Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices and Sustainable Water and Land Management, and on economic 

and financial analysis of agricultural investments. The project will support the mainstreaming of climate 

change adaptation in national agricultural M&E and in the extension and advisory system. It will also 

support the MoA to build its capacity to crowd in private investment to the agricultural sector by 

conducting agribusiness and investment policy dialogues with private sector partners, investment and 

commercial banks; and meetings with trade and financial specialists to share knowledge and interact on 

economic trends and events. 

 

Component 3. Project management and coordination  

2.1.16 The component will focus on the planning, coordination and management, and delivery of 
project activities within the scope and of high quality cost-effectively and efficiently. Activities will 

include the procurement of services for design, supervision and construction works, purchasing of good 

and services, including mechanized agricultural and office equipment, and training, consultancy and 

non-consultancy services (workshops). Project management tasks also include recruitment or 

appointment of project staff, provision of office space, and preparation of office manuals, annual work 

plans and budgets (AWPB), quarterly progress reports, the mid-term reviews, thematic studies, 

procurement plans and audit reports. Others include on-the-job training, adoption of the monitoring and 

evaluation (M&E) system, provision of operational resources for project-related transportation and 

communication infrastructure, organization of stakeholder workshops, and coordination of baseline and 

impact assessment studies.  

  



 

 7 

Table 2.1: project components 

 
nr. Component name Est. cost 

(USD) 

Component description 

 

1 Support to enhancing 

smallholder 

agricultural 

productivity and 

market access 

4.60 

million 

Sub-component 1.1. - Strengthening of sustainable crop 

production and intensification: 

▪ Support the development of seed supply system for rice, 
cassava and vegetables through seed multiplication. 

▪ Rehabilitation and stabilization of irrigation 
infrastructures for rice cultivation in lowland areas 

▪ Establish an agricultural mechanization service centre 
▪ Training of farmers. 
▪ Training of FFS Master trainers 
▪ Training of lead farmers as FFS facilitators  

1.24 

million 

Sub-component 1.2 - Value Addition and Market Linkages 

▪ Strengthening linkages between farmers and micro-hubs 
for primary processing of cassava and rice; 

▪ Improving storage and reducing harvest and post-harvest 
losses (Aggregation centres) 

▪ Expand and equip a Standards Lab for food quality and 
safety testing 

▪ Establish Risk Sharing Facility to provide credit guarantee 
to value chain actors 

2 Institutional 

Strengthening and 

Capacity Building 

1.22 

million 

Sub-component 2.1 – Strengthening participatory farmer 

advisory services 

▪ Strengthening the capacity of farmer / agricultural 
producer organizations 

▪ Implementation of community-based nutrition promotion 
activities 

▪ Development of Peri Urban Agriculture 
▪ Expand and strengthen the community grain reserve 

concept to include rice and cassava food products. 

 0.68 

million 

Sub-component 2.2 – Strengthening the capacity of MoA in 

investment planning and implementation 

▪ Strengthening the capacity of MoA staff  
▪ Mainstreaming climate change adaptation in national 

agricultural M&E and extension system 

▪ Conduct agribusiness and investment policy dialogues 
with private sector partners  

3 Project management 

and coordination 

1.34 

million 

Support the establishment of structures required for 

coordinating the implementation of project activities 

▪ Strengthen NCO;  
▪ Project Monitoring and Evaluation, including Knowledge 

Management and communication 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and alternatives explored 

2.2.1 The response to the ensuing COVID-19 crisis saw a redirection of country allocation funds away 

from agriculture, and a subsequent decrease in external sources of project funding. Under the new 

reality, the option of large ticket items was no longer a possibility. Large ticket items such as feeder 

roads, extended irrigation works, and a microcredit line were cut to bring the project within the confines 

of funds allocated by the GAFSP grant. The options ahead were also guided by the central premise to 

further enhance the engagement of smallholder farmers in monetizing their excess production at local 

markets, to ensure sustainable production from year-to-year, while encouraging improved productivity 

and consumption of nutritious diets. Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their 

weaknesses in generating the expected impact on a sustainable basis. Table 2.2 presents design options 

considered and reasons for their rejection. 

  



 

 8 

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

 
Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

1. Infrastructure 
support 

Construction of market centres and 

road infrastructure to link the 

farmers to market. 

• Difficulty in reaching effectiveness with limited 
project resources. 

• High maintenance cost in rural areas. 

• Problem to be addressed exceeds project 
resources. 

2. Procurement of 
imported seeds and 

supply to farmers 

The project will procure imported 

seeds and distribute to farmers for 

planting. 

• This approach was thought to be highly 
unsustainable. There is the need to develop local 

seeds sector for the country to be self-sufficient in 

seed production; 

• With the passage of the seeds board law, there is 
the need to support local seed production. 

 

Credit line Credit through MFIs or SACCOs   • Seed - key input - a small proportion of production 
costs.  

• Fungibility of money - loan use for production 
competing with the need to smooth consumption. 

2.3. Project type 

The project is a standalone investment project with technical assistance (TA) and capacity building 

activities. It is to be financed by a grant under the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

(GAFSP) and the African Development Fund (ADF).  

2.4. Project cost and financing arrangements 
 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at US$ 9.08 million, net of taxes, and based on 2020 

prices, comprising of 38% of the total cost in foreign cost, and 62% in local costs. The project cost 

comprises of GAFSP Grant of US$ 8.2 million (90.3%), ADF contribution of UA 300,000 ($ 429,027) 

and GoL contribution of US$ 0.45 million (5%) in kind. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 6% and 4% respectively. The price contingencies were 

estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local and foreign inflation rates of about 20.4% 

and 2% per annum, respectively. The physical contingencies are estimated from 0 to 15%, based on 

common practices. The ADF resources will finance mainly the credit risk guarantee scheme while 

Government contribution will be in kind contribution of project staff seconded to the National 

Coordinating Office (NCO). A summary of the project cost estimates by components and expenditure 

accounts is shown in Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes – Volume 

II. 

 

Table 1: Summary of Project Cost by Components 

COMPONENT 

(LRD, million) (US$, 000) % 

For 

%. 

Base 

Local  Foreign Total Local  Foreign Total   
A. Support to enhancing smallholder 
agricultural productivity and market 

access 406.40 378.74 785.14 2,579.78 2,404.23 4,984.01 48 61 

B. Institutional Strengthening and 

Capacity Building 210.63 88.54 299.17 1,337.05 562.08 1,899.13 30 23 

C. Project Management, M&E and 

Knowledge Management 197.55 13.71 211.25 1,254.00 87.00 1,341.00 6 16 

Total Baseline Costs 814.57 480.99 1,295.56 5,170.83 3,053.31 8,224.14 37 100 
Physical Contingencies 23.21 54.15 77.36 147.32 343.74 491.05 70 6 

Price Contingencies 47.88 9.90 57.79 303.97 62.87 366.84 17 4 

Total Project Cost 885.66 545.05 1,430.71 5,622.12 3,459.91 9,082.03 38 110 

 

 
 

 



 

 9 

 

Table 2: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

Expenditure Category 

(LRD, million) (US$, 000) % 
For 

Exch 

% 

Base 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total   

A. Goods 63.98 118.82 182.80 406.14 754.26 1160.39 65 14 

B. Services 488.06 122.02 610.08 3098.20 774.55 3872.74 20 47 

C. Works 100.90 235.43 336.33 640.50 1494.50 2135.00 70 26 

D. General Operating Expenses 161.63 4.73 166.35 1026.00 30.00 1056.00 3 13 

Total Baseline Costs 814.57 480.99 1295.56 5170.83 3053.31 8224.14 37 100 

Physical Contingencies 23.21 54.15 77.36 147.32 343.74 491.05 70 6 

Price Contingencies 47.88 9.90 57.79 303.97 62.87 366.84 17 4 

Total Project Costs 885.66 545.05 1430.71 5622.12 3459.91 9082.03 38 110 

 

Table 3: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

Sources of finance 
(US$, 000) % Total 

Foreign Local Total  

GAFSP Grant 2,980,317 5,219,683 8,200,000 90.3 

ADF 85,805 343,222 429,027 4.7 

Government - 453,000 453,000 5.0 

Total 3,066,122 6,015,905 9,082,027 100.0 

 
Table 4: Expenditure Schedule by Component  

Component 
 (US$) 

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 TOTAL 

A. Support to enhancing smallholder 

agricultural productivity and market access 1,603,276 2,099,074 1,614,197 374,597 150,759 5,841,902 

B. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 

Building 650,375 537,875 460,875 150,000 100,000 1,899,125 

C. Project Management, Coordination, M&E 

and Knowledge Management 286,200 266,200 266,200 266,200 256,200 1,341,000 

TOTAL 2,539,851 2,903,149 2,341,272 790,797 506,959 9,082,027 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 The Project area will cover six counties out of a shortlist of 11 counties that include the rice-

producing counties in the south-eastern areas of River Gee, Maryland and Grand Gedah, and the major 

cassava producing north-western areas of Bomi, Montserrado and Grand Bassa.  The selection criteria 

for the counties is based on high incidences of poverty and malnutrition rates, ecology, infrastructure, 

labor, target group, crop history, market hubs, and also on the locations of GAFSP-funded processing 

facilities under SAPEC that require sustained and increased supply of raw materials for production (rice 

and cassava). The value chains prioritized under the project are rice, cassava and vegetables, and they 

are of particular importance for food and nutrition security in the country.  

2.5.2 The estimated total number of project beneficiaries is 41,740, which includes direct 

beneficiaries of farming and nutrition activities including 30,000 children of school age. Of these, 

11,740 participants are among smallholder farmers with a plot size in the range of 0.8-2 ha that will be 

targeted. During the field mission, a number of farmer groups were already identified. During 

implementation, additional groups will be identified and added to reach the target of 11,740 farming 

households. Preferably, these groups will be located in farming communities with at least 100 farming 

households, to enable optimal use of project resources for further outreach. Using the Farmer Field 

School (FFS) approach, lead farmers will be selected (preferably one female  and one male) on the basis 

of their skill and knowledge as a farmer on the crop selected by the group for support. S/he will be 

respected by their farming group/community and have good communication skills in their local 

language of the community as well as a national language (for training purposes). To cover gender and 

nutrition issues it is important that each group selected one female and one male lead farmer.  

The nutrition campaign focuses on women groups and school children, using 5,000 kitchen garden kits 

in peri-urban areas, 5,000 women of UN Women trainings and 30,000 children of school age enrolled 

in school.  



 

 10 

2.6. Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

2.6.1 The SADFONS project was formulated on the basis of GAFSP’s special call for proposals for 

fragile and conflict-affected countries of 01 March 2019, after which the Government of Liberia 

requested the assistance of AfDB and UNFAO to develop the project proposal and document. In 

September 2019, a joint AfDB / UNFAO mission undertook a wide-ranging consultation process that 

culminated in a multi-stakeholder validation workshop with over 40 participants from within the NGO 

and donor community, including FBOs, the private sector, and relevant government offices and 

agencies of Liberia. The GAFSP proposal for SADFONS was endorsed by the ADWG, comprising of 

the EU, IFAD, USAID, WB and others. Initially, the project was narrowed down to 11 counties out of 

a nationwide total of 15 counties, when the proposal was cleared to go to appraisal. An appraisal mission 

in February 2020 was postponed indefinitely after the onset of Covid-19.  

 

2.6.2 A remote-based mission, with in-country support from the FAO-Liberia office, allowed the 

design process to press ahead, with a field team, comprising of the Government Technical Team (GTT) 

and FAO-Liberia colleagues, visiting five counties in the southeast and northwest parts of the country. 

Despite restrictions to movement related to Covid-19, the field mission was able to meet with farming 

communities, FBOs, civil society groups, agro-dealers and private sector operators in all planned five 

counties. The field mission was concluded with an in-depth stakeholder meeting with CARI and a field 

report ensued. As a follow-up to the field visits, virtual meetings in Monrovia were conducted with a 

wide range of stakeholders that included the Treasury, the Ministry of Finance and Development 

Planning, the Ministry of Gender, Child & Social Protection, ADWG members, UN Women, USAID 

and INGOs. Throughout this process, the GTT was involved and consulted in the suggested features of 

the project to address concerns raised, with the Minister of Agriculture’s participation on key occasions. 

Despite the distance of the core design team to the GTT due to Covid-19 restrictions, the SADFONS 

project was able to build strong country ownership of the project through a consultative process.  

 

2.6.3 Implementation of the project will involve the MoA and a NCO to plan, direct and execute 

activities in a participatory manner with the local communities, private sector stakeholders and other 

related government and international agencies. The project takes a special interest in using a 

participatory, lead-farmer extension model that is set to ensure local ownership of knowledge and 

project outputs.  

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

2.7.1 The Bank has 14 on-going and recently approved operations (all sovereign) in Liberia with a 
total commitment of UA 292 million, an equivalent of US$ 403 million. Liberia is also supported by 

four Technical assistants and Trust fund operations, of which three are multi-nationals- see table in 

annex 1 for details. The Bank has completed four operations in the Agricultural sector and three ongoing 

projects, for a total approved amount of UA 38.24 million (equivalent of USD 53 million). These 

include: (i) Smallholder Agricultural Productivity and Commercialization (SAPEC); (ii) Study to 

identify areas of need in the Agricultural value chain; and (iii) Support to the Forestry Authority to 

Scale up the participation of SMEs in secondary wood processing. In this regard, the Bank is supporting 

the Government of Liberia’s Agricultural Transformation Agenda (LATA) to increase productivity in 

the agriculture sector, especially rice and cassava production, particularly women farmers.  

 

2.7.2 The overall active portfolio performance is rated satisfactory, a score of 3.0 on a scale of 1 – 4. 
This portfolio performance has been maintained over a year now by drastically reducing the percentage 

of flagged operations from 50% at the start of 2019 to 20% at the end of the year and maintaining it at 

that level. There is no outstanding Project Completion Report, as well as no potentially problematic or 

problematic operation in the active portfolio. As such, the Bank’s portfolio at risk (PAR) and 

commitment at risk (CAR) is zero. The average age and approved amount of the ongoing portfolio is 

3.8 years and UA 20.85 million, respectively. Overall disbursement improved from 32% to 40% from 

April 2019 to April 2020, albeit amidst a very challenging fiduciary environment. Key factors amongst 

the factors responsible for this overall poor performance in disbursement are: (i) non-compliance with 

the Bank’s procurement and financial management procedures and guidelines; sometimes as a result of 

limited knowledge by the project staff, thereby unnecessarily delaying procurement and disbursement 



 

 11 

lead times; (ii) Limited capacity to process Bank related documents at different levels of Government; 

(iii) excessive delay by contractors and consultants to deliver on the contracts; and (iv) sometimes, delay 

by the Bank to provide prompt feedback to requests submitted by the projects. 

 

2.7.3 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in Liberia has enhanced the design of this project 
for implementation efficiency and sustainability. The proposed operation takes into account the 

identified key lessons learned. These include: (i) the importance of quality at entry - as lack of detailed 

designs at project start-up results in implementation delay; (ii) ensuring adequate national stakeholders 

consultation to enhance project ownership and sustainability; and (iii) institutional capacity and 

implementation – there were challenges in the implementation of SAPEC due to inadequate staff 

capacity at the Project Implementing Unit. 

2.8. Key performance indicators  

2.8.1 The Project’s key performance indicators are presented in the Results-Based Logical 

Framework. Regular implementation progress will be measured through bi-annual Bank supervision 

missions, quarterly project progress report and annual technical and financial audit reports. The Project 

Implementation Unit will collect and analyse data to monitor progress and submit to the Bank on agreed 

timeframes. 
 

2.8.2 The main indicators defined for monitoring the project’s impact, including the Bank’s Core 

Sector Indicators and GAFSP core development indicators, were developed together with the 

Government of Liberia technical team and validated during project preparation. Impact indicators 

include: (i) Proportion of households who are categorized as food insecure [Food Insecurity Experience 

Scale (FIES)] and (ii) Household income. Outcome indicators include: (i) % increase in yield of cassava 

and rice and (ii) Stunting amongst children under five. Gender dis-aggregated indicators will inform 

decision-makers to guide project mid-term review and to facilitate project management outcomes after 

completion. The Liberia Country Office of the Bank and FAO will play an active role in coordination, 

capacity support, sector dialogue, project supervision and monitoring. 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and financial performance 

3.1.1 Based on the objective and component structure, the Project is expected to generate benefits of 
different nature. Such benefits include: (i) increased yields; (ii) increased resilience to weather 

variability and shocks; (iii) reduced land degradation and soil rehabilitation; (iv) increased nutritional 

food availability at the household level from home-gardening activities; (v) additional income obtained 

from selling farm produce; and (vi) rural poverty reduction. Primary project beneficiaries are: (i) rural 

smallholder farmers in the selected counties producing rise and cassava, and involved in Farmer Field 

Schools (FFS); (ii) service providers and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). 
 

3.1.2 The target population was estimated to be around 11,740 households (HH). In order to avoid 
overlaps and double counting, this number has been disaggregated as follows for the use in the 

Economic and Financial Analysis: (i) 10,500 households from Component A “Support to enhancing 

smallholder agricultural productivity and market”; (ii) 1,240 households from Component B 

“Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building”.  

 

Table C.1: Key economic and financial figures 

NPV (base case) US$ 17.13 million 

EIRR (base case) 23.7% 

NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B6 
 

Economic analysis 

3.1.3 The period of analysis is 20 years to account for the phasing and gestation of the proposed 
interventions. Economic benefits from the farm and enterprise models have been aggregated using 

average incremental net benefits and beneficiaries for each agricultural and agri-business activities 



 

 12 

under the project interventions and assuming different adoption rates, extracted from the costing 

exercise. Economic benefits from enterprise models have been aggregated using an expected number 

of small enterprises to be supported by the project and for the agricultural models for the number of 

hectares. Benefits are phased-in progressively for all types of interventions.  

 

3.1.4 Economic costs associated with improving productivity and agri-business and small and medium 
enterprises were estimated at US$ 21.35 million. The economic costs have then been deducted from the 

overall economic benefit stream to obtain the project’s net incremental benefit stream. The economic 

analysis shows satisfactory results, with a Net Present Value at US$ 17.13 million and a 23.7% 

Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), suggesting that the overall project is economically profitable. 

 

3.1.5 Sensitivity analysis. Results were tested for sensitivity to variations in benefits and costs and 
for various lags in the realization of benefits. A delay of 2 years in the generation of benefits or a decline 

of 30% relative to the base scenario would reduce the EIRR to 18.5% and 18.8% respectively, 

substantially above the discount rate. Cost overruns would have very moderate impact, with EIRR 

falling to 20.2% with a 30% increase. An adoption rate of 70% would decrease the EIRR to 18.8%. All 

scenarios show robust results under all hypothetical scenarios. 

3.2. Environmental and Social impacts 

3.2.1 Environment 
 
3.2.1.1 The project is classified as Category 2 according to the AfDB Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) 

and as category B based on the Liberian EPA legislation (Environmental Protection and Management 

Law of the Republic of Liberia of 2003, and Environmental Protection Management agency procedural 

guidelines, 2006). This categorization is validated in ISTS2 and SAP3 by the Department of 

Environmental and Social Safeguards and Compliance (SNSC) on 20 May 2020, then confirmed in the 

approved PCN of 19 June 2020.The justification for categorization has been based on the medium E&S 

risk and the magnitude of the assessed negative impacts of the project. The project is not expected to 

involve land acquisition as the project will be executed on existing farms. Any likely impacts will be 

few, site-specific, largely reversible, and will readily be minimized by applying appropriate 

management and mitigation measures or incorporating internationally recognized design criteria and 

standards.  

 

3.2.1.2 Given the specific locations of the subprojects being unknown the project prepared a budgeted 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF - $419,000 reflected in the project costs) 

by the government of Liberia, reviewed and cleared by the AfDB and then disclosed by the Liberian 

Government on the website on January 15, 2021 and on January 21, 2021 by the AfDB on ISTS, with 

the authorization of the Liberian authorities. The Bank has ensured that the Borrower has carried out 

the public consultations in an adequate manner and the consultation minutes are annexed to the ESMF. 

The Borrower must prepare, submit for review to the Bank, and disclose Environmental and Social 

Impact Assessment (ESIA) reports for each physical investment sub-project once the locations are 

known. In addition, the Borrower must share with the Bank proof of the availability of funds for the 

implementation of the ESMFP and the ESMPs of the sub projects. The environmental permit that will 

be issued for each of these sub-projects will be shared with the Bank before the publication of each 

ESIA reports in ISTS. The NCO and the works contractors will have to implement the Grievance 

Redress Mechanism (GRM) proposed in the ESMF to ensure respect for the rights of populations and 

workers. The mid-term and final evaluation and an annual audit of the environmental and social 

performance of the project will be carried out by independent Consultants. Globally, the project is ready 

on the environmental and social aspects for its passage to the Board.  

 

 

 

 
2 ISTS: Integrated Safeguards Tracking System 
3 SAP: System of Applications and Products 



 

 13 

3.2.2 Climate Change 
The project has been screened for climate risks and categorized as a Category 2 operation, in line with 

Bank’s Climate Safeguards System (CSS). This means that the project may be vulnerable to climate 

risks and requires a review of climate change risks and adaptation activities. Practical risk management 

and adaptation options could be integrated into the project design and implementation plans. 

Agricultural production in Liberia is vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and change such 

as excessive rainfall in the coastal cities and high temperatures in the northern counties. Drought and 

floods are increasing in frequency and intensity, while average temperatures during the growing season 

are rising. Crop failures, reduction in productivity and outbreaks of pest and diseases are exacerbated 

by extreme climatic events. The project will also support technical and institutional capacity 

development for long-term climate resilience in agricultural sector in Liberia through various trainings 

on sustainable and climate smart agricultural practices and the mainstreaming of adaptation to climate 

change in national agricultural M&E and extension systems. This is not limited to government 

stakeholders, but also key private sector players, building community resilience to climate compatible 

agriculture and rural livelihoods, and research authorities to work in collaboration with project 

implementation team to carry out data collection and research to enhance policy and strategy on climate 

adaptation and low-carbon agricultural development practices. Overall, the project will facilitate 

climate resilience along the selected value chains by promoting climate smart agriculture including SRI, 

Sustainable land management, improved agriculture technologies 

 

3.2.3 Gender  
Liberia has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.651, ranking it 155 out of 162 countries in the 

2018 index. In Liberia, 11.7 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 18.5 percent of adult 

women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 39.6 percent of their male 

counterparts. 

Women are central to the development of rural areas and to national economies: Women account for 

60% of the agricultural labour force, contribute to 98% to food crop production and 76% of their work 

is directed at cash crop production (FAO, 2018). However, rural women and girls have restricted access 

to productive resources, such as land, agricultural inputs, finance and credit, extension services, and 

technology, which in turn limits agricultural output. They face more difficulty than men in gaining 

access to public services, social protection, employment opportunities, information, innovations and 

local and national markets and institutions, due to cultural norms and security issues.  

Unpaid care work further and gender-based violence hamper rural women’s ability to take advantage 

of on- and off-farm employment and new market opportunities in the agricultural sector. Their 

leadership and participation in producer organizations, decision making, and local governance remains 

low and rural and agricultural policies insufficiently address their needs and priorities. 
 

In addressing the above constraints, the Project will impact both women and men through (i) 

sensitization campaigns targeting women’s groups, especially in rural areas on training of women 

farmers on the elaboration of bankable proposals (ii) ensuring at least 50% representation of women in 

all capacity-building activities such as the Farmer Field Schools (FFS) and the improved nutrition 

capacity building activities (iii) Training of women as extension workers for the participatory famer 

advisory system (iv) strengthen the capacity of Ministry of Agriculture to ensure that the functioning of 

a Gender based M&E system adequately captures sex disaggregated data (v) strengthen the capacity ( 

training, equipment) of rural women’s farmer associations in the processing of rice, cassava and 

vegetables; (vi) link women farmers to marketing networks, particularly the national Market 

Information System; (vii) Information, Education and Communication on gender issues (Gender and 

agriculture, women participation in local development, Gender-based violence (GBV) to reduce gender 

stereotypes and violence (vii) involvement of a gender specialist in the Project Implementation Unit 

(ix) involvement of the Ministry in charge of Gender in the Project Coordination Unit. For all the above 

reasons, the project is categorized 2, according to the AfDB Gender Marker System. The annexed 

gender context analysis and action plan is providing more information. 

 

 



 

 14 

3.2.4 Fragility  

Liberia has experienced economic growth to some extent, but this growth has not always been shared 

equally across different groups of Liberians. Consequently, poverty is widespread and an estimated 51 

per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily concentrated. Rural areas reported 

higher food shortage (58.8 percent) than urban areas 44.2 percent (AfDB 2020 AEO). Liberia was 

crafted as an extractive, not developmental state that evolved institutional structures and practices that 

exploited the country’s natural wealth, initially around coastal areas and later into the interior, without 

providing public goods (social services and infrastructure) that benefit the indigenous majority. 

Economic diversification that focuses on agriculture that has the propensity to shift 

Liberia economy away from a single income source of extractive toward multiple sources from a 

growing range of sectors and markets is very limited. Many lack access to basic critical infrastructure 

and social services, and poor roads leave many areas inaccessible particularly during the wet season 

when the shortage of food becomes inevitable. Approximately 55 per cent of rural Liberian households 

is food insecure, (LISGIS 2018). The COVID-19 pandemic is already having devastating impacts on 

the Liberian economy. The impact is also being felt by the food and agriculture sector. According to 

the AfDB 2018 CRFA Report, an estimated 5.2% of Liberia’s total land area being arable but there is 

significant pressure to improve access to food and nutrition. 

 

The single greatest driver of fragility in Liberia is extensive and extreme poverty in a volatile post-war 

environment where expectations are high, as patience is waning amongst the youth who prefer to 

undertake quick-cash activities like artisanal mining, transportation and petty trade. Complicating this 

existing pressure and driver of fragility is the rapid urbanization of mainly the youth population 

migrating from rural to urban areas without requisite skills and education to seek gainful and sustainable 

employment. The youth perception of agriculture is “Something you do when you have nothing to do 

and is intended for older people.” It is difficult enough to persuade youth to enter the farming or the 

agriculture sector. Without technical support, many understandably avoid the sector altogether. Once 

some youth have agreed to enter the sector and received some training, the issue then becomes how best 

to deliver on-going support to new young farmers to help them to succeed. It will take enormous 

education and incentives (access to finance and etc) to change this mindset and perception of the youth 

in Liberia and many countries in transition. Youth lack of interest in the agriculture sector is particularly 

risky given their potential recruitment and mobilization into organized crimes and illegal activities. This 

has adverse implication on the peace and stability of the country owing to its history of war and low 

resilience capacity. According to the Bank 2019 CRFA Assessment, Liberia capacity score for the 

Security Dimension is as low as 2.4 which is consistent with rapid youth urbanization and surge. 

The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition Security builds on the foundation on 

the ASRP, SAPEC and Fish Town- Harper Road Projects for sustainability. The Project aimed at 

addressing drivers of fragility through enhancing smallholder agricultural productivity and market 

access and linkages by supporting Smallholder farmers and producers with modern marketing skills, 

market information, and requisite organizational capacity to increase their market share and 

profitability. The Project is intended to alleviate pre-harvest and post-harvest losses, increase industrial 

processing as inadequate feeder roads and access to market further restrict the linkage between potential 

producers and buyers. It will be mainly implemented in the same region (Southwestern) as the two 

previous Agriculture Projects and will complement the Fish Town- Harper Road Project.  

 

3.2.5 Involuntary resettlement 

 
There will be no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition as a result of the project. The major 

infrastructure related project activities are the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes, which will 

require the repair and stabilization of the water distribution canals. The interventions will be 

implemented on existing agricultural systems. 



 

 15 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

Implementation Arrangements  

The implementation arrangements for the project will follow the implementation model for the on-going 

GAFSP funded SAPEC project in the agriculture sector. The MOA will be the executing agency with 

implementation mainstreamed within its National Coordinating Office (NCO) to consolidate sector 

manpower capacity building for project implementation. The NCO will include key officers as follows: 

(i) Project Coordinator, (ii) Procurement Officer, (iii) Finance Officer, (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation 

Officer, (v) Irrigation Specialist, (vi) Food and Nutrition Officer, (vii) Agronomist and (viii) 

Environmental & Social Development Expert to support the national project coordinator the effective 

coordination of the project.  

 

The Government will provide full time staff to the NCO. These experts shall possess the experiences 

and qualifications acceptable by the Bank and will require the Bank’s prior approval. The appointment 

of project coordinator and accountant will be retained as a condition precedent to first disbursement. 

The day-to-day management of the project shall be the responsibility of the NCO under the technical 

guidance of MOA. At the county levels, the responsibility for delivery will rest with the County 

Agricultural Coordinators and District Agricultural coordinators. Planning, monitoring and evaluation 

will be done by the CACs working in conjunction with the NCO. The CAC will report to the Project 

Coordinator. The NCO will be assisted by Technical Assistance from FAO in the implementation of 

the Farmer Field Schools. For seed multiplication, quality control will be done by CARI with Technical 

Assistance from FAO. 

 

A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy guidance to the project. The 

PSC will be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of 

Agriculture and will comprise a representative (of not lower than the grade of Director) each from 

Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, Ministry of Public Works, Ministry of Local 

Government, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Gender, Social Protection & Children, Liberian 

Agriculture Commodity Regulatory Agency, Cooperative Development Agency, and Environmental 

Protection Agency. A representative from each Farmers Union of Liberia, Liberia Chamber of 

Commerce and National Civil Society Council of Liberia will also be in the PSC. The PSC shall ensure 

timely implementation and monitoring of audit recommendations and also be responsible for the overall 

strategic direction and oversight guidance of the project as well as approve key project documents 

(including annual work plans and budgets). 

 

Procurement Arrangements  

“Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of consulting 

services, financed by the Bank for the Project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and 

following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried 

out the following: (i) Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Procurement through National Competitive 

Bidding (NCB) and shopping procedures will be carried out using BPS comprising its Laws and 

Regulations (Public Procurement Concessions Act (PPCA) of 2005 which was amended and reinstated 

in year 2010 , using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) agreed during project 

negotiations” for various group of transactions to be indicated under the project, detailed in annexes of 

this report and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement; and (ii) Bank Procurement Policy 

and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard Solicitation 

Documents (SDDs), will be used for Open Competitive Bidding International (OCB-I) and Limited 

International Bidding (LIB) or Restricted Competitive Bidding contracts for both goods and works and 

Acquisition of Consulting Services as indicated in the relevant Annex of this document.  

 

Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 



 

 16 

and Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been factored in the entire procurement arrangements 

of the project. 

 

Financial management  

 

The existing financial management system will be used to manage the fiduciary arrangements of the 

proposed project. The project FM system will be handled by an experienced chartered accountant (to 

be deployed or competitively recruited) who is proficient in the use of an accounting software with 

hands-on experience in donor funded projects accounting and financial reporting. The Project 

Accountant (PA) will report to the Project Coordinator and under the guidance of the overall NCO 

Financial Management Specialist report to the Comptroller at the MOA (for consolidation of the 

Ministry’s financial reports). The PA will be assisted by an Accounts Assistant (deployed from the 

MOA) for capacity building and sustainability. The Accounts Assistant shall be partly qualified with a 

bachelor’s degree in accounting (or higher) and practical experience on donor funded projects. The PA 

will use the existing Tompro accounting software to record, process project transactions and prepare 

financial reports. The Project will adopt International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) 

Cash Basis in harmony with the accounting standards applied by the Government of Liberia (GoL) and 

other MOA NCO managed projects.  

 

A bespoke Financial Management Manual (FMM) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) shall be 

developed from the existing manuals to codify FM practices and guide project implementation, 

respectively. On a quarterly basis the PA will produce un-audited interim financial reports (IFRs) from 

Tompro, for the benefit of MOA and shared with the Bank within forty-five (45) days after the end of 

each quarter. The project financial statements at end of each financial year shall be audited and the audit 

reports submitted to the Bank no later than six (6) months after the end of each financial year. The 

content of the IFRs and annual financial statements have been agreed and shall be discussed in detail at 

project launching. The existing internal control and administrative procedures appear adequate and shall 

be implemented for the execution of the project. The internal auditor responsible for MOA-NCO 

projects in collaboration with the MOA internal audit function shall provide internal checks and 

periodically review project operations to strengthen the project control environment. The internal 

auditor will report to the PSC (in existence, chaired by the Minister of Agriculture) through the NCO 

Coordinator. The overall FM risk is assessed as moderate. 

 

4.1.2 Disbursement: The following four (4) disbursement methods are used by the Bank in 

disbursing funds to projects: (i) Direct payments; (ii) Payments through Special Account (SA); (iii) 

Reimbursement method; (iv) and Reimbursement by guarantee. Direct payments will be used for the 

payments against larger contracts signed between project management and contractors/suppliers/ 

service providers. The Special Account (SA) method will be used in paying for eligible recurrent 

expenses and smaller contracts only under GAFSP funding. This will require the opening of a dedicated 

USD denominated special account at a Commercial Bank in Liberia acceptable to the Bank. 

Reimbursements will be made for eligible expenses for goods, works, services and operating expenses 

already incurred and paid for by the GoL from its own resources. Under the Reimbursement guarantee 

method, the Bank shall provide an irrevocable undertaking to reimburse a commercial bank for 

payments made or to be made to a beneficiary against a letter of credit (for imported goods). All 

disbursements will follow with the disbursement’s procedures outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement 

Handbook 2020. 

 

4.1.3 Audit arrangements: The Auditor General Auditing Commission (GAC) of Liberia will audit 

the annual financial statements of the project or outsource the audit (using its outsourcing guidelines) 

to a private independent audit firm through a competitive recruitment process, acceptable to the Bank. 

The audit will be conducted in accordance with audit terms of reference (TOR) acceptable to the Bank. 

The audit reports (comprising of the audited financial statements with the auditor’s opinion and related 

management letter) must be submitted to the Bank no later than six (6) months after the end of each 

financial year. The audit cost shall be paid for from project resources. The assessment noted that Bank 



 

 17 

funded projects managed under the MOA have consistently complied with the submission of their 

annual reports to the Bank.   

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 The basic tool for monitoring and evaluation of this project is the logical framework that details 

the impact, effect and product measurement indicators aligned to GAFSP core indicators. The project 

monitoring and evaluation officer who will be recruited after approval by the Bank of his qualifications 

and experience will be placed under the authority of the coordinator. He/she will be responsible for the 

monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the implementation of the ESMP. He/she will also 

be responsible for establishing a diagnosis and baseline situation for the project as well as developing 

specific tools for planning and data collection. 

  

4.2.2 The NCO will be required to provide the Bank with a quarterly report showing progress in 

implementing the approved program and annual budget. This report should include the following 

information for each activity: the physical objectives, the level of achievement and the explanation of 

any discrepancies, the expected costs and actual costs, and the explanations of any discrepancies, the 

financial data of the project. The Bank will carry out two (2) supervisory missions per year to assess 

progress in terms of realization of products and effects as well as administrative and financial 

performance. The mission will then make recommendations to improve project implementation. A 

performance status report will be written after each supervision mission. 

4.3. Governance 

The Government of Liberia has formulated a National Aid and NGO Policy in 2020 to improve the 

effectiveness of aid, mobilize aid in a coordinated way with a wider reach, produce more visible results, 

collaborate more closely with NGOs, and serve as a reference for the Government of Liberia and 

Development Partners in the management of official development assistance. This policy provides an 

enabling environment for implementation of the project. 

 

This National Aid and NGO Policy will lead to better exploitation of the potential of the agriculture 

sector. With reference to sector-specific governance issues, policy, institutional and structural issues 

are also being addressed. For instance, the Government of Liberia recently passed the Seed 

Development and Certification Act. This is one of the major first steps in advancing the governance of 

seed sector in the country. 

 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Liberia, the existing governance practices and 

controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of the Project requires good governance 

at all levels from the national to County to District levels. This is in relation to better responsiveness, 

transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement 

has been designed to ensure good governance and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project 

objectives. 

4.4. Sustainability  

The ownership of the project is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders played during 

formulation and preparation of the Project. The intense interest of the Minister of Agriculture in this 

project was made manifest during the design and preparation of the project. The irrigation schemes will 

be managed by farmers’ organizations and technical sustainability will be assured since they will 

finance the recurrent costs based on generated funds. The group strengthening and capacity 

development will build the capacity of the farmers’ organizations to be able to manage the facilities. 

 

Farmers remain challenged when attempting to improve and adapt to productive farming methods, 

especially when access to improved inputs and markets remains a key issue. In this respect, the project 

benefits from lessons from past projects by aiming to instill a critical number of master trainer capacity 

within the selected counties, by training at least two FFS master trainers in each county. This would 

build a degree of momentum through the FFS approach, to propel farmers into becoming more 

productive in selected value chains, while becoming custodians of community acquired knowledge and 



 

 18 

information developed within their groups. Community embedded facilitators will enable the 

knowledge to remain a perpetual force for learning and discovery among the farming communities, 

from generation to generation.  

 

The sustainable multiplication of selected seeds will ensure continuity in farmer access to quality seeds 

for production. The project will fund capacity building of beneficiaries which will increase the 

knowledge base and guarantee sustainability.  

4.5. Risk management 

SN Identified Risks  Mitigation measures  

 

 

1 

Project benefits captured by local elites due 

to weak participation / political 

influence 

 

- Publish and publicize selection criteria for transparent beneficiary 

selection 

- Publish beneficiary lists in public places and online 

- Increase beneficiary sensitization on the project 

2 Mechanization centres and irrigation 
systems are not well maintained or 

underutilized  

 

.-Ownership of machinery will remain with FBOs with sufficient time 

for oversight of operations by the project team 

- Build capacity of FBOs in operation and maintenance. 

-WUAs will be formed to take responsibilities for irrigation 

infrastructure  

3 Farmers discontinue using inputs after the 
initial farming cycle 

 

Heightened awareness of the importance of nutrition 

FFS help farmers to become custodians of local farming knowledge 

4 Difficulty in maintaining equipment. 
 

Initiate a cost-recovery model to cover operational and maintenance 

cost 

5 Implementing agencies limited by technical 
and operational capacities 

- Train project staff on project objectives, activities and 

implementation arrangements among development partners 

6 Climate risks: droughts, dry spells, floods, 
etc.  

-Promote climate-resilient Agricultural and sustainable land 

management Practices 

-Mainstream adaptation to climate change in M&E and 

extension/advisory system 

4.6. Knowledge building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Knowledge enhancement is foreseen on 

the evolving concept of decentralized implementation unit located in the Counties; the role of value 

chain actors including farmers and farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial 

and public sector. Knowledge will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, 

mid-term reports, and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within 

and outside the production areas. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the 

Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on the Bank 

website, etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information 

sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, share 

knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension agents. This 

will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access to the disseminated 

knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports from FAO will introduce and consolidate 

knowledge and skills and facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the community and national 

levels. 



 

 19 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument  

GAFSP Grant and ADF Grant to the Republic of Liberia.  

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 

o Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force: The Protocol of Agreement for the ADF Grant and 
the Grant Agreement for the GAFSP Grant shall enter into force on the date of signature by the 

Recipient, the Fund and the Bank respectively.  
 

o Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank and the Fund to make 
the first disbursement of the Grant shall be conditional upon entry into force of the GAFSP and 

ADF Grant Financing Agreements and the following conditions, namely, the Recipient shall have 

provided evidence in form and substance acceptable to the Fund and the Bank: 
 

(i)  Submission of evidence for the recruitment of the Project Coordinator and the Project 
Accountant for the project implementation unit with qualifications and terms of reference 

acceptable to the Bank and the Fund.  
 

Conditions Precedent to Disbursements for Works. Subject to the provisions of Entry into Force) 

and Condition Precedent to First Disbursement, the obligation of the Bank and Fund to disburse the 

Grant for works that involve the use of an Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) shall 

be subject to the satisfaction of the following additional conditions by the Recipient:  

 

(a) Submission of the site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (“ESIA”) and 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (“ESMP”) for each works prepared in accordance 

with the ESMF and the Bank’s Safeguards Policies, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank; 

and 

 

(b) Submission of the evidence of approval of the site-specific ESIA and ESMP by the competent 

national authority of the Recipient. 

 

Undertakings:  

 

The Recipient shall, and shall cause the Executing Agency and any of its contractors or agents to 

provide: 

 

(a) Submission of evidence of the recruitment or designation or appointment of the relevant NCO staff 

with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund and the Bank not later than six 

(6) months after entry into force of this Agreement; and  

 

(b) Submit evidence of the establishment of the Project Steering Committee with membership and 

composition acceptable to the Fund not later than six (6) months after the entry into force of this 

Agreement. 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

VI – RECOMMENDATION 

 
Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed GAFSP grant of US$ 8.2 

million and ADF 15 grant of UA 0.3 million to the Government of Liberia for the purpose of 

implementing the project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report.



 

I 

 

Appendix I. Liberia’s comparative socio-economic indicators  

 

Year Liberia
West 

Africa
Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2020 96 5,115 30,067 94,557
Total Population (millions) 2020 5.1 397.2 1,338.8 6,437.7
Urban Population (% of Total) 2020 52.6 47.6 43.8 50.8
Population Density (per Km²) 2020 52.5 78.9 45.6 67.2
GNI per Capita (US $) 2019  580 1 677 1 843 5 093
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2020 72.7 57.7 61.3 58.3
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2019 72.0 57.1 55.8 45.9
Sex Ratio (per 100 female) 2020 101.1 101.4 99.9 106.9
Human Develop. Index (Rank among 189 countries) 2019 175 ... ... …
Popul. Living Below $ 1.90 a  Day (% of Population) 2007-18 44.4 36.0 34.4 …

Demographic Indicators

Population Growth Rate   - Total (%) 2020 2.4 2.7 2.5 1.2
Population Growth Rate   - Urban (%) 2020 3.5 4.0 3.6 2.3
Population < 15 years  (%) 2020 40.4 43.2 40.4 27.4
Population 15-24 years (%) 2020 20.1 19.7 19.3 16.3
Population >= 65 years  (%) 2020 3.3 2.8 3.5 7.3
Dependency Ratio (%) 2020 77.6 85.1 78.1 54.6
Female Population 15-49 years (% of total population) 2020 24.2 23.4 24.2 25.1
Life Expectancy at Birth - Total (years) 2020 64.4 58.4 63.8 71.0
Life Expectancy at Birth - Female (years) 2020 65.8 59.5 65.6 73.2
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2020 32.4 36.4 32.6 19.7
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2020 7.3 9.8 7.8 7.3
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1,000) 2019 62.2 63.3 47.9 30.6
Child Mortality Rate (per 1,000) 2019 84.6 98.2 69.5 41.0
Total Fertility Rate (per woman) 2020 4.2 5.0 4.3 2.6
Maternal Mortality Rate (per 100,000) 2017 661.0 704.7 432.3 231.0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2020 31.9 25.5 39.1 59.1

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Physicians (per 100,000 people) 2010-18 3.8 25.1 33.4 127.9
Nurses and midwives (per 100,000 people) 2010-18 53.2 98.7 107.8 247.6
Births attended by Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-18 61.1 54.2 64.7 79.4
Peop.  Using at least basic drinking water services (% of Pop.) 2017 72.9 69.8 66.3 87.7
Peop.  Using at least basic sanitation services (% of Population) 2017 17.0 32.5 40.3 68.4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Living with HIV/AIDS 2019 1.5 1.3 3.1 ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2019 308.0 170.2 198.2 152.0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2019 84.0 76.8 81.0 88.0
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2019 85.0 65.9 71.9 84.9
Underweight Children (% of children under 5 years) 2010-19 10.5 25.6 18.1 14.5
Prevalence of stunding 2010-19 34.6 36.4 32.4 23.6
Prevalence of undernourishment (% of pop.) 2018 37.5 13.1 15.1 9.7
Current health expenditure (% of GDP) 2018 6.7 4.1 5.2 5.4

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary School       -   Total 2010-20 85.1 89.4 101.0 101.6
      Primary School       -   Female 2010-20 84.7 87.3 98.8 100.5
      Secondary School  -   Total 2010-20 37.9 50.3 53.5 72.4
      Secondary School  -   Female 2010-20 32.9 42.9 50.5 72.1
Primary School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-20 18.5 41.7 49.2 63.7
Adult literacy Rate - Total (%) 2010-18 48.3 51.9 67.9 84.3
Adult literacy Rate - Male (%) 2010-18 67.7 71.1 73.5 88.4
Adult literacy Rate - Female (%) 2010-18 34.1 42.1 61.7 80.2
Gouvernment expenditure on Education (% of GDP) 2010-19 2.6 3.9 4.8 4.1

Environmental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2016 5.2 17.0 8.0 11.3
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2016 28.0 48.9 38.2 38.3
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2016 43.1 9.2 13.2 31.9
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2016 0.3 0.5 1.1 3.4

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (% of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (% of female population ages 15+) 

March 2021

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

2
0
0

0

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

2
0
1

6

2
0
1

7

2
0
1

8

2
0
1

9

Infant M ortality Rate
( Pe r 1000 )

Li ber ia Af r ica

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

2
0
0

0

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

2
0
1

6

2
0
1

7

2
0
1

8

2
0
1

9

GNI Pe r Capita US $

Li ber ia Af r ica

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

6.0

2
0

0
0

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

2
0

1
7

2
0

1
8

2
0

1
9

2
0

2
0

Population Growth Rate (%)

Li ber ia Af r ica

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0
0

0

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

2
0
1

6

2
0
1

7

2
0
1

8

2
0
1

9

2
0
2

0

Life  Expe ctancy at Birth 
(ye ars)

Li ber ia Af r ica



 

II 

 

Appendix II. Table of ADB’s portfolio in the country 
 

 
Liberia: Approved & ongoing Portfolio as at August 4, 2020 

  Project Name 
Date 

Approved 

Closing 

Date  

Amount 

Approved 

(M UA) 

Amount 

Disbursed 

(M UA) 

Financing 

Source/Instru. 

Agriculture and Rural Development     38.05    

1 
Smallholder Agriculture Productivity Enhancement 

and Commercialization Project (SAPEC) 
02.05.2012 29.06.2021 37.33 32.80 

ADF Loan 

GASFP Grant 

2 
Scaling up the Participation of SMEs in the 

Secondary Wood Processing Industry 
14.09.2018 30.06.2021 0.72 0.15 FAPA Grant 

Power/Energy     80.38   

3 CLSG-Rural Electrification -Liberia 06.11.2013 30.12.2021 17.96 0.50 
ADF Loan 

TSF Grant 

4 CLSG Electricity Interconnection Project  06.11.2013 31.12.2021 8.10 2.89 ADF Loan 

5 Liberia Energy Efficiency and Access Project 13.12.2016 30.06.2022 30.72 4.30 

ADF/NTF/TSF  

Loan 

EU-AITF/GEF  

Grant 

6 Renewable Energy for the Electrification of Liberia 31.10.2019 30.06.2025 23.60 0 ADF/SREP 

Social     0.155   

7 
Technical Advisory Assistance and Capacity 

Building support to the Liberia Revenue Authority 
05.11.2018 30.12.2020 0.155 0.02 TSF Grant 

Transport     164.38   

8 Paving Fishtown - Harper Road Phase I 04.09.2013 31.12.2020 42.04 28.60 
TSF Grant 

ADF/NTF Loan 

9 
MRU Road Development and Transport 

Facilitation Project – Phase I  
18.12.2014 30.06.2022 52.08 35.30 ADF/TSF Loan  

10 
MRU Road Development and Transport 

Facilitation Project – Phase I- additional Loan 
03.06.2015 30.06.2022 24.80 14.00 ADF Loan 

11 
MRU – Road Development and Transport 

Facilitation Project Phase II 
19.09.2018 31.06.2023 45.46 4.20 

ADF/TSF/ EIB 

Loan 

TSF/EU Grant  
Multisector- Governance, Technical Assistance and 

Capacity Building 
    19.13   

12 
Institutional Support for the Integrated Public 

Finance Management Project Phase II 
30.01.2017 31.12.2020 6.26 2.10 

ADF/TSF 

Grant 

13 
Technical and Capacity Building Assistance project 

to the Government of Liberia 
13.09.2018 31.03.2021 1.0 0.40 TSF Grant 

14 
Liberia Youth Entrepreneurship and Employment 

Project 
04.05.2016 30.03.2021 1.72 1.30 

TSF/FAPA  

Grant 

15 
Multi-Country Covid-19 Crisis Response 

Programme- Liberia 
24/07/2020  10.15 0 

ADF/TSF 

Grant 

 
TOTAL (UA million) 

  302.95 
126.56 

(41.89%) 
 

 TOTAL (USD million)   417 175  

  



 

III 

 

Appendix III. Map of Liberia 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

IV 

 

 

Appendix IV. Progress Toward Achieving the SDGS 

2000
1

2010
2

2020
3

... 69.0 41.0

... ... 50.9

... 73.1 47.6

... 67.8 39.9

Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved 

nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

35.9 32.2 37.5

45.3 39.0 30.1

0.0 0.0 0.0

2 14 23

Maternal mortality ratio 816 708 661

Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (%) 50.9 46.3 61.1

129.1 100.8 84.6

404.6 345.8 361.5

... ... ...

... ... ...

... 1.2 1.1

... 0 1

5.3 12.5 12.3

... ... 89.2

... ... 82.6

0.3 0.3 0.3

0.20 0.20 0.19

0.9 7.7 47.0

... 5.1 21.5

5.0 5.0 5.0

87.7 88.6 85.0

Annual growth rate of real GDP per capita (%) 2.6 3.5 -1.2

... 3.3 2.3

... 2.1 3.3

Proportion of youth not in education, employment or training (%) ... 24 13

Sources  :     ADB Statistics Department Database;   last update :

United Nations Statistical Division, Online Database on Sustainable Development Goals (https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/).

Note  :    n,a, : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available,

April 2021

1
 Latest year available in the period 2000-2005;  

2
 Latest year available in the period 2006-2010;  

3
 Latest year available in the period 2011-2020

Renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption (%)

Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and 

productive employment and decent work for all

Unemployment rate, (aged 15-24) (%)

Unemployment rate, (aged 25 & over) (%)

Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

Proportion of population with access to electricity (%)

Proportion of population with primary reliance on clean fuels and technology (%)

Level of water stress: freshwater withdrawal as a proportion of available freshwater resources (%)

Water body extent (permanent) (% of total land area)

Total official development assistance for water supply and sanitation (Millions of Constant 2018 

US$)

Proportion of women who make their own informed decisions regarding contraceptive use (% of 

women aged 15-49 years)

Proportion of women who make their own informed decisions regarding reproductive health care 

(% of women aged 15-49 years)

Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

Total official flows for scholarships (Millions of Constant 2018 US$)

Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (% of total number of seats)

Proportion of children and young people at the end of primary achieving a minimum proficiency 

level in: Reading (%)

Proportion of children and young people at the end of primary achieving  a minimum proficiency 

level in: Maths (%)

Gender parity index of trained teachers, primary (ratio)

Under-five mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births)

Malaria incidence (per 1,000 population)

Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning 

opportunities for all

Agriculture orientation index for government expenditures

Total official flows for agriculture (Millions of Constant 2018 US$)

Goal 3:  Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

Employed population below the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day, aged 25 and over  

(%)

Prevalence of undernourishment (%)

Proportion of children moderately or severely stunted (%)

Proportion of population living below the international poverty line of US$ 1.90 (PPP) per day

Proportion of population living below the national poverty line (%)

Employed population below the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day, aged 15-24  (%)

Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

2005 2010 2018

Prevalence of undernourishment 
(% )

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

2005 2010 2019

Under-five mortality rate, 
(per 1000 live births)                                     

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

2005 2010 2018

Annual growth rate of real GDP per 
capita (%)

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

2005 2010 2020

Proportion of seats held by women in 
national parliaments (% of total 

number of seats)

0

5

10

15

20

25

... 2010 2017

Proportion of population with access 
to electricity (%)



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMPLIANCE NOTE 

(ESCON) 
                              AFRICAN DEVELOPPEMENT BANK GROUP 

 

A. Basic Information1 

Project Title: Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition Security Project ‘’SAP code’’:  P-LR-AA0-010  

Country: Liberia Lending Instrument2: DI   FI   CL   BS   GU   RPA   EF   RBF  

Project Sector: AGRICULTURE Task Team Leader: Mark EGHAN 

Appraisal date: July 2020 Estimated Approval Date: 26.02.2021 

Environmental Safeguards Officer: Cheumani Noudjieu Charlotte 

Social Safeguards Officer: / 

Environmental and Social Category: 2 Categorization date: May 20, 2020 Operation type: SO   NSO   PBO  

Is this project processed under rapid responses to crises and emergencies?   Yes     No  

Is this project processed under a waiver to the Integrated Safeguards System? Yes     No  

 

B. Disclosure and Compliance Monitoring 
B.1 Mandatory disclosure 

Environmental Assessment/Audit/System/Others (specify: Environmental and Social Safeguard Management - ESMF) 

Was/Were the document (s) disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes       No        NA         

Date of "in-country" disclosure by the borrower/client January 15, 2021 

Date of receipt, by the Bank, of the authorization to disclose January 7, 2021 

Date of disclosure by the Bank January 21, 2021 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Others (specify: ………………………………………………………………….) 

Was/Were the document (s) disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes       No        NA  

Date of "in-country" disclosure by the borrower/client [Date] 

Date of receipt, by the Bank, of the authorization to disclose [Date] 

Date of disclosure by the Bank [Date] 

Vulnerable Peoples Plan/Framework/Others (specify: ……………….……………….………………………………...) 

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes        No      NA    

Date of "in-country" disclosure by the borrower/client [Date] 

Date of receipt, by the Bank, of the authorization to disclose [Date] 

Date of disclosure by the Bank [Date] 

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, as per the country’s legislation, please explain why: NA. 

 

B.2. Compliance monitoring indicators 

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation 

of measures related to safeguard policies? 

Yes     No  NA    

Have costs related to environmental and social measures, including for the running of the grievance redress 

mechanism, been included in the project cost? 

Yes     No  NA    

Is the total amount for the full implementation for the Resettlement of affected people, as integrated in the 

project costs, effectively mobilized and secured? 

Yes     No  NA    

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 

measures related to safeguard policies? 

Yes     No  NA    

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 

reflected in the project legal documents? 

Yes   No  NA    

 

C. Clearance 

Is the project compliant to the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards requirements, and to be submitted to the Board?

                 Yes        No    

Prepared by: Name Signature Date 

Environmental Safeguards Officer: Cheumani Noudjieu Charlotte  February 2, 2021 

Social Safeguards Officer: / / 

Task Team Leader: Mark EGHAN 03 February 2021 

Submitted by:  

Sector Director: Martin FREGENE 

 

 

 

16.02.2021 

Cleared by:  

 

Director SNSC: 

 

Maman-Sani ISSA 

 

 

19.02.2021 

 

 
1
 Note: This ESCON shall be appended to project appraisal reports/documents before Senior Management and/or Board approvals. 

2 DI=Direct Investment; FI=Financial Intermediary; CL=Corporate Loan; BS=Budget Support; GU=Guarantee; RPA=Risk Purchase 
Agreement; EF=Equity Financing; RBF=Results Based Financing. 





