













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 
 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 1 of 23  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 2 of 23  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

OECS Countries P158958 OECS Regional Agriculture 
Competitiveness Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 06-Feb-2017 25-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines, Grenada 

SVG - Ministry of 
Economic Planning, 
Sustainable Development, 
Industry, Information and 
Labour, Grenada - 
Ministry of Finance & 
Energy, SVG - Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry, 
Fisheries and Rural 
Transformation, Grenada 
- Ministry of Agriculture, 
Lands, Forestry and 
Fisheries. 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for competitively 
selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in Grenada and St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines. 
 
Components 

Support for Preparation of Business Plans 
Implementation of Business Plans 
General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development    1.80  

International Development Association (IDA)    6.50  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 3 of 23  

 

 

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    1.36  

Total Project Cost    9.66  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

The small and open countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
1
 have 

traditionally encountered serious development challenges, coupled with low growth, high debt, and 
limited fiscal space to maneuver around these problems. Agricultural exports and tourism drove 
growth of roughly 6 percent per year on average in OECS economies the 1980s, but growth and external 
trade began to decline in the late 1990s, after the European Union (EU) withdrew preferential access for 
traditional OECS agricultural exports (bananas and sugar).

2
 Efforts to revive growth and offset 

exogenous shocks through increased public investment engendered a large public debt and stifled 
private investment. The global financial crisis in 2008 heavily curbed tourism, remittances, and financial 
sector activity, while sharply increasing public debt and fiscal imbalances. OECS countries recorded a 
cumulative drop in output of 6 percent during 2009–12; at the same time, periodic natural disasters 
continued to batter their infrastructure and economies. OECS economies started to recuperate recently 
through a steady recovery in tourism and the United States economy. The regional growth forecast for 
2017 is positive, based on improving performance in key sectors (tourism, construction, agriculture) and 
lower fuel prices. Over the medium term, average growth for the region is expected to accelerate to 
about 2.5 percent. 

OECS countries have not reduced poverty and unemployment rates to levels compatible with their per 
capita income levels. Official poverty rates are 30.2 percent in Saint Vincent & the Grenadines (SVG) and 
37.7 percent in Grenada; poverty is concentrated in rural areas.

3
 The financial crisis and reduced 

demand for OECS exports and services have aggravated unemployment, which was already high. 
Unemployment (now 10.2 percent in Grenada and 18.8 percent in SVG) is higher among youth, 
exceeding 30 percent in both countries. Female-headed households, which account for two-thirds of all 
households in the OECS, are more likely to be poor.  

                                                           
1
 Established in 1981, this inter-governmental organization promotes economic harmonization and integration, human and 

legal rights, and good governance. It has seven founding and full members (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, 
Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines) and two associate members (Anguilla and the 
British Virgin Islands—British Overseas Territories). Martinique (France) joined in 2015 but is not represented by the OECS 
diplomatic mission.  
2
Governed by the Lomé Convention (1975) and its successor, the Cotonou Agreement, these trade arrangements included 

special protocols for EU imports of bananas and sugar. The EU initiated reforms for banana imports in 1999 and sugar in 2006.  
3
Specific figures on rural poverty are not readily available, but government studies and agricultural sector reviews reveal that 

most poor people in the OECS reside in rural areas. 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 4 of 23  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Agriculture is a critical element for improving rural incomes, employment, and food security for OECS 
countries and farmers, however, it has not adapted rapidly to the changing trade regime. For example, 
SVG’s banana exports declined significantly; Grenada’s banana exports collapsed, and its nutmeg and 
cocoa production were devastated by Hurricanes Ivan (September 2004) and Emily (July 2005). 
Consequently, agriculture’s contribution to GDP, which was 13.4 percent in Grenada and 21.2 percent in 
SVG in 1990, was 5.4 percent in Grenada and 7.5 percent in SVG two decades later. The fact that 
agriculture remains a major contributor to employment, representing about 11 percent of the labor 
force in Grenada and 26 percent in SVG, indicates a persistent productivity problem.  

OECS agriculture could drive sustained gains in employment and income, while reducing dependence 
on imported food, if strategic investments are made to improve agricultural productivity and increase 
access to markets. Investment opportunities exist along the two main pathways for developing 
agriculture: import substitution and export expansion. For instance, Grenada produces nutmeg and 
cocoa of exceptional quality, in high demand internationally. Each product has only one principal 
exporter (public rather than private—the Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association and Grenada Cocoa 
Association), but the market for processing these products is open, and Grenada has two chocolate 
factories and a plant to produce medicines from nutmeg. Nutmeg and mace still lead Grenada’s 
agricultural exports, and it has also had success exporting soursop, citrus fruits, cloves, ginger, 
cinnamon, and fish, while agro-processing (pepper sauces, jams, juices) is becoming more important for 
the export market. SVG has started to export eddoes and dasheen (taro), arrowroot starch, roots and 
tubers, ginger, coconuts, spices, pineapples, and peppers, mostly to regional markets and the United 
Kingdom (UK). However, key investments are required to increase competitiveness to gain extended and 
sustainable access to regional and international markets. 

Local produce could potentially substitute for some imported produce in the tourism sector as well as 
in local and regional markets. Agricultural imports have increased in volume, variety, and value as 
tourism, supermarkets, and incomes have grown. The volume of OECS agricultural imports—mainly 
meat (especially poultry), cereals, and dairy products—is now about four times higher than the volume 
of agricultural exports. The World Bank estimates that 68 percent of food demand from the tourism 
sector is met through imports, representing around 20 percent of OECS agricultural imports. Locally 
produced fruits and vegetables appear to have the greatest import substitution potential, given high 
local demand, competitive production costs (in some cases), high perishability of these products, their 
ability to grow in most OECS countries, and their suitability for production even on small farms. Apart 
from hotels, the expanding yachting and supermarket sectors offer opportunities for local food 
producers. The freshness of local produce, as well as of fish and seafood, and better transport times and 
costs represent major advantages and opportunities for local farmers and fishermen where 
supermarkets and hotels will pay a premium for freshness. While for some locally grown products the 
cost of production is simply too high to compete with imported products, in some cases local fresh 
produce has the potential to be competitive.

4
 

A major consideration in this context is that the peak agricultural season is out of sync with the peak 
tourism season, impacting food demand, availability, and prices. Local demand for high-quality food 
peaks in mid-December to mid-April, the high season for tourism in the Caribbean, and falls 
precipitously afterward. On the other hand, agricultural production peaks in the wet season (June–

                                                           
4
 Jansen, Hans, Adam Stern, and Eli Weiss (2015), “Linking Farmers and Agro-processors to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern 

Caribbean,” Report No. ACS16280, World Bank, Washington, DC. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taro
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrowroot


 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 5 of 23  

 

November, coinciding with the hurricane season), which is becoming less predictable and drier with 
climate change. During the December–May dry season, the absence of intensive irrigation to sustain 
horticultural production significantly reduces the consistent supply of local produce. Owing to the lack of 
storage facilities and farmers’ tendency to produce the same products at the same time, the oversupply 
of certain crops in the wet season leads to food losses, lower food prices, and declining farm revenue. 
Key strategic investments to ensure a sustained supply all through the year, to promote proper storage, 
and to diversify markets, seem to be essential for the sector to develop.  

In sum, the main barrier to purchasing more local produce is the limited ability of local farmers to 
deliver the required quantity and quality of produce in a timely, consistent, and competitive manner. 
Most farms are small and lack the inputs, equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills 
(including production planning, crop management knowledge, and post-harvest handling capacity) to 
become reliable suppliers. Hotels belonging to large international chains prefer to purchase in bulk from 
Miami to get guaranteed quantities and volume discounts, rather than to deal with the uncertainty of 
sourcing large quantities locally from many small farmers. Recently established large hotels received 
government concessions to import duty free. Lacking such options, small and medium-sized hotels 
purchase from multiple local farmers and other sources to meet demand, which can be time consuming. 
They benefit from greater freshness (produce typically is picked and transported to hotels on the same 
day) and lower transport times and costs, but must cope with the inconsistent quantity and quality of 
produce, as well as the limited variety and overall quantity.  

The rudimentary market structure for fresh produce, including the lack of aggregation of smallholder 
supplies, results in suboptimal market performance. The limited aggregation of produce reduces 
smallholders’ access to assured and remunerative markets (and a more stable income), complicates 
buyers’ purchasing operations, and creates a disincentive to buy locally. Virtually all marketing of fresh 
local produce in OECS countries is done by individual farmers, and until they harvest, many do not know 
where or to whom they will sell. OECS countries have few producer or marketing organizations to 
remedy these problems, and such organizations generally suffer from financial problems, unstable and 
limited membership, side-selling, and mistrust. An added complication is that the public sector (typically 
ministries of agriculture) actively purchase and market produce through marketing boards that typically 
run at a loss, fail to provide remunerative prices to farmers, and crowd out private marketing activity. 
Poor communication and coordination between supply and demand complicate the planning of farm 
production and create uncertainty for buyers and sellers. 

The agro-processing industry is not well developed. Several small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
produce a range of products, but difficulties in obtaining financing on affordable terms limit the 
investments in infrastructure, equipment, and inputs required to scale up and generate consistent 
profits. Many agribusiness entrepreneurs lack technical skills and knowledge to develop viable business 
plans, make the required investments, develop a network of reliable farmer-suppliers, and comply with 
the quality, food safety, and certification standards enabling them to penetrate profitable markets. The 
food processing industry cannot absorb all the produce offered, yet at the same time processors cannot 
obtain consistent supplies of quality produce. This mismatch between local production and industry 
demand, while partly related to seasonality, is mainly an organizational and marketing problem. As in 
marketing, in agro-processing public sector initiatives (largely unsuccessful) have crowded out the 
private sector.  

A combined production-marketing system, based on private sector aggregators of smallholder 
produce and agro-processors, could address most of these constraints and improve international 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 6 of 23  

 

competitiveness. Promising models are based on aggregation by private sector actors, who purchase 
from small-scale producers and give them a market for their produce. Apart from aggregating, storing, 
and marketing produce, aggregators can add value to certain products through basic activities such as 
washing, packaging and cutting, and can potentially offer support and services for producers (planting 
material, agro-chemicals, technical advice). Some producer organizations in Grenada and SVG could 
possibly act as aggregators and should be supported to do so, but they cannot succeed alone. Private 
actors—traders, wholesalers, or even larger (lead) farmers—need to step in and assume the required 
organizational and aggregation roles. Agro-processors can adopt the same model, in which smallholder 
farmers produce in accord with a plan agreed with the processor and embodied in a written contract.  

The Productive Alliance (PA) methodology, successfully tested in several projects in the LAC region, 
could help to resolve major constraints on producers’ access to markets. The PA methodology, 
introduced during the early 2000s in Latin America and more recently to other regions, engages with the 
private sector to enable smallholders to meet market demand for produce in terms of quantity, quality, 
and timeliness. The traditional PA approach involves three core agents: a group of smallholder 
producers, one or more buyers, and the public sector, while more advanced versions include technical 
service providers and lenders. These agents are connected through a business plan, which describes 
producers’ needs for capital and services and proposes improvements—attained through productive 
investments, technical assistance (TA), and business development—to upgrade their production 
capacities and skills and strengthen their linkage with markets. Evidence shows that the PA approach 
increases productivity, market integration, production, sales volume, prices, and smallholders’ incomes; 
generates on-farm and non-farm employment; and facilitates the inclusion of vulnerable groups in 
commercial value chains.  

The proposed project is well aligned with the revised OECS Regional Plan of Action for Agriculture 
(2012–2022) and national development plans. The priority of the Regional Plan of Action is to promote 
a market-oriented agribusiness approach to alleviating poverty and food and nutrition insecurity, 
consistent with the proposed project. Another priority is to mainstream climate change mitigation and 
adaptation strategies in agricultural programs to protect food production systems and build resilience 
against tropical storms, heavy rains, and droughts in rural/farming communities, which the proposed 
project will do. At the national level, the project is aligned with the National Economic and Social 
Development Plan (2013–2025) of SVG, which among other objectives for agriculture seeks to increase 
productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness; increase market access for agricultural produce; and 
increase agricultural exports; as well as with the National Agricultural Plan (2015-2030) of Grenada. 

Finally, the project is well positioned to contribute to the climate change policies and measures of 
Grenada and SVG, outlined in their Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). The INDCs 
of both countries emphasize improving climate change adaptation in the priority sectors of tourism and 
agriculture. By taking climate change into consideration as an emerging risk and reflecting adaptation 
and mitigation in its design and implementation, the project provides a framework to achieve some of 
the INDC commitments.  The project includes strategic investments, both at the level of the public and 
the private sectors, to promote the development, dissemination and adoption of innovative 
technologies that would significantly contribute to decrease vulnerability to climate variability and, 
therefore, generate climate mitigation and adaptation co-benefits. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 7 of 23  

 

The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for 
competitively selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in 
Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  

 
The main beneficiaries of the proposed project include:  

(a) Small-scale individual or organized farmers and fishers (FFs). 
(b) Aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), including: (a) producer organizations (associations, 

cooperatives or similar formal organizations with legal standing); and (b) SMEs, such as 
wholesalers, traders, lead farmers (with legal standing to act as aggregator), and industrial 
agro-processors.  

(c) The respective ministries of agriculture, as well as their extension officers and staff, which 
will be strengthened by the Project.  

 

Detailed criteria for eligibility of FFs and AAs for receiving matching grants under the project will be 
defined in the Project Operational Manual (POM). The FFs and AAs will be eligible only if they are 
formally participating together in a strategic productive alliance approved by the project to pursue the 
stated objectives. It is expected that the Project will have 1,700 direct beneficiaries, of which at least 25 
percent will be female and 25 percent will be below the age of 40 years. 

Key Results 
 

The proposed PDO indicators are identical for both countries (with different quantitative targets for 
each country): 

(b) Market Access Compliance Score for participating FFs supplying products to their allied AAs 
in accordance with the agreed Business Plans per semester (this Score is a weighted average 
of the volume complying with the agreed terms of the business plans related to quantities, 
quality, and timeliness of delivery). 

(c) Market Access Compliance Score for sales from all participating AAs complying with buyers' 
specifications  as per their Business Plans per semester (weighted average of volume 
complying with quality, quantities, and timeliness of delivery). 

(d) Percentage increase in the average annual sales of FFs participating in strategic alliances 
under the project. 

(e) Percentage increase in the value of gross sales made by AAs participating in the project to 
their final buyers. 

(f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (%) and young (%). 

 
D. Project Description  

 

The scope of the proposed project is based on successful experiences with productive alliances (PA) in 
other operations supported by the World Bank in the region, adapted to the specific conditions of small 
island economies such as Grenada and SVG. As noted, the PA approach is intended to improve access to 
markets for AAs and small-size FFs, using the private sector as a vehicle to foster smallholder production 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 8 of 23  

 

in accordance to market demand in terms of quantity, quality, and timeliness. The main components, 
apply to both recipient/borrowing countries and are based on the need for improving linkages between 
demand and supply in prioritized value chains. 

Component 1: Support for Preparation of Business Plans (Costs: Grenada IBRD: US$ 0.38m; 

SVG IDA: US$0.40m) 

The objective of this component is to: (i) promote an understanding of the Project’s scope and 
objectives through outreach to potential stakeholders and beneficiaries (such as individual and 
organized FFs, AAs, buyers, and lenders); (ii) identify potential business opportunities for prioritized 
value chains and their translation into viable and profitable business proposals; and (iii) prepare full 
business plans for selected proposals. 

This component will finance the provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
operating costs in support of implementing pre-investment activities, including:  

(a) development and implementation of a communication and information dissemination strategy 
to raise awareness of the Project and its activities;  

(b) organization of networking events, including business roundtables and local workshops for 
supporting the formation of strategic alliances between aggregators and agro-processors 
(“AAs”) and farmers and fishers (“FF”), buyers, and lenders;  

(c) provision of Training to AAs, FFs and buyers to identify business opportunities and to translate 
them into viable business proposals;  

(d) implementation of a country-wide call for interested parties to present business proposals;  
(e) evaluation of business proposals, and selection of those proposals to be developed into business 

plans; 
(f) provision of technical assistance for the preparation of sustainable and competitive business 

plans;  
(g) evaluation and selection of final business plans, and the preparation of Subproject Agreements 

for those selected plans; and 
(h) analysis of the qualifications of input suppliers eligible to participate in the voucher program 

under Component 2 of the Project. 

A Technical Assistance Agreement between the borrowing countries and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, financed by contributions from the credit proceeds of both 
countries, will include TA support for the implementation of activities described under (c), and (f) above.  

Component 2: Implementation of Business Plans (Grenada: IDA US$2.2m; IBRD US$ 0.22m; 

beneficiaries: US$ 0.64m; SVG: IDA US$2.95m; beneficiaries: US$ 0.72m) 

The objective of this component is to provide matching grants to co-finance the implementation of 
technically feasible, financially viable, economically profitable, socially responsible, and environmentally 
sustainable business plans, which, when implemented, will contribute to a consistent and timely supply 
of sufficient quantities of quality produce to buyers while providing a reliable income to allied FFs. The 
implementation of these Business Plans will make possible an increase in productivity and quality of the 
products, as well as reducing dependency on rainfall, thus reducing the constraints for increasing supply 
during peak season and enhancing vulnerability to climatic factors.  In addition, Component 2 is 
expected to provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (i) adaptation, by promoting innovative 
resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 9 of 23  

 

mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected agriculture 
and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (ii) mitigation, by promoting agricultural intensification using 
higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping patterns, improving irrigation 
measures and replacing traditional sources of energy (see Annex 4). 

This component will finance:  

(a) The implementation of a matching grant and voucher program, including the provision of: 

(i) training for capacity building to AAs receiving matching grants (such as in logistics, 
storage, marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, good 
manufacturing practices, packaging, labelling, traceability, quality control, food safety 
and hygiene, legal and environmental aspects ) and FFs receiving vouchers (such as in 
good production practices, modern and improved technologies, climate-smart 
agriculture, post-harvest handling, and financial literacy); and 

(ii) support in supervising the implementation of the selected business plans, including 
assisting the PIUs to put in place a technical supervision and implementation support 
system, capable of following up the implementation of the Business Plans making sure 
they follow the approved Plans and detecting real or potential issues that could 
compromise the expected results of the Plans or their effectiveness. 

(b) Provision of matching grants to eligible AAs, and vouchers to eligible FFs, which are allied with 
the respective AAs, for the purpose of implementing the business plans selected under 
Component 1 of the Project, and co-financing investments under said plans, including:  

(i) for the selected AAs: (A) equipment (transport, office, ICT tools/mobile applications, 
cold storage, product processing, and so on), infrastructure (such as storage/warehouse 
and cold chain facilities) and other related inputs, and (B) technical assistance and 
specialized Training related to their respective business plans; and 

(ii) for the selected FFs: (A) farming equipment, infrastructure and other related inputs 
(such as equipment for land preparation and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure 
(including rainwater harvesting structures and pressured irrigation, greenhouses, 
tunnels, hydroponics, aquaponics, and so on), and (B) fishing equipment, infrastructure 
and other related inputs (such as boats and fishing implements, logistics, temporary cold 
storage) 

(c) Provision of (i) technical assistance and Training on procurement to AAs receiving Matching 
Grants, and (ii) specialized Training, in relation to the implementation of the relevant business 
plans, to FFs receiving Vouchers. 

The Technical Assistance Agreement to be signed between both countries and FAO to be financed under 
the Project will include necessary technical support for the implementation of activities described under 
(a) above, unless such activities constitute a conflict of interest with the services provided under this 
assignment. 

Each business plan will need co-financing from the AA (at least 20 percent of the AA investments for 
producer organizations and at least 50 percent for other private sector AAs). At least 10 percent of the 
AA costs of the subproject will have to be allocated upfront in cash by the beneficiary. The rest of the 
counterpart financing of the business plan will have to be covered by the beneficiaries from their own 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 10 of 23  

 

funds or through resources provided by other lenders (banks, credit unions, development banks, private 
sector, etc.). Proof of the availability of resources secured in advance from these sources will be a 
condition to start implementation of a subproject. Producer organizations with potential will be 
encouraged to participate as AA; however, to give them better opportunities to participate as AAs, they 
will not compete directly with other private sector AAs in the selection process.  Weaker producer 
groups will participate as FFs in alliance with an AA, and they will receive TA in organizational and 
institutional strengthening to help them become an AA in the future. 

The mechanisms to finance subprojects will be different for AAs and FFs:   

(a) For AAs: The procurement of investment items included in the Subproject will be undertaken 
by the AAs for small works, goods, and individual consulting and non-consulting services, 
under a threshold further defined in the POM. Above the specified threshold, and for all 
consulting services by firms regardless of value, all procurement for the benefit of the AAs will 
be undertaken by the PCU. The PCU will have a fiduciary control function of the procurement 
undertaken by the AAs and will provide TA and support to improve the procurement capacity 
of the AAs.  Under this proposed mechanism, each beneficiary AA will receive funds in a 
specific bank account opened by the AA for its exclusive use while implementing the 
subproject. The counterpart funds from the AA are expected to be deposited in the same 
specific account as a precondition for disbursing project funds, which will be sequenced in line 
with physical progress in accordance with the Subproject Agreement and the related schedule 
in the Subproject Procurement Plan. This matching-grants for the AAs would have a maximum 
of $120,000 for productive investments and a maximum of $20,000 for specific technical 
assistance for implementation. 

(b) For FFs: The project will implement a voucher mechanism to provide financial assistance to 
FFs. The investments to be supported by the sub-grants will be partially financed by vouchers 
issued by the PCU in the name of the benefitting FFs (in accordance with the terms of the 
respective business plans and the corresponding Subproject Agreement). The FFs will use 
these vouchers to complement their own funds in purchasing the specific approved items, as 
confirmed and approved by the PCU, from a local supplier selected by them from a list of 
suppliers approved beforehand by the PCU.  The maximum allowed for each individual 
beneficiary FF will be $8,000 and for a total of $120,000 for all the FFs in a single Subproject 
Agreement.  In addition, the FFs will receive free general training and extension services from 
FAO in collaboration with each Ministry of Agriculture and more specialized TA from other TA 
providers directly procured by the PCUs 

Component 3: General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment (Grenada IBRD: US$0.54m; SVG 

IDA:  US$0.25m)  

The objective of this component is to strengthen general agricultural public services directly linked to 
the subprojects described in Component 2 and needed to enhance the probability of success. It will also 
support the strengthening of the overall enabling environment needed for the sustained development 
of the business enterprises with potential competitive advantages, locally and internationally. The 
project will finance goods, works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and operating costs 
(travel, per diem, etc.) to help implement the key activities under the component. This component will 
contribute to generate climate change co-benefits in two main areas: (i) promotion and incorporation of 
techniques more resilient to climate variability into public extension services practices; and 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 11 of 23  

 

(ii) mitigation, by conducting basic research as well as introduce new technologies that reduce GHG 
emissions in crop production and fisheries, as well as promoting the adoption of new systems increasing 
carbon sequestration (see Annex 4). A TA Agreement to be signed with FAO will include technical 
support for the implementation of activities under (c), as described below. 

The main activities under this component are to:  

(a) improve the quality and availability of key inputs required for the adoption of more 

productive technology (such as quality seeds, seedlings, and planting materials) for products 

supported under Component 2 of the Project;  

(b) organize, and facilitate participation in, trade fairs and study tours;  

(c) strengthen agricultural public extension service providers’ knowledge and skills to effectively 

(i) support the selected AAs and FFs to adopt technology for the efficient implementation of 

their business plans under Component 2 of the Project, and (ii) communicate and disseminate 

information broadly across the agricultural sector; 

(d) carrying out technical studies to competition improve competitiveness, including market 

studies, analysis of new potential value chains, enabling environment, reforms, agro-food 

logistics, and food safety requirements and quality standards (including legal framework) and 

related technical skills; and  

(e) carrying out improvements to public infrastructure that are required for the promotion of 

adequate internal distribution of produce, reduction of post-harvest losses, establishment of 

modern food safety mechanisms, as well as cold storage at key exit points for perishable 

agricultural exports (e.g., airports/port terminals).  

Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Grenada IBRD: US$0.66m; SVG IDA: 

US$0.70m)  

The objective of this component is to ensure effective project implementation, monitoring of activities 
and final project evaluation. The project will finance goods, consulting and non-consulting services, 
training and incremental operational costs to the PCU and the PIU for expenditures related to the 
project activities, including: (i) project coordination and management; (ii) monitoring, evaluation, and 
impact assessment; (iii) fiduciary administration, accounting and financial/technical audits; (iv) 
safeguards management; and (v) a citizens’ engagement mechanism. 

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

Overall implementation responsibility. In each country, a Steering Committee (SC) will be formed by 
representatives of government ministries and agencies considered relevant for a successful project 
implementation and the achievement of its objectives, as well as from the private sector, to provide 
overall guidance and support for project implementation and ensure proper inter-institutional 
coordination. This committee will approve the annual Project Operating Plans and requests for 
budgetary allocations, and it will provide opinions on possible restructuring or adjustments in the 
project’s approach, methodology, and focus. The final constitution of the SC will be defined in the POM. 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 12 of 23  

 

Overall responsibility for financial management (FM), procurement, and safeguards for the proposed 
project will rest in the existing PCU in each country. In Grenada, the existing PCU is located in the 
Ministry of Finance and Energy (MoFE) and has been executing Bank-financed operations for several 
years. In SVG, the PCU is located in the Public Sector Investment Program Management Unit (PSIPMU), 
which is based in the Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information 
and Labour (MoEP) and has also executed Bank-financed operations for several years. FM, procurement, 
and safeguards assessments of the PCUs were completed at appraisal to determine any needs for 
further strengthening of these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff or 
contracting consultants to efficiently implement the fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the proposed 
project.  

Overall responsibility for technical implementation will rest within the line ministries of agriculture 
(MoALFF in Grenada; MoAFFRT in SVG), through a small PIU in each country. In principle, each of these 
PIUs will consist of at least a Project Manager and an Agribusiness Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. 
The PIU will be responsible for (i) coordinating and implementing all Project activities, including with 
relevant agencies and beneficiaries, as specified in the POM, (ii) ensuring that the requirements, criteria, 
policies, procedures and organizational arrangements set forth in the POM are applied in carrying out 
the Project, (iii) preparing all Project implementation documents, including Project reports, and (iv) 
monitoring and evaluating the Project. Very close collaboration between the PIU and the PCU will be 
crucial. 

Technical Assistance (TA). The main focus of this TA is to support the preparation and implementation 
of effective and sustainable business plans at the FF and AA levels and to strengthen the capacity of the 
respective ministries of agriculture to deliver the services needed to improve production and 
competitiveness. The TA services, together with the investments included in the business plans (for AAs 
and FFs), are the two main pillars of the project, complementing each other and aiming to achieving the 
development objectives. Grenada/SVG, through each PCU, will enter into a contractual agreement with 
a technical service provider to receive specific assistance and guidance in key aspects of project 
implementation. The two recipient governments have expressed their preference to engage a single 
service provider for covering the key phases of the business plan cycle (from identification/preparation 
of Business Plans to the supervision of implementation), ensuring a consistent approach and 
methodology. The two governments have requested that FAO serve as this main technical service 
provider, given the organization’s long engagement with both countries and its presence in the region, 
as well as its worldwide experience with agricultural competitiveness and technology development 
issues.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Environment Under Component 2, the Project would co-finance aggregators’ investments such as transport, 
storage, post-harvest, cold chain facilities, ICT tools and mobile applications, equipment, infrastructure, or 
energy-saving technologies; and for allied producers, investments such as equipment for land preparation 
and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure including rain water harvesting, greenhouses, tunnels, hydroponics, 
and aquaculture. Technical assistance, training, and extension services would also be provided for storage, 
marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, machinery, packaging, labeling, 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 13 of 23  

 

traceability, quality control, or food safety and hygiene; and good agricultural practices, modern and 
improved technologies, climate smart agriculture, post-harvest handling or financial literacy. The 
investments could take place anywhere in Grenada or in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. While the prime 
agricultural lands are in relatively flat lying areas, fairly steep areas are routinely cultivated and therefore 
erosion control is of concern and was incorporated into the ESMF through extension services training for 
best management practice. Pest management is also being improved through other World Bank projects in 
the region and lessons learned will be applied to this Project. Processing or storage facilities could be 
located in non-agricultural lands, and will apply lessons learned in other projects in the region. Social The 
final design and location of sub-project sites will be defined during project implementation. Some of the 
physical characteristics of relevance to social safeguards analysis would include: population density, 
patterns of land ownership, livelihood activities, and presence of vulnerable populations. Once specific sub-
project sites are known, a screening of potential social risks and impacts will be conducted, where needed. 
Given that some investments under Component 2 may lead to involuntary resettlement impacts, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to guide the application of the Operational Policy (OP) 
4.12 requirements. The RPF guides the resettlement objectives and principles, organizational arrangements 
and funding mechanisms for the preparation of the Resettlements Plans (RPs) to be carried out during 
Project implementation.  

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo,Michael J. Darr 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The World Bank Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 for 
Environmental Assessment (EA) is triggered, and 
after analysis of the Project and its components it 
was determined that it falls under Category B, due to 
minor to moderate potential negative impacts from 
agricultural production, food processing, 
aquaculture, livestock rearing, and other related 
activities.  The details of individual subprojects are 
not yet known, therefore an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared for both recipient (Grenada and SVG), 
using examples from other World Bank OECS 
regional projects.  A consultation/workshop was 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 14 of 23  

 

held during the pre-appraisal mission in late October 
and early November and the ESMF has been 
disclosed in country for comments. A final version 
has been disclosed on the World Bank's external 
website on January 24, 2017, and in country on 
February 22, 2017 in Grenada and on March 2, 2017 
in SVG. A revised version was disclosed in-country 
and in the World Bank external website on April 18, 
2017.  
 
The ESMF includes guidance for screening of simple 
subprojects (such as washing and sorting facilities) 
that can use standard mitigation measures already 
detailed in the ESMF, as well as identification of 
more complex subprojects (such as large agro-
processing facilities) or subprojects in sensitive areas 
(such as mariculture or seafloor harvesting projects) 
that would require additional assessment during 
implementation to prepare comprehensive 
environmental management plans as needed. For 
simple subprojects and small producers, the ESMF 
includes a condensation of World Bank Group 
Environment Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for 
reference as a generic environmental management 
plan.  Additional consideration is given to pest 
management, water supply, fertilizer use, mixed 
cropping (or rotation), soil conservation, and erosion 
control, since these are common issues in 
agricultural projects in the OECS.  Complex 
subprojects will require individual design reviews 
and due diligence for emissions and discharges, 
labor practice, and other environmental and safety 
aspects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The Project will screen out and exclude any 
subproject works that would involve clearing of new 
land for agriculture; however, during Project 
preparation it was decided to trigger the policy as a 
precaution to ensure that any affected natural 
habitats are adequately protected, because some of 
the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas, or may potentially affect lands that 
meet the definition of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09) was also 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 15 of 23  

 

triggered as a precaution, because pesticide use is a 
necessity in agricultural activities in the region. The 
ESMF promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
standard practice, and a screening mechanism is 
included in the ESMF to determine if there are any 
subprojects with significant pest management 
issues; if so, then a separate Pest Management Plan 
will be required to ensure that these materials are 
well managed for those subprojects. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy was triggered as a precaution to ensure 
that any "chance finds" or other physical cultural 
resources during excavation or other earth-moving 
activities are adequately protected. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

Policy OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered. In the context of 
preparation of other OECS regional projects in Saint 
Vincent and Grenada, screening, background 
research, and consultations were conducted by the 
World Bank to determine whether Indigenous 
Populations were present in the project area. These 
screening activities confirmed that while populations 
who claim historical indigenous heritage do exist in 
the OECS (in the area of Sandy Bay, Saint Vincent), 
these groups do not have distinctive customary 
cultural, economic, social or political institutions that 
are separate from the dominant society and culture. 
Nor do they have an indigenous language different 
from the official language of Saint Vincent (English). 
Therefore, it was concluded that this community 
does not retain the minimum characteristics 
necessary to claim indigenous group affiliation under 
Bank Policy OP/BP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The designs of individual subprojects are not yet 
known, however, some investments for aggregators 
(for example: transport, storage, cold chain facilities, 
infrastructure) and allied producers under 
Component 2 may lead to involuntary 
resettlement/land acquisition, affecting land or 
livelihoods. Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered and a 
Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) was developed 
to guide the application of the OP 4.12policy 
requirements. No project funds will be used for land 
acquisitions. In case land acquisition is needed, it 
would have to be entirely and directly financed by 
the concerned beneficiaries. Activities that could 
involve involuntary resettlement will be avoided, 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 16 of 23  

 

nevertheless a RPF has been elaborated as a 
precautionary measure. The RPF clarified 
resettlement objectives and principles, 
organizational arrangements and funding 
mechanisms to be prepared and implemented if any 
safeguards tools (e.g. Resettlement Action Plans) are 
required during project implementation. The RPF 
was prepared and disclosed and consulted  prior to 
Project appraisal.  A revised version was disclosed in-
country and in the World Bank external website on 
April 18, 2017. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Improvements of canals or water conveyance 
systems are not envisioned and will be excluded in 
the EMF screening criteria. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy should not be triggered since the Project 
will not finance activities involving the use or 
potential pollution of international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any projects in disputed areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:   
 
Two of the main issues identified during Project preparation are the management of pesticides and the potential for 
soil erosion.  Both issues are prioritized in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) through the 
promotion of best management practices.  Another potential issue relates to discharge and permitting for large agro-
processing facilities; these are also identified in the ESMF and would require additional studies as needed during 
implementation. 
 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts 
anticipated from the Project. 
 
Social:   
 
Social impacts addressed in the ESMF, are related to  potential  involuntary resettlement  which are not expected to 
be significant. Other project’s potential impacts are associated with aggravation of social exclusion among 
disadvantaged farmers and fishers. The ESMF provide guidelines for screening business plans and subproject sites and 
for undertaking full social assessments, if needed, to analyze social impacts and risks, including but not limited to land 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 17 of 23  

 

acquisition/resettlement/economic displacement. Social assessment identifies population density, patterns of land 
ownership, and defines the establishment of mechanisms to screen for farm and rural larceny; determines the 
presence of vulnerable segments of the population in the Project area, including women, poorest smallholders, as well 
as young farmers under the age of 40, to ensure their participation and share in Project benefits (including in training 
and extensions services). 
 
Most works contemplated will involve temporary impacts, and potential land acquisition and/or resettlement 
associated with construction activities, as per the OP4.12. and estimated social impacts on affected people are 
estimated as low and temporary. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) ensures the mitigation and compensation 
of involuntary resettlement. The RPF guides the preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs) during implementation. 
Regarding potential impacts on vulnerable population for assuring the inclusion of less advantage FFs and AAs, the 
Project’s PA participative approach will be implemented. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are not  indirect or long term social impacts estimated in the 
Project area. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Environment:  
 
The ESMF includes guidance to avoid clearing new agricultural lands, and exclusions of effects on natural habitat or 
forests.  Otherwise the Project alternative analysis is not relevant with regards to environmental aspects. 
 
 
Social:  
 
In order to avoid and minimize land acquisition and define the mitigation and compensation measures needed when 
land acquisition is unavoidable, the Project has prepared an RPF that will guide the preparation RPs in the 
implementation phase. The RPs will define the specific alternatives for each sub-project to minimize and compensate 
social impacts. 
 
Fostering social inclusion will be addressed by a productive alliance (PA) tool that  aims at targeting established 
producer groups and value chains, supporting the inclusion of disadvantaged groups and building broader alliances 
with state agencies and/or municipalities. The proposed project approach is based on the PA methodology, adapted to 
the OECS context and reflecting lessons learned from similar projects, with the objective of improving the access of 
small farmers and fishers (FFs) to markets and increasing their productivity and income. Business plans developed 
under the Project will allow these individuals to upgrade their production, capacities, and skills. Project activities are 
defined to ensure access and opportunities for vulnerable beneficiaries, and capacity building under the Project will be 
tailored to the demands and interests of small producers, different age groups, and women.  
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Coordination Units (PCU)s will be responsible for oversight to ensure safeguards policies are followed, and 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 18 of 23  

 

their capacity will be strengthened by sharing of PCU staff dedicated to environmental safeguard resources among 
other World Bank projects.  The Ministries of Agriculture will be responsible for technical project management 
through Project Implementation Units(PIU)s and will coordinate with the PCUs, as well as directing the liaison with 
beneficiaries on the field level with extension officers.  Finally, technical training including best environmental practice 
and business plan preparation will be provided by academic partners, NGOs, and/or consultants who will be 
contracted to support the Program. Safeguards assessments of the PCUs will be completed prior to appraisal to 
determine any needs for further strengthening these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff 
or contracting consultants to efficiently implement the safeguard aspects of the proposed Project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the proposed project include: (i) small-scale farmers and fishers (FFs), either individually or 
organized in associations, cooperatives, or similar formal organizations with legal standing, or in the process of 
obtaining legal status, and (ii) aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), such as producer organizations, lead farmers, 
wholesalers, traders, and industrial agro-processors. Equally important, the project will support the participation of 
the rural private sector, including new suppliers. Workshops with key stakeholders were held in the pre-appraisal 
mission (Oct.-Nov. 2016) including the Ministries of Agriculture, the extension officers, other relevant government 
agencies, and potential beneficiaries (agro-processors, coops, and individual farmers). Disclosure of the draft ESMF 
was done by posting on the government website and targeted e-mailings to key stakeholders to solicit feedback.  
 
Comments were addressed and evidence of consultation and disclosure was included in the final ESMF.  If any 
sensitive or complex projects are identified during screening (such as large agro-processing facilities, mariculture or 
seafloor harvesting projects) which would require additional assessment and/or permitting, then the appropriate 
consultations would be done during implementation. A project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism has been 
developed by the Social Specialists at the PCUs to provide a way for project affected people and communities, as well 
as members of the public to lodge complaints and/or request information about the Project. Once subprojects’ sites 
are known, the social specialists will undertake community consultations to provide beneficiaries and stakeholder 
communities with information about the subproject and to elicit feedback on subproject activities and design. 
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 24-Jan-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Grenada 
  31-Oct-2016 

Comments 

A revised version of the ESMF, which includes the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) has been disclosed on 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 19 of 23  

 

February 22, 2017. The ESMF was revised for a third time to reflect the change in the IBRD/IDA allocation and to 
include the latest version of the project description. This third version was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The 
link is: http://www.gov.gd/egov/docs/publications/esmf_agricom_final.pdf 
 

   St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

A revised version of the ESMF, which includes the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) has been disclosed on 
March 2, 2017. The ESMF was revised for a third time to reflect the change of the project amount and to include the 
latest version of the project description. This third version was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://planning.gov.vc/planning/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=217&Itemid=252 

   
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Jan-2017 24-Jan-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Grenada 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

The RPF was disclosed in country on January 20, 2017 and a revised version reflecting the change of the IBRD/IDA 
allocation and the latest version of the project description was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://www.gov.gd/egov/docs/publications/rpf_agricom_final.pdf 
 

   St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

The RPF was disclosed in country on January 20, 2017 and a revised version reflecting the change of the project 
amount and the latest version of the project description was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://planning.gov.vc/planning/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=217&Itemid=252 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

NA   

   
"In country" Disclosure   



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 20 of 23  

 

 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

During Project implementation if subproject-specific safeguards instruments, (Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs), or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are required, specific stakeholders will be identified and public meetings 
will be conducted to enable the reflection of stakeholder concerns in project design. These requirements will be 
incorporated into the TORs for EIAs. In the case of land acquisition, Project Affected People (PAP)  will be consulted in 
the whole sub-projects’ cycle,  involving design and implementation, as well as on the establishment and 
implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanisms. Advanced public notifications will inform PAPs, whom if necessary, 
will be compensated prior to works. Relevant line ministries will assist the respective PCUs in these efforts. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 21 of 23  

 

NA   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
No   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
NA 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 22 of 23  

 

 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Eli Weiss 
Senior Rural Development Specialist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

St. Vincent & the Grenadines 

 

 

 
 
 

Grenada 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

SVG - Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information and Labour 

Laura Anthony-Browne 

Director of Central Planning 

lanthony-browne@svgcpd.com 
 
 

Grenada - Ministry of Finance & Energy 

Kim Frederick 

Permanent Secretary 

Kim.Frederick@gov.gd 
 
 

SVG - Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Rural Transformation 

Raymond Rayan 

Permanent Secretary 

rayjoel3163@hotmail.com 
 
 

Grenada - Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Forestry and Fisheries. 

Merina Jessamy 

Permanent Secretary 

merina.jessamy@gov.gd 
 

 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 23 of 23  

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Eli Weiss 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Garry Charlier 23-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Sabine Hader 25-Apr-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 1 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC19912 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 2 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Sierra Leone P160295  Sierra Leone Agro-
Processing 
Competitiveness 
Project (P160295) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 18, 2017 Feb 08, 2018 Trade & 
Competitiveness 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Sierra Leone Ministry of Trade and 
Industry 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted agro-processing firms in 
Sierra Leone. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   10.00  

Total Project Cost   10.00  

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 3 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
Sierra Leone, a low-income country with a population of 7.1 million people, has made good progress towards political 
stability and economic growth. The country has had three relatively peaceful national elections since the end of the 10 
year civil war in 2002 and recorded average annual growth of 7.8 percent from 2003-2014. Post-war economic growth 
continued to be robust, bolstered by the resumption of iron ore exports, increased inflows of foreign direct investment 
(FDI), and rising government revenues. These developments led to a surge in economic activity, manifested in GDP 
growth of 15.2 percent in 2012 and 13 percent in 2013. In spite of the impressive growth, 2015 GDP per capita was 
US$653.1, well below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of US$1588.5. Poverty levels remain high, even though the 
poverty headcount declined from 66.4 percent in 2003 to 52.9 percent in 2011.

1
 Strong growth in rural areas, where 

poverty declined from 78.7 percent in 2003 to 66.1 percent in 2011, explains much of overall reductions in poverty. 
However, rural poverty level is still higher than urban poverty. While about 62 percent of the working age-population is 
formally or informally employed, there is a dearth of good quality jobs, particularly among urban youth and in rural 
areas.

2
 The lack of sufficient technical and vocational skills needed for the labor market compounds the unemployment 

problem despite the potential offered by a growing workforce that is dominated by young people 
 
Sierra Leone has vast natural resources and the economy is heavily dependent on its land endowments; mineral 
resources including rutile, diamonds, gold, chromite and iron ore; water and tourism. Agriculture including forestry and 
fisheries still accounts for the largest GDP share but that share declined from 57percent in 2012 to 41percent in 2013. 
The mining sector’s contribution to GDP increased substantially from 8.5 percent in 2011 to 16.8 percent in 2012 and 
on to 27.2 percent in 2013 due to the expansion of large-scale iron ore operations. The service sector, led by banking, 
retail, transport and tourism, accounted for 28.8 percent of GDP in 2013, down from 35.5 percent in 2011, while the 
manufacturing sector, dominated by cement and light manufacturing, accounts for only 2percent of GDP.

3
  

 
 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The promotion of value addition and private sector-led growth in agriculture are essential elements in achieving its 
vision and goal of the AfP. The National Sustainable Agriculture Development Plan (NSADP) serves as the overarching 
sector strategy with a focus on: (i) Commodity Commercialization, (ii) Agriculture Infrastructure Development, (iii) 
Private Sector Promotion and (iv) Sector Coordination and Management. Through the NSDAP, The Smallholder 
Commercialization Program (SCP) 2010 -2015, helped organize smallholder farmers by establishing Farmer Based 
Organizations (FBOs) and Agribusiness Centers (ABCs), involving about 122,500 farmers, of which 30 percent were 
female-headed households. The ABCs were designed as farmer-owned multi-purpose facilities delivering a broad range 
of services, including micro-credit, sales of inputs and tools, rental of labour-saving equipment, storage of seeds and 
farm products, processing, transport, information on new technologies and markets and group marketing. The 
successor of the SCP, the Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Program (ICADEP), 2016-2020 focuses on 
private sector-led commercialization and agribusiness development as a basis for inclusive growth. Key tenets of the 
strategy emphasizes reduced government intervention with an emphasis on implementing evidence-based private 

                                            
1
 World Bank and Statistics Sierra Leone, A Poverty Profile for Sierra Leone, June 2013 

2
 Statistics Sierra Leone, World Bank, ILO, Sierra Leone 2014 Labor Force Survey 

3
 Statistics Sierra Leone: Report on 2013 Real GDP Figures, October, 2014 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 4 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

sector support policies and projects.  
 
Strengthening economic diversification is a policy priority for achieving strong and sustainable growth and reducing 
poverty in Sierra Leone. Currently, the economy is dominated by mining and agriculture but there is huge potential to 
diversify into other sectors such as fisheries, light manufacturing, and tourism. While mining has dimmed, there are 
bright prospects for agribusiness investments. The Sierra Leone Investment and Export Promotion Agency (SLIEPA), has 
prioritized increased investment inflows in agribusiness as a key objective in its Strategic Plan, 2016 – 2018. This strategy 
aims to attract domestic and foreign direct investments and to develop and diversify exports, particularly in the 
agricultural sector, given the sector’s contribution to GDP and livelihoods. In addition, SLIEPA supports SMEs to enhance 
their competitiveness and participation in trade. Both the investment Promotion and Export Development and 
Promotion Departments have developed strategies and activities that focus on enhancing competitiveness of 
agribusiness, SMEs and other segments in agribusiness value chains that have strong potential for creating jobs and 
income opportunities. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed project is aligned to Pillar 1 of the Bank’s Strategy for Africa, competitiveness and employment and 
consistent with the pillars on diversified economic growth and international competitiveness in GoSL’s Agenda for 
Prosperity, the Third Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy, 2013-2018. The AfP prioritizes agriculture and 
agribusiness as a key sector for promoting economic diversification because of its long term potential for inclusive 
sustainable growth and value addition. In addition, the proposed project is aligned to components 2 and 3 of the 
Inclusive Comprehensive Agricultural Development Project (ICADEP) that focus on commercialization and agribusiness 
development. Project interventions are also consistent with the Private Sector Recovery Priorities relating to creating 
jobs and supporting MSMEs to increase their competitiveness in key agricultural value chains.  
 

The proposed project will directly contribute to the Joint Country Assistance Strategy (JCAS) 2010-2013. Pillar 1 on 
promoting inclusive growth. The 2012 Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) recognized the potential of 
agriculture, agricultural value addition, and supporting services in driving an inclusive growth strategy. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
The project objective is to improve business environment in agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted 
agro-processing firms in Sierra Leone. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

 Lower unit cost of production for local agro-processing firms 
 

 Increased agro processing investment (from existing and new agro-processing firms) 
 

 Improved institutional framework for coordination of agro processing investments  
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 5 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 
D. Concept Description 
In Sierra Leone, productivity and growth of agro-processing firms is held back by key market failures and constraints, 
characterized by limited knowledge of FDI linkages and market opportunities, coordination externalities, weak supply 
chain linkages, lack of access to finance and technology, policy failures, and skills gap. Consequently, most local and 
foreign-owned agro-processing firms have installed modern plants and utilize state of the art technology but have low 
productivity and operate at less than 30 percent utilization 
 
The proposed project focuses on enhancing domestic value addition in agro-processing through strengthening vertical 
(forward and backward) linkages between local companies and foreign investors. Such linkages provide important 
channels for enhancing competitiveness of the sub-sector through flow of new technology, know-how, innovation, and 
skills. Interventions supporting domestic value addition in agro-processing will involve local and foreign actors that are 
operating in the sub-sector as well as those that provide goods and services to the industry. Project interventions will 
emphasize upgrading of local large enterprises and SMEs, enabling them to be competitive in domestic, regional, and 
international markets.  

 
Project interventions will address key market failures and constraints that limit competitiveness of agro-processing firms 
in domestic and international markets (see annex 1). Modalities for project support will include financing and technical 
assistance for targeted investment promotion and retention and connecting local companies to foreign investors in ways 
that enhance the benefits of agglomeration economies and networking effects 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project location is collocated with the catchment area of the SCADeP Project. The specific sub-project sites are yet to 

be determined. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Trade and Industry being the burrower for the project will work in close collaboration with the Ministry 

of Agriculture Forestry and Food Security through the Worldbank Funded Smallholder Commercialization and 
Agribusiness Development Project (SCADeP). The project coordinating unit for the implementation of the project will 
recruit a safeguards specialist and will work in close collaboration with the safeguards specialist of the SCADeP project 
who are already in place. It is expected that through the close collaboration with the SCADeP project, the needed capacity 
building for the client will take place throughout implementation. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Gloria Malia Mahama, Anita Bimunka Takura Tingbani 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 6 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project categorization is B (partial 
assessment). The project will fund agro-processing 
equipment and other value chain enhancement 
activities, the impacts associated with these activities 
are expected to be site-specific and reversible in 
nature. An environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared and disclosed 
prior to appraisal. The ESMF will outline measures for 
screening of sub-projects to determine any further 
environmental assessment that might be required 
during implementation. The ESMF will also provide a 
template for the preparation of an EMP based on the 
screening results of sub-projects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project is not expected to impact on any natural 
habitats because the proposed activities will be limited 
to existing agro processing firms. The project is also 
not expected to fund any expansions in agriculture 
production areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Forests will not be impacted by the project 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 
The project activities do not involve any pest 
management activities. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
It is not expected that any physical cultural resources 
will be impacted. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
indigenous people (as per definition) in the project 
area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Triggering OP4.12 will be determined during appraisal. 
The project will provide matching grant to support 
domestic value addition in agro-processing. The 
project still needs to clarify whether or not the 
activities funded under the matching grant will lead to 
construction of warehouses, agro-processing units or 
any activities that may require land acquisition. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not involve construction or 
rehabilitation / maintenance of dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No The Project does not involve International Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The Project does not involve Disputed Areas. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 7 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 22, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The need for safeguards related studies will be determined during preparation missions. An Environmental Assessment 

and any other required safeguards studies will be prepared prior to appraisal. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Adesimi Freeman 

Lead Private Sector Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Sierra Leone 

Momodu Kargbo 

Minister 

info@mofed.gov.sl 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Trade and Industry 

Momodou  Pat-Sowe 

Minister 

info@trade.gov.sl 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Sierra Leone Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project (P160295) 

 
 

  
Mar 21, 2017 Page 8 of 8  

  

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Adesimi Freeman 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 02-May-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director:   
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

















































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA21768
Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Lesotho Project ID: P162397

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P119432

Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project Additional 
Financing (P162397)

Parent Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (P119432)

Region: AFRICA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 15-Sep-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Financing Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 10.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 10.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? No
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small mountainous country characterized by extensive land degradation 
and erratic climatic conditions. It has a population of 2.1 million people of whom around 57% live 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



below the poverty line and 34 percent fall below the extreme poverty line (CPF, 2016). The country is 
also beset with high unemployment rates and a high incidence of HIV/AIDS. This interaction of socio-
economic factors and environmental constraints results in low agricultural productivity with maize 
yields averaging only 800 kg/ha leading to food and nutrition insecurity.

Variations in the Kingdom’s topography and micro-climate shape its ecological zones—the lowlands, 
the foothills, the highlands, and the Senqu (Orange) River Valley. Annual precipitation is highly 
variable, both temporally and spatially, ranging from 500 mm to 760 mm. Temperatures are also 
highly variable, ranging from –10°C to 30°C. Agriculture accounts for less than 10 percent of the 
country’s gross domestic product, but it provides employment for as many as 63 percent of the 
country's population. The crop sector’s contribution to agriculture GDP declined by 17.2% in 2015, 
with the main crops of maize, sorghum, and wheat planted on more than 85 percent of the cultivated 
area.  Livestock contributes 30 percent of total agricultural output, including domestic production of 
pigs and poultry and extensive production of wool and mohair on rangelands in the hill and highland 
areas.
The IPCC categorizes Lesotho as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. The country has a temperate climate with subalpine characteristics, having four distinct 
seasons, and experiences regular droughts, floods, frosts, snow, hailstorms, and strong winds.  
Frequent droughts result in poor harvests and large livestock losses to rural farmers. Dry spells also 
create food shortages and can lead to an increase in invasive plants and destructive insects. Strong 
winds and floods also pose devastating threats to Lesotho’s agricultural sector; as a result, there are 
large swings in output, with maize yields ranging from a high of more than 1.5 t/ha in 1977 to only 
170 kg/ha in 2011.

The impact of climate change on crop and livestock production systems, and consequently livelihoods, 
may be severe if existing cropping and land use systems remain unchanged.  Lesotho is over-reliant on 
rain-fed agriculture for food production and has a large rural population engaged in undiversified 
subsistence farming. Climate change and increasing climate variability may be reflected in reduced 
crop yields and increased incidence of crop failure. There is also likely to be a decrease in forage 
production and a decline in the carrying capacity of the rangelands, which will have negative impacts 
on livestock production resulting from reduced animal vigor and fertility. As animal condition 
deteriorates, the quality of animal products, especially wool may decline. Furthermore, there may be a 
higher incidence of livestock pests and diseases which will have negative implications for animal 
production.

Less than 1 percent of crop production in Lesotho is under irrigation and almost all subsistence and 
smallholder farming is rain-fed. The development of medium to larger irrigation schemes is expensive 
and may not be suitable due to the demanding topography and geology, and lack of local scheme 
management skills and experience is a serious limitation. The fragile soils also demand very careful 
irrigation management. Thus, while water is available, it is being allocated for other purposes and 
farmers have yet to productively exploit their country’s water resources. Small-scale water harvesting 
schemes are seriously lacking and yet these remain viable adaption options for smallholders in the face 
of expected climate change impacts on water resources.

The commercial farming sector in Lesotho  remains underdeveloped. Full-time commercial farmers 
are still few in number, and specialized agribusiness firms are equally scarce. Lesotho stands in stark 
contrast with neighboring South Africa, where production, processing, and distribution of food is 
carried out by commercial producers and agribusiness firms.

Opportunities continue to exist in Lesotho for developing commercially viable smallholder agriculture. 



Demographic changes, compounded by rising incomes and accelerating urbanization, and improved 
access to South African markets, are fueling changes in consumption patterns that are creating new 
opportunities for agricultural producers and processors. Local and regional demand is projected to 
continue to strengthen in the coming years for fresh fruits and vegetables; for meat and processed 
livestock products (sold through local market stalls, small and medium-scale butcheries, and large-
scale meat wholesalers); for milk and dairy products; and, for processed foods and products (dried 
fruits, processed meat and animal feed).

Continued support to smallholders and close coordination at the national, district and community 
levels is still needed.  Strategies for strengthening smallholder capacity must take into account the 
communities’ stated needs and aspirations and align them with targeted innovations to create resilience 
and sustainability.  However, guidance is needed to help farmers gradually re-orientate their farming 
approaches to produce for markets and to be resilient to the imminent impacts of climate change in 
fragile and highly vulnerable production systems.

Two options for scaling-up the SADP were considered: (i) increase counterpart funding; and (ii) seek 
additional IDA 17 financing. Given fiscal restrictions, the Government of Lesotho is unable to 
increase counterpart funding for the SADP. Therefore, additional IDA 17 financing was identified as 
the most appropriate mechanism to enable expansion of the SADP’s activities to new districts. With 
the AF, the SADP’s objectives, which include increasing marketed output among project beneficiaries 
in Lesotho’s smallholder agriculture sector, can be expanded in more districts in the country, 
contributing to government efforts to develop smallholder agriculture. The proposed scale-up can be 
completed by February 28, 2020 – representing a cumulative implementation period of less than ten 
years. The original closing date is March 31, 2018.

The AF for the Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (SADP II) will continue to support 
smallholder farmers in targeted areas of Lesotho – Botha-Bothe, Leribe, Berea, and Mafeteng, rural 
Maseru, Mohale's Hoek, and Quthing – with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to increase 
their productivity in a changing climate and diversify into market-oriented agriculture, and to improve 
the enabling environment for agribusiness activities.  Project support will continue to be driven by 
market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of enterprises and products.  These three 
additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, have a rural population of 
almost 500,000 people (about 100,000 households); a cropped area of about 80,000 ha; and ready 
access to Maseru and South African markets due to their location along the border.  The addition of 
these three districts will result in all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included 
in the project.  It is expected that at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in 
addition to the 55,000 already reached under SADP.

The overall zones of intervention for this project have been identified and prioritized to complement 
current activities supported under the Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP) and to 
consolidate and support the achievements under SADP.  SADP supports smallholder farmers in 
targeted areas of Lesotho, with the goal of helping them exploit opportunities to diversify into market-
oriented agriculture. SADP is driven by market opportunities and perceived commercial viability of 
enterprises. The proposed Additional Financing will focus on continuing to increase the capacity of 
farmers in Lesotho, smallholder and commercial, to build more productive climate resilient 
commercial agricultural systems.

The incremental benefits of this AF are expected to be extensive. For example, by initiating the 
process of discussing food quality and safety standards in Lesotho, the GoL and the international 
community can begin to finance and provide the focused expertise and funds needed to undertake 



actions in setting standards and strengthen capacity to enforce them.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Rural and agricultural sector. Manufacturing and mining contribute the largest shares to GDP in 
Lesotho, but agriculture remains important as a major provider of employment and source of food.  
About 70-80 percent of Lesotho’s people live in rural areas, and more than three-quarters of these are 
engaged in agriculture – mostly traditional, low input, low output, rain-fed cereal production and 
extensive animal grazing.  In the past, remittances from mineworkers were a major source of rural 
livelihoods, providing vital cash needed to purchase agricultural inputs and productive assets or to 
invest in household assets and housing, but remittances have declined steadily over the past decade as 
the number of Basotho employed in the South African mining sector has declined substantially from 
more than 100,000 20 years ago to less than 30,000 at present. Despite the economic growth that has 
been achieved in recent years, income-generating opportunities remain limited and are generally 
confined to urban areas and wage employment in the industrial sector especially in garment 
production.

Because the urban economy has limited ability to absorb new labor market entrants, the rural economy 
in general and agriculture in particular will continue to play a major role in Lesotho’s development 
strategy for the foreseeable future. Agricultural development faces a number of challenges; however, 
most significant are difficult agro-climatic conditions and limited availability of irrigable arable land. 
The country’s limited production potential is not fully exploited due to poor farming practices, limited 
use of quality seeds, inappropriate crop selection and lack of diversification. Agricultural productivity 
is further undermined by unsustainable land management practices that in many cases have led to 
declining soil fertility and severe soil erosion. If agriculture were commercially viable, these 
constraints could likely be overcome through well-targeted investments, but the development of 
market-oriented crop and livestock production enterprises faces a number of constraints such as 
limited small-scale irrigation, lack of access to finance, and limited supply of produce of the required 
quality.

Institutional Context:
The successful transformation of Lesotho’s smallholder agricultural sector will continue to depend on 
sustained support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment 
capital, among other factors. This support has come from three main sources: (i) public service 
providers, (ii) producer organizations, trade associations, and other industry groups; (iii) NGOs and 
donor-funded programs. SADP II will continue to benefit from the current institutional arrangement of 
having the PMU embedded within the main service provider in this sector - MAFS, which has proven 
efficient as an implementation and communication strategy. The Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil 
Conservation continue to be implementing partners in NRM projects along with the Ministry of Water 
Affairs.  Producer groups such as piggery and poultry associations, as well as wool and mohair 
grower’s associations are also important partners and can prove instrumental in setting standards, 
prices and spreading knowledge towards increasing marketed output; however, much still needs to be 
done for this to be realized.  NGOs and donors provide services in support of agricultural 
development.  Most technological innovations continue to be introduced by both national and 
international NGOs, donor-funded projects and programs, and by private entrepreneurs in some cases.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent



Increase in marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector 
and, in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to 
said Eligible Crisis.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

To increase marketed output among project beneficiaries in Lesotho's smallholder agriculture sector.

Key Results 

.

D. Project Description

The proposed AF offers a well performing vehicle to scale up smallholder agricultural productivity to 
other districts in Lesotho – reinforcing a key component of the CPF pillar on private sector jobs, in 
line with Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan.  The AF provides combined multi-faceted 
support in the form of technical advisory services, improved technology, and investment capital that 
are key to meeting the government’s goals in the new districts. The AF will be allocated to expand 
project activities to three additional border districts with good potential and accessibility to markets, 
namely rural Maseru, Mohale's Hoek and Quthing.  The addition of these three districts will result in 
all of the more productive lowlands and foothill areas being included in the project.  It is expected that 
at least an additional 18,000 beneficiaries will benefit from the AF in addition to the 55,000 already 
reached under SADP.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 1: Increasing Agricultural Market Opportunities.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 2: Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder Production- Climate Smart Packages for 
Smallholders.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 3: Project Management.
Comments ( optional)

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Comments ( optional)

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics            relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known)
The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or community 
groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), cultivation of high value 
crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and horticulture, processing and 
storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully reclamation and catchment 



conservation. Although a list of potential sub-projects is known, the specific sub-project locations are 
not yet known. The project is designed as demand driven and, therefore, the exact locations will only 
be known at the time when the applications are received by the PMU through the Competitive Grants 
Programme. This will take place during the implementation phase of the project.

The Additional Financing will be scaled up in three (3) additional districts which have been identified 
as suitable for agriculture and have good potential for accessing markets, namely (i) rural Maseru, (ii) 
Mohale's Hoek, and (iii) Quthing located in the southern lowlands agro-ecological zone. ..

Topographically, Lesotho is predominantly mountainous, with the mountain zone covering 
approximately 65% of the total land area. The land is mostly characterized by steep slopes with fragile 
soil formations which are extensively degraded. Only 9% of Lesotho’s land is arable and over 80% of 
this is found in the lowlands, where it is not only used for agriculture, but rather for other purposes 
such as housing. They typically have rich black soils or sandy loams in the valleys where the major 
agricultural activities occur. The southern lowlands, where the new districts are located, are 
characterized by poor soils and low rainfall and cover the western part of the country, occupying about 
2,700 km2 which is 9% of the total surface area. Generally, the lowland soils are the duplex type 
which are prone to erosion, and have poor moisture retention capacity. They are thus liable to rapid 
loss of top soil. The region forms the main livestock grazing area in the country. Although the soils are 
much less susceptible to erosion, inadequate grass cover combined with the steep slopes, and torrential 
rains result in massive erosion in this zone. It will be important to include sub-projects that will control 
runoff and control soil erosion such as sustainable landscape management, gully reclamation, 
catchment management and small-scale infrastructure such as gabions and check dams.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kisa Mfalila, Social Safeguards Specialist

Majbritt Fiil-Flynn, Social Safeguards Specialist

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under Parent Project which 
established a Project Management Unit (PMU) However, the capacity of the existing Project 
Management Unit (PMU) to implement, monitor and report on environmental and social 
safeguard issues during the implementation of the Parent Project was inadequate. With the 
guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a dedicated 
environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects to determine 
the level and degree of risk and impacts, ensure that site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Lesotho 
Smallholder Agriculture Development 
Program will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent 



Project. Environmental risks and impacts 
inherent to the agriculture and agribusiness 
industry are largely related to effluent 
discharges from use of pesticides/herbicides in 
controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer 
to increase crop productivity, pollution of soil 
and water resources from runoff, occupational 
health and safety of workers, efficient use of 
water and energy resources, and solid waste 
disposal. The review of the ESMF of the 
Parent Project indicates that the instrument is 
adequate for the Additional Financing in terms 
of identifying potential environmental impacts 
that will likely occur from implementing the 
project activities, the proposed measures to 
mitigate the impacts and monitor the 
implementation, the pest management 
approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The 
ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to 
guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and 
reporting of environmental issues for the sub-
projects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support sub-projects that 
have the potential to adversely alter or impact 
natural or critical habitats as defined under OP 
4.04. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support sub-projects 
located within forested areas or plantations as 
defined under OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy 
is not triggered.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy is triggered to 
allow for the use of agrochemicals, as needed, 
using licensed professions and in a manner 
described in the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan (IPMP). The initial screening of the 
potential sub-projects to be funded under the 
AF, indicates that the risk of pesticides use is 
minor to moderate due to the small amounts of 
pesticides currently being used in the sub-
projects of the Parent Project. The ESMF 
prepared for the Parent Project, incorporates 
an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
which provides guidance on the sustainable 
application of fertilizers and pesticides taking 
into consideration the soil type and slope to 



ensure protection of watershed and 
groundwater. The use or purchase of 
significant amounts of pesticides will be 
excluded in the screening process described in 
the ESMF.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The AF will not support physical cultural 
resources but in some of the districts that the 
project will be implemented, artifacts from 
historical cultural resources have been found. 
The ESMF of the Parent Project have included 
Physical Cultural Resources Chance Find 
procedures for handling chance finds that 
might occur during the implementation of the 
sub-projects.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no 
indigenous people within the project area of 
influence.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes It is not anticipated that there will be any land 
acquisitions as a direct result of the project. 
However, communities are expected to 
continue to pool their land or provide 
voluntary land donations of communal land. 
This potentially impact livelihood through 
affecting access, for example for grazing and 
water. The existing RPF will be applied to 
screen and guide implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not 
finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, 
nor will it rely on the performance of an 
existing dam or a dam under construction, as 
defined in the policy.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

No The project is not expected to affect 
international waterways and, therefore, OP 
7.50 is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project will not finance any activities 
located in any known areas under territorial 
dispute as defined in OP 7.60. Therefore, the 
policy is not triggered.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The activities to be financed by the Additional Financing include small-scale gravity irrigation 
schemes, small-scale water harvesting structures such as weirs and tanks for households or 
community groups, small-scale investments in livestock operations (such as piggery), 



cultivation of high value crops, wool and mohair production, production of tree seedlings and 
horticulture, processing and storage, rangeland management, climate smart agriculture, gully 
reclamation and catchment conservation. The sub-projects are similar to those that are already 
being financed under the Parent Project, and therefore the AF will maintain the Environmental 
Category B classification of the Parent Project. Environmental risks and impacts inherent to 
the agriculture and agribusiness industry are largely related to effluent discharges from use of 
pesticides/herbicides in controlling weed infestation, use of fertilizer to increase crop 
productivity, pollution of soil and water resources from runoff, occupational health and safety 
of workers, efficient use of water and energy resources, and solid waste disposal. The 
anticipated risks and impacts are expected to be small-scale in nature and scope, limited to the 
project sites and can be addressed with known mitigation measures. Overall, there are no large 
scale, significant or irreversible impacts that have been identified.

The PMU will use the ESMF of the Parent Project – which describes the screening, 
reviewing, implementing and monitoring procedures – to assess the risks and impacts and 
prepare the appropriate mitigation measures during the implementation phase.  Review of the 
ESMF of the Parent Project indicates that the instrument is adequate for the Additional 
Financing in terms of identifying potential environmental impacts that will likely occur from 
implementing the project activities, the proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and 
monitor the implementation, the pest management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable 
use of fertilizers and pesticides, and community health and safety issues. The ESMF also 
contains adequate and very clear screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in 
the screening, assessment, review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental 
issues for the sub-projects.

Review of the environmental performance of the Parent Project:

The team has been continuously reviewing the environmental performance the Parent Project 
through regular missions to the sub-project sites, and the overall environmental performance 
of the Parent Project is moderately unsatisfactory. Some of the issues identified under the 
parent project relate to, for example, improper handling of solid and liquid waste, insufficient 
monitoring of water access, improper handling of agrochemicals. A detailed time bound 
action plan has been agreed with the Borrower to remedy any environmental issues and avoid 
them reoccurring in the future

Climate Vulnerability
There is a need for climate vulnerability to be considered particularly during the siting of 
subprojects.  One poultry subproject is located on a mountainside exposed to severe wind and 
cold, and consequently many of the chickens died. Recently, a number of horticulture tunnels 
were damaged due to strong winds, hail and rain, and although these conditions were 
reportedly a one-off event, tunnels that were located in less sheltered terrain were more 
severely damaged than those that were somewhat sheltered.   The siting of subprojects taking 
into account climatic factors is therefore important in ensuring sustainability of the 
investments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:



The sub-projects to be supported under the AF will not generate indirect and/or long term 
impacts in the sub-project areas. It is, however, anticipated that some of the sub-projects that 
entail landscape restoration and management, will result into long term positive and beneficial 
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

In accordance with the RPF, voluntary land contributions will only be permitted where the 
land is communal land. If private use the communal land contributed under the project exists, 
then the private users must either benefit directly from project activities or be provided 
suitable alternatives. Such arrangements must be fully documented and are subject to 
informed consent procedures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Parent 
Project by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security will serve as the key environmental 
safeguard instrument for the project. Review of the ESMF by the project team indicate that 
the instrument is adequate for the Additional Financing in terms of identifying potential 
environmental impacts that will likely occur from implementing the project activities, the 
proposed measures to mitigate the impacts and monitor the implementation, the pest 
management approaches to be used to ensure sustainable use of fertilizers and pesticides, and 
community health and safety issues. The ESMF also contains adequate and very clear 
screening procedures and methodologies to guide the PIU in the screening, assessment, 
review, approval, implementation and reporting of environmental issues for the sub-projects

With the guidance of the World Bank, the PMU is currently in the process of recruiting a 
dedicated environmental and social specialist who will oversee the screening of sub-projects 
to determine the level and degree of risk and impacts, site-specific ESMPs are prepared and 
mitigation measures are implemented, monitored and reported on in the progress reports, and 
which will eventually strengthen the capacity of the PMU. Further safeguard training will be 
provided by the World Bank staff throughout the implementation phase to ensure adequate 
capacity is retained. The first task to be carried out by the PMU environmental specialist will 
be to undertake an environmental audit for all ongoing sub-projects to assess the extent to 
which the World Bank Safeguard Polices are complied with and make recommendations on 
how environmental risks and impacts will be mitigated.

All other institutions that will be involved in implementing the AF have previously 
implemented World Bank funded projects or are currently involved in implementation of 
other World Bank programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank safeguard policies 
and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) were subject to discussions with various groups 
of stakeholders at district and national level, including relevant government agencies, national 
and international NGOs, and farmer associations during appraisal of the original project in 



2011. In addition, beneficiary farmers and communities will receive appropriate training, as 
they will participate in screening, verification and mitigation measures (as relevant).

.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 03-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes

Date of receipt by the Bank 30-May-2011

Date of submission to InfoShop 11-Jun-2011

"In country" Disclosure

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::

.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA 
(including EMP) report?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit 
or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve 
the EA report?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the 
EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

PHCompliance

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest 
management issues?

Yes [X] No [] NA []



Is a separate PMP required? Yes [] No [X] NA []

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and 
approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  
Are PMP requirements included in project 
design?If yes, does the project team include a 
Pest Management Specialist?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

PHCompliance

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) 
been prepared?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Practice Manager review the 
plan?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? Yes [] No [X] TBD []

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of 
assets or access to assets that leads to loss of 
income sources or other means of livelihoods)

Yes [] No [X] TBD []

PHCompliance

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents 
been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-
country in a public place in a form and language 
that are understandable and accessible to 
project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

PHCompliance

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear 
institutional responsibilities been prepared for 
the implementation of measures related to 
safeguard policies?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures 
been included in the project cost?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of 
the project include the monitoring of safeguard 
impacts and measures related to safeguard 
policies?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements 
been agreed with the borrower and the same 
been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents?

Yes [X] No [] NA []



V. Contact point
World Bank

PHWB
Contact:Ijeoma Emenanjo
Title:Sr Agricultural Spec.

.

.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
PHBorr
Name:Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Contact:Hon. Semano Sekatle
Title:Minister Development Planning
Email:ntebohelengraliapeng@yahoo.com

.

.

.

Implementing Agencies
PHIMP
Name:Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Contact:Jules Cesaire YAGANZA
Title:Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit
Email:motselebanem@agric.gov.ls

.

.

.

VI. For more information contact:
.

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name:Ijeoma Emenanjo

Approved By:
PHNonTransf

Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA) Date: 27-Jul-2017

Practice Manager/Manager: Name: Mark E. Cackler (PMGR) Date: 30-Jul-2017

Country Director: Name:Janet K. Entwistle (CD) Date:31-Jul-2017

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 12

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20600

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Lesotho Project ID: P160964
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P144933

Project Name: Second Private Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification - AF 
(P160964)

Parent Project 
Name:

Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Prj 
(P144933)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

30-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Trade & Competitiveness Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Development Planning
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Trade and Industry

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 13.40
Total Project Cost 13.40

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 12

Country Context
The Kingdom of Lesotho is a small, landlocked, lower-middle-income country with a per capita 
GNI of US$1,350. Lesotho is one of the poorest countries in Southern Africa, and has one of the 
highest income inequality in the world. Home to about 2 million people, Lesotho is surrounded by 
South Africa, the second largest and most industrialized economy in Africa. Lesotho generates 
income mainly by exporting textiles, water, and diamonds, and is a member of the Southern 
African Customs Union (SACU), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and 
the Common Monetary Area (CMA). The national currency➢❨  the loti➢❨ is pegged to the South 
African rand. Lesotho➢❨ s main trading partners are South Africa and the United States. 
 
Several factors are concerning for Lesotho➢❨ s fiscal and economic outlook: in the short term, a 
projected sharp decline in SACU revenues and higher food prices caused by drought; in the 
medium term, insecurity in textile manufacturing given uncertainty of continued renewal of the 
African Growth and Opportunity Act, and risks caused by the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Lesotho 
now faces large fiscal and current account deficits, which will require substantial fiscal 
adjustment to restore macroeconomic stability and avert erosion of the exchange rate peg to the 
South African rand.  
 
The signs of fragility are exacerbated by other vulnerabilities, such as political instability, climatic 
vulnerability, including El NiÃ±o, and high rates of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and maternal 
and infant mortality. The 2015/16 El NiÃ±o induced drought prompted authorities to declare a 
state of emergency in December 2015, with a high share of the rural population now expected to 
be food insecure through the March 2017 harvest. For Lesotho➢❨ s small and highly dependent 
subsistence farming economy, El NiÃ±o related stress factors risks further depressing household 
incomes, which had already dropped due to declining migrant remittances from South Africa➢❨ s 
mining sector. Lesotho➢❨ s poor historical record in addressing climatic vulnerabilities adds to 
the capacity risks. The burden of disease is disproportionately higher among HIV/AIDS affected 
households.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Several factors hinder Lesotho➢❨ s private-sector growth, affecting both Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) and the growth of the local micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). The 
Trans-Pacific partnership could cause FDI in textile manufacturing to fall over the medium term. 
All quantitative measures ➢❨  including the Global Trade Reports, Doing Business Indicators, 
and Enterprise Surveys ➢❨  suggest that business regulations seriously constrain growth. Despite 
making progress in streamlining business and property registration and in establishing and 
operating a credit bureau, Lesotho ranks low on key Doing Business Indicators ➢❨  such as 
dealing with construction permits, accessing finance, and the cost of capital. These are constraints 
on domestic entrepreneurship, suggesting that the domestic private sector remains dependent on 
the state and non-tradable sectors. Over the last two decades, Lesotho shifted its growth drivers 
from export-led development towards dependency on government spending. 
 
Increased public spending has further crowded out private sector investment. Limited job 
opportunities in the private sector have exacerbated poverty and inequality and led to a situation 
in which the public sector has become a de facto social safety by absorbing employment which 
has led to a bloated public sector and oversized public spending. This has led to a vicious cycle 
that simultaneously crowds out investment in the country.



Page 3 of 12

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the development of selected 
non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth and job creation.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To improve the business environment for firms, strengthen select government institutions, and 
further diversify the economy.

Key Results 
The Additional Financing (AF) would seek to ensure that: (i) legislation supported by the Project 
is passed and implemented, (ii) automated systems supported by the Project are widely used, (iii) 
institutional changes supported by the Project are completed and institutional entities are fully 
operational, and (iv) deciduous fruit production, piloted by the Project, is supported by an 
enabling environment that facilitates investment in the sector. A new activity would include 
support for issues of trade facilitation and logistics given their cross-cutting importance to the 
economy.

D.  Project Description

The AF will provide additional support to the three original components, as well as support a new 
subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics. Activities have been chosen for the following 
reasons: (i) those which can be completed during the time available for implementation of the AF; 
(ii) those with overall positive results during the current project; (iii) those where implementation 
needs to continue in order for benefits for firms to be realized and sustained; (iv) those with 
significant stakeholder buy-in and clear alignment with the country➢❨ s economic needs and 
policies, including the Vision 2020 and the NSDP for 2012➢❨ 2017; and (v) those 
complementary with other private sector development projects.  
 
Component 1: 
 
Project activities under this component will continue to support efforts to reduce the time and cost 
associated with doing business, and increase access to finance. Subcomponent 1A would be 
divided into two subcomponents, in order to properly reflect anticipated results against Doing 
Business indicators. A new subcomponent on trade facilitation and logistics aims to make trading 
across borders faster and cheaper for firms. 
 
In Subcomponent 1A, support would continue under the AF for the enactment of the business 
registration and licensing bill, and the implementation of automated business licensing and e-
payment gateway services at the One Stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC). The AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Strengthening of the OBFC, which would include developing OBFC➢❨ s legal framework; 
integrating the Business Registration system with LRA➢❨ s system to issue tax identifier 
numbers; supporting OBFC management; designing and implementing a capacity building 
program; completing necessary technology upgrades; developing and deploying a reform 
communication strategy; and creating public access sites in various districts for OBFC and other 



Page 4 of 12

government-to-business services. 
 
(ii) Improving business inspections reform, through a careful review of the legal and regulatory 
framework, the training of inspectors, and the development of a business inspections policy and 
associated manuals, risk-assessment tools, and training modules for its implementation. 
 
In Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) support would continue for the automation of the 
construction permit system. The AF would additionally support the implementation of an e-
payment system, and system support and maintenance for two years.  
 
In Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B), support would continue under the AF for access to finance 
activities. 
With regards to the establishment of the credit information bureau (CIB), the AF would 
additionally support: 
 
(i) Expanding CIB coverage to include businesses, which would require legal reforms since the 
current law only allows for collection of consumer (individual) data. 
  
(ii) Training to enable credit providers associations and microfinance institutions to upgrade 
systems and processes and use various new credit information tools being developed by the 
project. 
With regards to the establishment of a movable assets collateral registry, the AF would 
additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to raise public awareness; (ii) development of a 
mobile application; (iii) development and implementation of a capacity building program for 
credit providers; (iv) continuous alignment and harmonization of associated laws. 
 
With regards to the establishment of a leasing industry, the AF would support technical assistance 
on financial leasing for credit providers.  
 
With regards to insolvency reform, the AF would additionally support: (i) extensive campaigns to 
raise public awareness; (ii) intensive training to prepare for the implementation of the new Bill, 
focused on the Office of the Master of the High Court, the judiciary, and insolvency practitioners; 
and (iii) the design and implementation of ICT systems to ensure efficiency in insolvency 
proceedings and for the Master of the High Court. 
 
Finally, in order to ensure the sustainability of ongoing reforms and to entrench capacity within 
Lesotho to generate further reforms as needed, an institutional assessment of the Office of 
Parliamentary Counsel (OPC) will be undertaken under the AF in the areas of technology, skills, 
and human resources, and a training and capacity building plan will be developed and deployed. 
 
Subcomponent 1D would be new, and it would support two trade facilitation and logistics 
activities. Importantly, the majority of the related technical assistance and training would be 
funded by the LICP. 
 
(i) Support for Customs operations. This would cover the upgrading of ASYCUDAWorld, 
including additional modules, and the provision of redundancy for the system: a disaster recovery 
site to secure and sustain the customs operation, a back-up server, a stand by generator and other 
equipment as required. 



Page 5 of 12

 
(ii) Support for preparing and developing a single window that would connect selected 
government agencies involved in trade. This would enable Lesotho to move towards a paperless 
environment for import/export related procedures and processes.  
 
This component would finance technical assistance, training, goods, works, and equipment. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 1A would be US$ 1.3M, Subcomponent 1B (formerly part of 1A) 
would be US$ 0.03M, Subcomponent 1C (formerly 1B) would be US$ 1.7M, and Subcomponent 
1D would be US$ 2.3M. 
 
Component 2: 
 
This component will continue to support economic diversification activities. 
 
In Subcomponent 2A, support would continue under the AF for investment promotion and 
fostering increased linkages to the local economy. The AF would additionally support: (i) the 
reorganization of the LNDC, including implementation support for the resulting entity(ies); (ii) 
the development of a Private Sector Development Strategy; and (iii) the scaling up of a linkages 
program currently being piloted, including capacity building in the government to sustain the 
program.   
 
Subcomponent 2B will continue supporting the tourism sector, albeit in a different capacity given 
the complementarity with the AFDB project. Under the AF, support would be provided for: (i) the 
construction and management of the Tourism & Handicraft Information Center, which would 
provide information to tourists, offer retail space for fashion accessories and home decor 
products, and offer leisure and entertainment; and (ii) the development and implementation of a 
business plan for the handicrafts sector.  
Subcomponent 2C will continue supporting commercial horticulture by building out the value 
chain for fresh fruit produce and leveraging the private sector to scale-up production. The AF 
would additionally support:  
  
(i) Support for the existing commercial horticulture plots in order to render them commercially 
sustainable. 
 This includes upgrading the irrigation system; and developing and implementing a marketing and 
distribution strategy; among others.  
 
(ii) Development of a research and training center, to conduct applied research, including variety 
testing, and yield and performance monitoring, and to provide training on good farm practices, 
retail standards, and business skills to farmers in Lesotho. If adequately funded and governed, the 
research and training Center could take over many horticulture- related activities, currently 
managed by the PMU, when the Project ends. 
 
(iii) Development and implementation of a capacity building program for quality and standards, 
directed at farmers, trainers, auditors and GoL Officials.  
 
(iv) Integrate horticulture suitability maps with the master irrigation plans that are being 
developed for Lesotho.  
 



Page 6 of 12

(v) Support for financial institutions, to strengthen their capacity to effectively assess business 
plans, conduct due diligence, and gauge risks in the fresh fruit sector. After the initial assessment, 
support could be provided through LEAP. 
 
(vi) Support for a targeted investor attraction program, that clarifies at which levels of the value 
chain investors may seek to engage or invest, what the GoL expects from investors, and what 
potential investors can expect in return. This would include support for road shows in selected 
target markets, including South Africa and Kenya, among others. 
 
(vii) Support for agri-logistics, including a feasibility study for a packhouse, among others. LICP 
is embarking on an in-depth agri-logistics survey to identify technical and regulatory constraints 
from the field to domestic and international retailers, with a special emphasis on cross-border 
logistics and cold chains (storage and transport). The AF would consider supporting some of the 
recommendations, subject to financing availability. 
 
Subcomponent 2D will continue to support the management of the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance 
Program (LEAP) Program. A review of the systems and processes of LEAP will be carried out 
under the current project such that under the AF, the scope of the LEAP matching grants program 
can be expanded to include machinery and equipment. 
 
This component would primarily finance technical assistance, training, goods and works. 
Indicatively, Subcomponent 2A would be US$ 1.4M, Subcomponent 2B would be US$ 1.7M, 
Subcomponent 2C would be US$ 2.4M, and Subcomponent 2D would be US$ 0.5M. 
  
Component 3: 
 
This component will continue supporting the costs of the Project Management Unit, including the 
Monitoring and Evaluation system, and the management and implementation of the Environment 
and Social Management Plans (ESMP). To accommodate the larger scope of the PSCED-II 
Project under the AF, it is proposed that the PMU hire a Horticulture Coordinator, an Investment 
Climate / Business Environment officer, and a Communications Specialist. While the first of 
these is contemplated under the current project but has never been filled, the latter two positions 
would be new. A review of salaries is proposed to ensure PMU staff are paid competitively and 
according to their experience and performance.

Component Name
Improving the Business Environment
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Supporting Economic Diversification
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Implementation



Page 7 of 12

Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Under Component 2, the construction of a Tourism Handicraft Centre will take place in Maseru, 
while horticulture related activities will be implemented in Mahobong and Likhetlane in the 
Leribe District located approximately 215km from Maseru.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)
Nneka Okereke (OPSPF)
Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Reflecting the multi-sector nature of the project, implementation arrangements are intended to offer a 
balance between the effective overall supervision and monitoring of the activities at the project level, 
as well as reinforcing the management and institutional responsibilities of individual sub-
components.  
 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC consists of members representing the agencies 
responsible for the project implementation i.e. the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, 
MAFS, MFLR, MoF, MDP, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank, Town Clerk of the MCC, the 
Parliamentary Counsel, Master of High Court and the CEOs from LNDC and LTDC. The committee 
meets every semester to monitor the implementation progress of the project and help to resolve 
technical and implementation problems affecting project progress. Meetings are chaired by the 
Principal Secretary of MTICM. 
 
Project Management Unit (PMU): The day-to-day operations of the project are overseen by a Project 
Management Unit that is headed by a qualified Project Manager. In addition, the PMU includes a 
Financial Manager and a Procurement Manager who oversee the Financial Management and 
Procurement issues respectively. The PMU provides for overall fiduciary management, monitoring 
and evaluation, project oversight, and coordination. The role and functions of the PMU have been 
detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The Project Manager is responsible for: (i) 
overall day-today management of the project, including coordination of procurement, financial 
management and M&E; (ii) coordination with all the implementing agencies responsible for the 
implementation of the various sub-components; and (iii) coordination with other donors and relevant 
programs/projects. The Project Manager reports to the Project Steering Committee chaired by the 
Principal Secretary, MTICM. The project covers the operating costs of the PMU, necessary 
equipment purchase, training of staff and the costs of annual audits of project accounts.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



Page 8 of 12

Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The Additional Financing to the Second Private 
Sector Competitiveness & Economic Diversification 
Project will maintain the Category B classification of 
the original loan. The environmental impacts of the 
AF are expected to derive mainly from the 
horticulture activities and the small-scale 
construction works related to the Tourism Handicraft 
Center which were assessed in the original loan. 
Potential minor to moderate adverse impacts are 
being managed and monitored through Global GAP 
certification for the horticulture sub-component, and 
through the provisions of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared 
for the horticulture sub-component and the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). Both instruments where prepared in 
anticipation that the project will scale up horticulture 
production in Lesotho, and was therefore designed 
for the Government of Lesotho to use post PSCED-II 
Project. Given the nature and scale of the project, the 
environmental impacts are expected to be generally 
limited to the sites and can be addressed with known 
mitigation measures included in the ESMF 
 
Environmental safeguard implementation 
arrangements will follow the arrangements that are 
already in place for the parent project. Activities to 
be carried out under the proposed Additional 
Financing (establishment of nurseries and a research 
center) are derived from continuity of the current 
project, and therefore the Additional Financing will 
not trigger additional safeguards policy.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project will not support activities that will affect 
natural or critical habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The projects will not support activities located within 
forested areas or plantations as defined under OP 
4.36.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes While the total land under the project is not 
substantial (only 30-35 hectares) and the risk of 
pesticides is minor to moderate due to the small 
amounts of pesticides being used, the ESMF 
incorporates an integrated pest management plan 
(IPMP). The application of fertilizers and pesticides 
will consider soil type and slope to ensure protection 
of watershed and groundwater. Application of 
pesticides and fertilizers will follow sustainable 



Page 9 of 12

approaches described in the Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) for the parent project and 
monitored under the Global Gap framework. The 
subscription to Global Gap ensures that the project is 
compliant with international norms in the use and 
handling of agrochemicals. The horticulture 
coordinator will monitor erosion, water quality and 
soil nutrition, but with the 
Global Gap the project has enhanced inspection with 
an independent monitoring regime.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No While the project will finance minor construction 
works related to the Tourism Handicraft Center that 
will provide information on tourism sites, including 
physical cultural resources, the AF will not have 
direct impacts on physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no Indigenous Peoples identified in the 
project areas.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The Tourism Information & Handicraft Center will 
be built on land on which there are no encroachers or 
squatters. A shortlist of potential sites has been 
developed for the tourism center and all shortlisted 
sites are held by public entities. Activities under the 
project will avoid any potential involuntary 
resettlement impacts and will ensure that if land 
acquisition is necessary, it will be carried out in a 
fully voluntary nature. Given that risk of involuntary 
resettlement impacts is low, the ESMP will include 
land acquisition screening criteria in order to ensure 
that involuntary resettlement impacts are avoided.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance construction or 
rehabilitation of dams, nor will it rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under 
construction, as defined in the policy.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project will not affect international waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities located in 
any known areas under territorial dispute as defined 
in OP 7.60.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated from the project since 
the project will mainly be providing technical assistance to the GoL in Maseru, and only sub-
components 2B and 2C will support the tourism sector and horticulture, respectively. Potential 



Page 10 of 12

minor to moderate potential adverse impacts are being managed through Global GAP certification 
for the horticulture subcomponent, and through the provisions of the ESMP and ESMF prepared 
for the sub-components, respectively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The AF will benefit from the institutional arrangements established under PSCED II Project. In 
anticipation of potential adverse impacts that could arise from construction of the Tourism 
Handicraft Centre, an ESMP has been prepared, and for implementation of the horticulture 
subcomponent, an ESMF has been prepared.  
 
All institutions that will be involved have implemented bank projects previously or are currently 
involved in implementation of other programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank 
safeguards and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include: (i) the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which provides guidance to 
the PMU; (ii) The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, which provides support to the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; (iii) The Ministry of Forestry, which provides guidance to the 
project on matters related to technical on-farm activities; (iv) The Project Steering Committee, 
which consists of the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, MAFS, MFLS, the Central 
Bank, Registrar General and CEOs from LNDC and LTDC; (v) The National Environmental 
Secretariat (NES), the environmental agency responsible for reviewing and clearing all safeguards 
documentation for the project; (vi) operators in the handicraft sector in Lesotho who were 
consulted during the preparation of the ESMP for the Tourism Handicraft Center to be constructed 
in Maseru; (vii) the current participating farmers in the horticulture industry who have been 
consulted during the preparation of PSCEDP II as well as ESMF preparation; and (viii) the 
Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA), which will be the beneficiary of activities relating to the 
Project's new trade facilitation & logistics subcomponent.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 23-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Lesotho 22-Dec-2016
Comments: Disclosed here: http://www.psc.org.ls/viewNewsletter.aspx



Page 11 of 12

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 23-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Lesotho 22-Dec-2016
Comments: Disclosed here, as part of the ESMF http://www.psc.org.ls/viewNewsletter.aspx

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 12 of 12

include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Maria Paulina Mogollon
Title: Senior Private Sector Speciali

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Ministry of Development Planning
Contact: Tlohelang Aumane
Title: Principal Secretary
Email: tlohelang@yahoo.co.uk

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Trade and Industry
Contact: Fusi Notoane
Title: Principal Secretary
Email: fusi.notoane@gmail.com

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Paulina Mogollon
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA) Date: 23-Dec-2016
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: David Bridgman (PMGR) Date: 27-Dec-2016

Country Director: Name: Ivan Velev (CD) Date: 29-Dec-2016

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 
 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 1 of 33  

     

 
     

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 2 of 33  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Haiti P162908 Resilient Productive 
Landscapes in Haiti 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 04-Dec-2017 28-Feb-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Natural Resources and 
Rural Development 
(MARNDR), Ministry of 
Environment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing agricultural and 
landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the Government to respond promptly 
and effectively to an eligible emergency 
 
 
Components 

Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level interventions 
Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices 
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Emergency Response Mechanism 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 26.21 

Total Financing 26.21 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 3 of 33  

 

Total World Bank Group Financing 15.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing 5.00 

Multilateral and Bilateral Financing (Concessional) 5.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Baseline and business as usual 
 

1. Haiti is a densely populated island state, the third largest nation by area and population (10.4 
million) in the Caribbean and benefits from a rich economic endowment. Assets include proximity 
and access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 
historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and unmet demand for the 
private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. Yet Haiti remains 
the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the poorest countries in the world, with 
a GDP per capita of US$820. Almost 60 percent of the population lives below the national poverty 
line with marked differences between urban and rural areas

1
, inequality is high, with wealth and 

economic opportunity concentrated around Port-au-Prince. Access to basic services is limited, 
particularly in rural areas, which has translated into low human development indicators (Haiti ranks 
168th out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index). 

 
2. Agriculture continues to play a dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing over 20 

percent of GDP and most rural Haitians rely on agricultural production as their primary livelihood 
strategy. The agriculture sector also accounts for around 50 percent of overall employment, 66 
percent of employment in rural areas, and 75 percent of employment in low income households. 
Agriculture is the sole economic activity for 55 percent of the rural households, and involves more 

                                                           
1
 75% fall below poverty line in rural areas compared to 40% in urban areas 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 4 of 33  

 

than 70 percent of them. This production is critical for food security
2
, in a context where more than 

half of the population is affected by undernutrition (2016, FAO); around a third of the production is 
being used for subsistence

3
, while the rest of productions is sold generating much needed income. 

 
3. Climate change is significantly impacting agriculture and will increasingly do so in the future. 

Climate change is projected to manifest itself in Haiti the following ways:  a) increases in 

temperatures: it is likely that temperatures will increase by 0.8-1°C by the year 2030 and by 1.5-

1.7°C by the year 2060, with the highest increases expected in the months of June or July; b) 
decreases in precipitation: precipitation is expected to decrease by 5.9-20 percent by 2030 and by 
10.6-35.8 percent by 2060, with the greatest decreases also expected in the months of June or July

4
. 

This will affect agriculture in general, and subsistence agriculture in particular, which is primarily 
rain-fed and therefore highly vulnerable to rainfall patterns. A combination of increasing 
temperatures and decreasing precipitation, especially in June and July, is likely to impose 
particularly severe stresses on agricultural systems, especially given the highly-degraded nature of 
soils and vegetation in the target sub-watersheds.  

 
4. Haiti’s population and territory are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters and exposure is 

expected to increase as climate change impact intensifies. Haiti has the highest index of 
vulnerability to hurricanes (12,9 on a scale of 13) among small Low Income Countries (LIC) Island 
States and is the third country hardest hit by climatic events in the world

5
. Ninety-six (96) percent of 

the population is considered at risk. Climate change predictions for 2050 and beyond suggest that 
more than 50 percent of the total area of Haiti will be in danger of desertification largely due to 
climate variability and change. Extreme weather events, according to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC)

6
, indicate that the Caribbean region is likely to be exposed in the future to 

more intense and frequent extreme weather events. On average, each disaster costs two percent of 
GDP per year, and occasionally much more (in 2008, tropical storms’ economic impact reached 15 
percent of GDP), and significantly affects the agriculture sector

7
. The country is highly mountainous 

with more than half of Haiti’s territory having slopes over 20 degrees, that centuries of 
deforestation have rendered particularly vulnerable to climatic events. Exposed agricultural fields 
which are now commonly exploited on slopes

8
 further exacerbates the issues. Deforestation, and 

inappropriate agricultural practices have produced predictable interlinked environmental and social 
consequences: the loss of topsoil, decreasing soil fertility, rain water run-off and depletion of 
aquifers, droughts, agricultural productive capacity decline, farmers’ losses of incomes and rural 
out-migration. In a context of climate change, extreme weather events and their average intensity 
and frequency are expected to increase, and will further accelerate land and population 

                                                           
2
 Undernutrition concerns more than half of the population (FAO)  

3
 Traditionally, rural Haitians take advantage of seasonal, nutrient rich productions, to complement their diet (fruits, vegetables, 

legumes, small livestock), yet this diversity is at risk due to the deterioration of natural resources that decreases the availability 
of many of these sources of supplementation. 
4
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/presentations/haitipres.pdf   

5
 Global index on Climate Change, 2016 : from 1993 to 2012 the country faced 2 droughts, 1 earthquake, 31 floodings and 26 

tropical storms/hurricanes. 
6
 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/   

7
 In the case of tropical storms, almost 50 % of damages and losses in productive sectors have been concentrated in the 

agriculture sector (PDNA, Feb 2017)  
8
 63% of agricultural land is on more than 20 degrees’ slopes, and 40% of cultivated land in mountains is on slope of more than 

50 degrees. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 5 of 33  

 

vulnerability trend
9
 : identified climate related hazards in Haiti include flash flooding, salt water 

intrusion, drought, intense rainfall, landslides, severe soil erosion, and hurricanes
10

.  
 

5. Addressing intertwined human and ecological vulnerabilities requires a holistic landscape-level 
“productive” approach. The above-mentioned context provides a rationale for integrating a 
landscape approach within watersheds (or sub-watershed) in Haiti to address major soil erosion and 
water retention capacity, prioritizing interventions helping to reduce downstream impacts. 
Improving the natural resource base through the promotion of climate-smart productions and 
practices best adapted to the agro-ecological context

11
, and, as importantly, the capacity to 

generate sustainable incomes out of these, is expected to have a significant positive impact on 
agriculture and the many people who derive their livelihoods and income from, together with the 
provision of nutritious food, and jobs. It will also contribute to protect in a sustainable way 
communities at large against the risks of flash flooding and landslides linked to soil erosion and 
water runoff.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Agriculture in Haiti is beset with problems, despite its importance in local food security and 

contribution to GDP. Production is highly dependent on rainfall, with around five percent of farmers 
using irrigation. Most farmers have poor access to tools, machinery, and purchased inputs including 
improved seeds and fertilizer. Access to credit in rural areas is not a viable option either for poor 
farmers. In addition, there is little organization among producers and underdeveloped value chains, 
further compounded by a lack of rural infrastructure to access markets e.g. rural roads for 
connectivity with buyers, water storage and irrigation for production in dryer seasons and mitigation 
of drought impacts, food dryers and storage for reduction of vulnerability to prices volatility, 
reduction of post-harvest losses, , improved quality for better marketability as well as accessibility of 
nutritious food all year long. The lack of value addition along value chains, reliability and 
sustainability of sources of incomes for farmers generated from tree-crops and other types of 
resilient agricultural productions constitutes a major impediment to the maintenance and 
sustainable expansion of such systems. This also drives their choices towards higher demanded/less 
perishable productions, often at the expense of the environment (e.g. peanuts production on 
slopes, trees cutting for land expansion and/or cash generation with fire wood or charcoal 
production and sales), contributing to the vicious circle of land degradation and increasing 
population vulnerability. In addition, women play a major role in the post-harvest marketing of 
products in Haiti, and the improvement of these value chains is a critical factor for women’s 
economic empowerment, livelihoods and resilience, which offers opportunities for vulnerable 
population- such as women and youth- to increase rural income and jobs diversification.   
 

7. In a country that is already densely populated, steady population growth and land inheritance 

                                                           
9
 Based on available projections, major climatic changes expected to occur in Haiti include a reduction in rainfall of 6 to 20 

percent by 2030 and 11 to 36 percent by 2060. While annual precipitation is projected to decrease, the more limited rainfall 
events are expected to become more intense. Temperatures are also expected to increase by 0.8°C to 1.0°C by 2030, and by 
1.5°C to 1.7°C by 2060.  
10

 Source: Review of Current and Planned Adaptation Action: The Caribbean (Nov, 2011) 
11

 These would seek to improve the stability and quality of the soil substrate through measures such as agroforestry, live fences, 
hedgerows intercropping, vegetative wind breaks, soil vegetative cover, conservation tillage, among others. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 6 of 33  

 

rules
12

 continues to put pressure on land, and drives land use changes. Haiti has 961 inhabitants 
per square kilometer of arable land, the highest pressure density on arable land in the Western 
Hemisphere. Farm sizes have shrunk dramatically over time: 85 percent of farms now have less than 
1 hectare. The main food crops produced are rice (in lowlands), maize, bananas, yams, cassava, 
beans, and millet, and main export crops include coffee and mangoes. Diversification has commonly 
been practiced by farmers as a risk-mitigation strategy (70 percent of farmers produce more than 4 
crops and 75 percent raise some livestock) but is becoming harder to implement in increasingly 
smaller plots. In addition, the traditional practice of creole garden (or “jardin creole”

13
) 

corresponding to small but highly diversified agro-forestry systems, providing fresh and nutritious 
food throughout most of the year among other benefits (high biodiversity, higher productivity linked 
to species associations, soil protection and quality), have tended to decrease to give way to annual 
crops. Yet these resilient systems are particularly adapted to face harsh topographic and climatic 
conditions and are now recognized as a typical climate-smart/agro-ecological best practices. 
Restoring these agro-forestry systems is however not affordable for the vast majority of farmers.   
     

8. The natural resource base and agriculture are linked by a negative feedback loop. Unsustainable 
farming practices such as agriculture on slopes and marginal areas, lack of agriculture conservation 
technologies, are driven by land pressure, low farmers’ education level, and poor farmers’ economic 
conditions. These have contributed to the severe degradation of around 85 percent of watersheds

14
 

with wide ranging impacts, namely on (i) yields -the depletion of the natural resource base and high 
exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events have driven an average rate of decline in 
yields of between .5 to 1.2 percent per annum (World Bank, 2005). Stagnating or shrinking yields in 
turn further exacerbate land pressure, causing more degradation and deforestation; and (ii) on 
critical habitats such as mangroves

15
 -run off from denuded slopes and gullies leading to soil washed 

away and settling into valleys, rivers and eventually into the sea. Soil erosion caused by water, either 
as direct rainfall on the soil surface, or indirectly through gullies and channels, causes an annual loss 
of land for the whole country estimated at about 37 million metric tons (MT). This corresponds to an 
average loss of about 15 MT/ha/yr across the country. Without trees’ complex root systems to hold 
Haiti’s mountainous terrain in place, protect gullies from serious erosion and prevent water 
resources depletion, vulnerability of landscapes and people living on them is doomed to increase. 
Reducing poverty and building system resilience will require an integrated management approach 
that considers the complex interactions between the environment and agriculture and turns the 
negative- into a positive feedback loop.  Climate change is expected to increase these negative 
feedback loops. 
 

9. The unique challenge to building resilience in the Haitian Agriculture sector arises from the 
combination of climate change adding further stress to a system already engaged in a negative 
feedback loop between the agriculture production and the natural resource base.  As described 
above, the depleting natural resource base and lack of landscape level management increase the 
sensitivity of agricultural production and ecosystems to weather and climate events. Climate change 

                                                           
12

 All land is inherited bilaterally and equally between siblings, with arable land being usually divided immediately. 
13

 A Creole garden is a multi-storied agro-forestry system including a mix of perennial and annual crops, i.e. woody perennials, 
tree crops (i.e. bread fruit, mango, avocado, bananas, citrus, coffee), vegetable and staple crops, playing multiple roles, 
including household’s food security and providing ecosystems benefits 
14

 According to Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (MARNDR), 2016  
15

 Mangroves are essential for maintaining fish nursing sites, protecting coasts against storms, and lowland crops from soil 
salinization (e.g. rice production) which are ultimately important for livelihoods 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 7 of 33  

 

is expected to further amplify the exposure to such events. With both sensitivity and exposure set to 
increase, vulnerability will follow suit. The weather and climate events that today’s depleted natural 
resource base offers much reduced protection against are congruent with priority issues for 
resilience building in the climate change context: extreme events, drought, extreme rainfall events, 
etc. In each of these cases, the health of the natural resource base is a key determinant of farmer 
resilience. For example, the risk of drought is much reduced if the moisture retention capacity of 
soils is rehabilitated, micro-catchment areas include water storage facilities and water is being 
retained for longer periods in upstream forests. As a result, any effort to build resilience to climate 
change in Agriculture will need to take an integrated approach taking into account both sensitivity 
due to a diminished natural resource base and exposure due to climate change. 

 
Institutional context 
 
10. Ministry of Environment (MdE) and Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) recognize the interdependency between Natural Resources 
Management and Agriculture Production as well as the added stress imposed by climate change. 
In its policy framework 2010-2025, MARNDR identifies watersheds degradation as a major issue, and 
establishes the reduction of environmental vulnerability as a long-term objective requiring the 
protection of environment and natural resources. It also establishes the prevention and 
management of natural disasters as a priority

16
. In 2006, the Government submitted their National 

Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) (Plan d’ Action National d’ Adaptation - PANA).  In this 
document, the Government lays out their most urgent risks from climate change and propose a way 
forward.  One of the key risks outlined is that of soil erosion

17
 and its relationship with the 

agriculture sector vulnerability. In a recent update of the National Action Plan against Desertification 
(2015), MdE establishes as one objective the collaborative development of management plans for 
the most vulnerable watersheds in the country. However, the operationalization of the Plans has yet 
to unfold. The need for stronger cross-sectoral collaboration is mutually recognized, but little 
concrete actions have taken place in a context of institutional weaknesses, absence of joint planning 
and insufficient budget to operationalize actions plans.  

 
11. In response to the country’s vulnerability to current climate variability and to climate change, there 

is a baseline of investments in this area: 

 World Bank (WB) financed Strengthening Hydro-Meteorological Services project (2015-2020, 
US$ 5 million), which aims to strengthen Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide hydro-
meteorological and climate information services customized to the needs of the civil protection 
and agriculture sectors, contributing to increasing disaster and climate resilience. The main 
counterpart agency is the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

                                                           
16

 The MARNDR Triennial Plan for Relaunching Agriculture 2013-2016 also identifies as a strategic pillar the watershed 
integrated approach (ridge to reef). 
17

 “Haiti is a mountainous country whose peaks reach up to 2684 meters over altitude. Poor farming practices weaken the soil 
capital and weaken the productive capacity as they lead the arable land towards the sea Land erosion, under the effects of 
some natural factors. Drought, wind, rain and some anthropogenic factors: excessive deforestation and uncontrolled 
construction in urban areas leads to a country's land desertification processes. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is 
closely linked to that of water and soil.  Climate change by acting on water resources also influence agricultural production. On 
the other hand, winds, floods, droughts have direct impacts on agriculture given the level of soil erosion leading to their 
aridity. In addition, a study conducted by the MOE (2000) argues that early in the second half of the 21st century, more than 
half of the area of land of Haiti will be at desertification risk due to climatic conditions.” 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 8 of 33  

 

(MARNDR). 

 WB financed Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project Phase II - 
RESEPAG II  (2012-2019, US$ 85 million) which aims to  (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to 
services in the agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food 
security in Selected Areas; (c) improve livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew; and 
(d) enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. The 
project finances interventions in the North/North East, Centre, and South departments. It 
supports in particular a Farmer Subsidy scheme using various technical packages and 
implemented through individual vouchers to improve the adoption of improved agriculture 
inputs/technologies (with a particular emphasis on climate resilient production and practices) ; 
finances Farmer Field Schools as a vehicle to promote best practices (extension services 
mechanism) ; and a Market Support Facility, using matching grants to allow group of producers 
to add value to their productions (value chain development).  

 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (2016-
2020, US$ 42 million), which aims to reduce rural economic losses through the improvement of 
climate risk management in selected watersheds. Some specific objectives include to: (i) 
increase capacities for adaptation to climate change and disaster risk management (DRM) in the 
agriculture sector; (ii) improve water and sediment conservation in selected gullies of priority 
watersheds; and (iii) reduce the risk of rural economic losses due to floods in targeted 
watersheds. 

 United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Reforestation Project (2017-2021, 
US$ 40 million), which aim is to reduce the threat of deforestation, improve resilience to 
economic and natural shocks, increase tree cover in targeted areas, and improve environmental 
governance and coordination. It will be implemented in northern departments. 

 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) financed Projet Small Irrigation and 
Market Access Development Project in the Nippes and Goavienne Region (PPI-3) (2012-2017, 
US$ 13.2 million), which aims to achieve a sustainable improvement in the livelihoods 
and incomes of rural poor households, especially those belonging to the most vulnerable 
groups. Its specific objectives include: (i) increasing agricultural production sustainably through 
efficient water management and the consolidation of both collective and individual irrigated 
agriculture; (ii) improving the value of irrigated agriculture production and increasing farmers' 
access to markets and financial services in order to raise the incomes of the poorest families; 
and (iii) strengthening the planning, organizational and management capacities of grass-roots 
organizations in order to facilitate their access to markets and financial services. 

 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) implemented with LDCF co-financing of the 
Strengthening Climate Resilience and Reducing Disaster Risk in Agriculture to Improve Food 
Security in Haiti Post Earthquake project (2012-2017, US$ 12 million), which aims to increase the 
resilience of vulnerable farmers including their livelihoods and agro-ecosystems against the 
impacts of climate variability and in the post-earthquake crises through integration of disaster 
risk management and adaptation practices in the agricultural sector and replication of more 
hazard resilient crop varieties and cultivation technologies. 

 UNEP implemented with GEF co-financing Program Ecosystem approach on the South Coast of 
Haiti (2015-2020, US$ 6.2 million), aims to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems in 
communities vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. This program advocates an integrated 
strategy encompassing all ecosystems and agricultural production areas from the mountains to 

https://www2.fundsforngos.org/category/democracy-and-good-governance/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 9 of 33  

 

the sea. The various components of the project will also try to address the whole issue of the 
destruction of the ecosystems of the Great South in a perspective of recovery and the fight 
against poverty. 

 French Development Agency (AFD) and European Union co-financed Project for Food Security 
(SECAL) (2013-2017, 15 million euros), which objective is to support agricultural sectors with 
high potential in southern Haiti, contribute to improving the food security of people in the South 
Department and generate additional revenue in the rural areas.  

 
12. Collaborative efforts are underway to boost the implementation of watershed approaches to 

strengthen the management of natural resources (wood, water, soil). In the context of the COP21 
process and resulting Paris Agreement, and in order to relieve the agriculture and population 
pressure on forests and landscapes, as well as adapt to the effects of climate change, a Haiti-based 
NGO, the J/P Haitian Relief Organization (J/P HRO), together with MdE and MARNDR, developed in 
2015 a proposal for a broad initiative – Haiti Takes Roots (HTR) – focused on watershed 
management and reforestation in key areas of Haiti

18
. Its objective is to facilitate engagement, 

coordination, learning, monitoring and synergies in a programmatic approach. This platform would 
be a conduit to operationalize Ministries’ plans, helping to bring key actors together around the 
issue, and establish long term strategies and mechanisms to sustain and implement its objectives. 
Supported by seed funding from J/P HRO and the French government, HTR has shaped its 
governance mechanisms

19
. The IDB and the WB participate in this initiative and more partners are 

expected to join. Two studies have been financed under the HTR umbrella by the WB together with 
J/P HRO to develop a participatory watershed management planning methodology and a post-
hurricane Charcoal and Arboreal Assessments

20
, contributing to the development of a body of 

knowledge and resources. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) is envisaged 
as a proof of concept under HTR aimed at being scaled-up in other (sub)watersheds of the country. 
For this reason, and in order to also benefit from the WB project management experience, J/P HRO 
has committed to provide a parallel financing of US$5 million to RPLP, which will be fully blended 
with IDA and the Global Environment Facility/Least Developed Countries Fund (GEF/LDCF) co-
financing. In this context, LDCF will leverage IDA and parallel financing resources to more 
systematically integrate the climate adaptation lens into productive-oriented interventions.  
 

13. RPLP builds on solid analytical work, as well as the lessons learned from other Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) funded and donor-funded project, including the World Bank’s own projects. Key 
lessons learned emphasize in particular the need for collaborative efforts including strong 
communities’ participatory engagement throughout a project process and continuous institutional 
commitment and support, as well as the necessary generation of revenues for farmers out of the 
supported investments. Since the 2010 Earthquake, the WB’s portfolio in Agriculture expanded with 
RESEPAG I and RESEPAG II,

21
 supporting MARNDR’s capacity to deliver public goods and piloting 

                                                           
18

 The mission of HTR is to contribute to a more rational management of Haiti’s natural, renewable through the management of 
watersheds, the restoration of soils, increasing forest cover, and the promotion of agroforestry – most notably in vulnerable 
watersheds – therefore breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and deforestation. 
19

 HTR shall be governed by a Steering committee chaired by the Prime Minister and supported by a Secretariat, a technical 
platform, a Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, a Geographical Platform, and a virtual Resource Centre; it will include 
members from concerned ministries, institutional partners, international organizations, civil society and private sector. 
20

  PROFOR-funded works to develop (i) a Resilient Productive Landscape Planning Methodology (P162352), and (ii) Haiti 
Arboreal Assessments - post- hurricane tree counting and charcoal assessment (P164024). 
21

 Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project – Phase II (P126744) is ongoing and will close on 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 10 of 33  

 

incentives schemes to support farmers’ improved productions through vouchers mechanisms and 
the strengthening of agricultural value chains through matching grants. RPLP would take advantage 
of the experience gained and use the same approaches, adjusted to the specificities of RPLP. On the 
environment side, the GEF co-funded several projects in Haiti and in the Caribbean, that focused on 
increasing the resilience of agriculture and ecosystems, and boosting food security through climate 
change adaptation. Several of these projects have also focused specifically on the Grand Sud 
(greater south area), given its increased vulnerability to climate shocks. While many of these 
projects were financially supported for the duration of the project, there was little effort to ensure 
that this financing was sustainable.     
 

14. In the context of Climate Change, sustainable financing over time is an important tool to address 
environmental and social vulnerability, and to support Climate adaptation and mitigate Climate 
Change impact. Ministries and other institutions in Haiti face significant financial resources 
constraints. Sustainability of short term programs have consistently been challenging. To address a 
similar problem faced by five other Caribbean islands, a GEF financed project, Sustainable financing 
and management of Eastern Caribbean Marine Ecosystem Project (P103470) (closed June 2016), set 
up and endowed a Caribbean Biodiversity Fund (CBF) mechanism to ensure sustainable financing 
over time to combat threats to biodiversity that arise through human, climate or other sources. 
Under the proposed Project, Haiti, which is an observer and has taken steps to become a full 
member of the CBF, would use LDCF financing (and co-financing from other donors) to join the CBF 
by contributing to the endowment, and establish a National Trust, which will enable Haiti to access 
long term sustainable financing for climate adaptation and biodiversity conservation into perpetuity. 
While the CBF has for various reasons retained this name, it will create a climate change adaptation 
window under RPLP to address climate change adaptation priority needs. This National Trust shall 
use the interests raised by the CBF from the LDCF funding to continue to fund sub-projects that 
would support primarily the sustainability of interventions financed under RPLP, and other future 
climate change adaptation related investments. The interest raised, however, will be off the total 
amount in the CBF (over US$34 million currently) to allow all the CBF countries to benefit from 
economies of scale. This longer-term source of predictable financing will mean that when a disaster 
strikes Haiti, the current practice of diverting government funding to address that crisis will not 
impact this fund. As such it presents a key long term stabilizing mechanism for addressing 
adaptation. 
 

15. The Project is consistent with the climate change action plan submitted to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in the context of the Paris meetings in 2015 (Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution – INDC)

22
. The Action Plan specifically names natural resource 

management within watersheds, use of agricultural technologies adapted to climate change, use of 
drought-resistant crops, soil conservation, reducing disaster risk in areas most vulnerable to 
drought, reforestation of upstream areas, as priorities for adaptation within the plan.  
 

16. It responds directly to strategic objectives laid out in the GEF Programming Strategy on 
Adaptation to Climate Change: Least Developed Countries Fund Special Climate Change Fund 
(June 11, 2014) and Haiti’s National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) by helping the 
country reduce its vulnerability to soil erosion, which are exacerbated through increasing volatile 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
December 31, 2019. 
22

 http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Haiti/1/CPDN_Republique%20d'Haiti.pdf 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 11 of 33  

 

climatic events (floods, cyclones, hurricanes) and human (agriculture) activity. The project will 
contribute to the LDCF strategy Objective 1 (Reduce the vulnerability of people, livelihoods, physical 
assets and natural systems to the adverse effects of climate change); Objective 2 (Strengthen 
institutional and technical capacities for effective climate change adaptation) ; and  Objective 3 
(Integrate climate change adaptation into relevant policies, plans and associated processes)

23
. The 

Project, using LDCF funds jointly with IDA financing and J/P HRO parallel financing, will (i) contribute 
towards building an increased awareness of climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaption, and 
directly reducing the vulnerability of farmers to climate change through investment in more resilient 
agricultural practices. These will occur in (sub)watersheds areas by financing climate-smart 
agricultural production practices (agroforestry, conservation agriculture, slope management, etc.) ; 
the project will also finance improvement of the product value chains to generate higher and more 
sustainable income, and reinforcement of climate resilient infrastructure assets ; (ii) support the 
enabling environment by strengthening institutional capacities to develop and implement sound 
cross-sectoral policies and action plans integrating climate change adaptation considerations in 
national and local level strategies ; access to and analyze geo-spatial and other climate related data 
to better address climate risks and inform decision processes ; and support a mechanism aimed at 
sustaining long term financing of adaptation technologies and practices; and (iii) it will provide 
extensive trainings programs to increase skills and knowledge tailored to the key stakeholders and 
audiences. RPLP will support the achievement of objectives set forth under the NAPA, which served 
as the basis for the plan submitted to the UNFCCC in 2015. The document weighted adaptation 
options based on their impact on vulnerable natural resources and groups, and ranked “watershed 
management and soil conservation” at the top (5 on a 1 to 5 scale).    
 

17. RPLP is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Haiti Country Partnerships Framework (CPF) 2016-
2019. Objective 1 of the CPF aims to enhance economic activities and income-generation 
opportunities, including in the agricultural sector through improving agricultural productivity by 
reinforcing the ability of farmer’s groups to bring quality products to market. RPLP will support value 
chains to access to new and better markets and reduce production risks while decreasing 
vulnerability to the effects of prices and climate shocks. The CPF’s Objective 2 targets improving 
disaster prevention and strengthening climate resilience through a number of avenues, including the 
analysis of land management practices and definition of entry points for investment in the 
promotion of resilient productive landscapes. RPLP will directly tackle the issue of improving disaster 
prevention, reducing the vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change, increase adaptive 
capacity to respond to the impacts of climate change, and strengthening climate resilience. It will 
target four sub-watersheds within hydrological zones hard-hit by Hurricane Matthew in the 
Department of Nippes, and help mitigate the impact of future extreme weather events.   

 
18. RPLP will work closely and coordinate actions with other development partners, especially 

through the HTR platform.  Given the challenges with fragmented donor contributions to all sectors 
in Haiti as identified by the CPF, the HTR platform will be important for the sector to bring all 
partners around critical development themes, and coordinate efforts for broader impact. In addition 
to ongoing projects mentioned above (see point 11) new projects with similar objectives are under 
development that RPLP will coordinate with. These include projects to be financed through IDB, 
AFD, and IFAD.  

                                                           
23

 Updated Results-Based Management Framework For Adaptation To Climate Change Under The Least Developed Countries 
Fund And The Special Climate Change Fund”, GEF/LDCF.SCCF.17/05/Rev.01 October 15, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 12 of 33  

 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 

19. The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing 
agricultural and landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the 
Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 
20. The crisis or emergency referred to in the PDO reflects a legal requirement that relates to the 

Contingency Emergency Response Component (component 4 of the Project).  
 

21. Selected areas for intervention. While Component 1 addressing institutional and organizational 
capacity would have a nationwide coverage, Component 2 would be implemented in selected sub-
watershed. In the process of selection of these sub-watersheds, specific aspects were considered: (i) 
Agro-ecological criteria; (ii) Socio-economic criteria; (iii) Environmental vulnerability criteria; and (iv) 
Institutional criteria. Using a ranking scale of 1 to 5 for each of these criteria to prioritize areas, and 
based on available funding from the Project, four sub-watersheds were selected. These are:  (i) Rivière 
Froide watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and 
(iv) Bondeau sub-wastershed and its mangrove. They offer a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, 
yet geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities.  

 
22. In the context of RPLP, resilience is defined as the ability of people, assets, and systems to resist, 

absorb, accommodate, and recover in a timely and efficient manner from climatic hazards without 
undermining its welfare, value, structure, and functioning, while also maintaining the capacity for 
adaptation, learning, and transformation in the long term. Resilient-enhancing agriculture and 
landscape management practices correspond to the group of technologies, practices and systemic 
approaches under the climate smart agriculture and landscapes framework of the Global Alliance for 
Climate Smart Agriculture. In the context of the RPLP, these include interlinked actions at diverse 
levels: at farm level; along food value chains; and, at landscape level.  

 
23. Landscape is defined as “an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough 

to be managed by the people using the land which produces those services” (FAO 2013). A landscape 
can contain various ecosystems, and human activities and institutions are viewed as an integral part of 
landscapes. Ecosystems services include soil health, essential for sustainable and productive 
agriculture; water retention; biodiversity conservation; carbon sequestration; renewable energy 
sources; among others. 

 

Project Beneficiaries 
 
24. Primary beneficiaries of RPLP will be smallholder farmers and communities living in the selected sub-

watersheds targeted by the Project that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. In a 
context of high poverty prevalence, extensive land use for agricultural production including on steep 
slopes including gullies, very small size plots, degraded or at risk for degradation, all farmers and 
communities can be considered vulnerable. They will benefit individually from improved agricultural 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 13 of 33  

 

production practices adapted to the agro-ecological context, improving soil conditions and becoming 
more resilient to extreme weather events, as well as from improved marketing conditions; and 
collectively from reduced soil erosion, improved water retention capacity, enhanced field level 
productivity linked to ecosystems services generated collectively and synergies created between 
differed production systems at the watershed level. 

 
25. Interventions will also benefit key actors along the agriculture value chains, including service and input 

providers, buyers, processors, and retailers. Lastly, it will benefit the national, regional and local 
institutions in providing with essential tools, knowledge, and management capacity of landscape level 
interventions. Direct beneficiaries would include: (i) producers who have benefited from the voucher 
mechanism (3,000 of which minimum 30% are female); (ii) Service Providers (100 of which minimum 
10% are female); (iii) members of producers’ groups that benefit from co-financing in selected value 
chains (800 of which minimum 50% are female); and, (iv) persons trained in Ministries and local / 
regional authorities (100). The total percentage of women is estimated on the basis of a weighted 
average.  In order to strengthen the role of women, they will receive preferential support to benefit 
from the Project’s interventions.  

 
26. Private sector. Investments of RPLP look at poor to extremely poor segments of the population. 

Access to rural credit is not an option for an already vulnerable population. In addition, changing 
practices, even if expected to provide longer term gains and reduction of vulnerability, involves an 
important level of risk in a context of frequent natural disasters, occurrence of pests, and markets 
uncertainties. No insurance mechanism exists either to cover for such types of high frequency, high 
impact types of risks. RPLP would therefore provide technical packages to producers (including 
knowledge/services and inputs on a one-off basis) required for them to move towards a less 
vulnerable category, and doing so in a concentrated manner in a determined area to produce the 
expected broader ecosystems benefits. The Project would strengthen the private sector actors related 
to agricultural production valorization, critical to develop economically viable and sustainable 
businesses as well as job opportunities; the voucher mechanism involves systematically private sector 
beneficiaries, which supply such inputs and services at market price. Matching grants for groups of 
producers or other actors along the value chains will also aim at filling access to finance gaps to 
increase agricultural production valorization. The Project will also work with the Ministries to 
strengthen their capacity to deliver on their public good mandates, and establish the enabling 
environment for supporting resilient landscapes management. 
 

27. Gender and Nutrition. RPLP acknowledges that women and men are not given the same opportunities 
towards climate adaption and raising of incomes. Women face supplementary constraints -such as less 
access to information, to assets, to credit, to inputs- that have to be taken into account. 
Mainstreaming gender and nutrition into the different investments and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) mechanisms will ensure that the Project will contribute to reduce gender gaps when building 
resilience and contribute toward improving food security. The Project will build on experience and 
knowledge developed through RESEPAG II Project, which will be facilitated by the fact that RPLP core 
actions to support climate smart practices adoption and value chains improvement will use similar 
instruments as RESEPAG II. Namely the design of selection mechanisms of beneficiaries and co-
financing rules for matching grants, the tailoring of participatory and training activities, including 
related to nutrition, and gender-disaggregated data collection in M&E and grievances, will be 
embedded into RPLP. In order to  address any possible outstanding  gender gaps in the areas of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 14 of 33  

 

interventions,  further  analysis and gender planning will be conducted prior to Project 
implementation by the RESEPAG II gender specialist.   
 

28. Food Security co-benefits. Food insecurity is an important problem in Haiti particularly in rural areas 
that the Project will tackle at different levels. First, the promotion of activities contributing to the 
restoration of degraded areas and improvement of current practices in the different watersheds will 
have a positive impact on overall agricultural productivity as well as on the production of food of high 
nutritional value (mostly fruits and vegetables). Second, the Project will contribute to improve food 
security through the promotion of crop quality and diversity induced with agroforestry investments, 
named traditionally “jardins creoles” in Haiti.  The project expects to promote several types of fruit 
trees, such as breadfruit, coconut, mango, guava, banana, citrus, as well as vegetables and yam. In 
addition, the combination of such investments combined with small infrastructure and support to 
commercialization (through groups of producers, intermediaries, or small enterprises) within the 
entire value chain will therefore contribute to their greater accessibility, availability and thus 
affordability of food, creating more resilience of households toward food insecurity. Investments 
could be related not only to private but also institutional markets. The government has already been 
discussing with school feeding program in the area of intervention. Such intervention would seek to 
help increase the accessibility of nutritious local food to Haitian students and guarantee a stable 
market access to institutional markets for producers and groups. 
 

29. Climate change adaptation co-benefits. RPLP activities are expected to yield significant adaptation co-
benefits (as well as mitigation co-benefits described below). An initial assessment at concept note 
stage indicated that >80 percent of RPLP financing would achieve climate co-benefits. The below table 
summarizes expected adaptation co-benefits: 
 
Table1 Climate change adaptation co-benefits  
 

Current situation Project interventions (selection) Adaptation co-benefits 

Increasing vulnerability to climate 
change driven by: 
- Increased exposure to climate 

change impacts such as: droughts, 
extreme heat, flash floods etc. 

- Increasing sensitivity of production 
to climatic phenomena due to 
reduced resilience driven by a 
degrading natural resource base 

- Increased sensitivity due to a lack of 
adaptive planning capacity at the 
micro-catchment level 

- Increased sensitivity due to lack of 
cross-sectoral adaptive institutional 
capacity to take informed decisions, 
guide, report, and monitor 
interventions on the ground in 
function of a changing climate 

Capacity building: 
- Development of Master Plan for 

Resilient Landscapes Development 
- Intensive technical trainings within key 

line Ministries, at national and local 
level and other relevant stakeholders 

- Capacity building in cartography, 
satellite imaging data collection and 
analysis for climate modeling, , 
development and application of spatial 
decision support tools, forecasting and 
early-warning systems 
 

Investments: 
- Development of “technical packages” 

(including inputs, such as tree 
seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and 
services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-
ecological zones 

- Development of participatory 
investments plans identifying priority 
investments and their geographical 

Strengthening of resilience through 
fortification of natural resource 
base at landscape level: 

- Soil quality improvement in 
areas with high risks of erosion 

- Increased water retention 
capacity 

 
Reduced sensitivity of agricultural 
production & livelihoods to climate 
impacts: 

- Increased coverage of resilient 
agricultural practices, adapted 
to the topography and agro-
ecological context 

- Improved adaptation capacity 
of agricultural production 
through increased 
diversification of productions 
practices to increase resilience 

- Improved livelihoods with 
additional and more diversified 
incomes 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 15 of 33  

 

locations;  
- Development of participatory business 

plans based on specific vulnerability 
criteria (including ecosystems and 
livelihoods) to allow the 
implementation of climate smart 
productions and practices ; and  

- Set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for 
producers focusing on transferring 
knowledge and know-how on Climate 
resilient production systems and 
practices. 

 
Improved adaptive capacity: 

- Improved capacity for planning, 
implementing, monitoring, 
watershed-level interventions 
towards improved natural 
resources management and 
livelihoods. 

 
30. In terms of mitigation co-benefits, it is estimated that RPLP activities will lead to significant benefits 

compared to the baseline. A quantification of the Green House Gas (GHG) mitigation potential using 
the EX-ACT tool estimated that over a duration of 40 years (4 years for actual project implementation 
and 16 years for capitalization of its effects), the Project’s carbon emission reduction  is estimated at 
572,397 tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq), or 28,620 tCO2-eq per year. These benefits will principally be 
achieved through improved landscape management, in particular through the promotion of 
afforestation, agroforestry systems and perennial agriculture cultivars.  

 
Key Results 
 

31. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified: 
 

- Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (Ha) – Corporate Indicator - (target 
of 2,000 Ha) 

- Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number), of which female (in percentage) – 
Corporate Indicator - (target of 3,000 farmers) 

- Share of targeted farmers with improved market access (%) – (target of 40%) 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 16 of 33  

 

 D. Project Description  
 

32. RPLP is designed to restore ecosystem services at sub-watershed level to safeguard and enhance agricultural 
production, reduce vulnerability of economic and ecological systems to external shocks, and to strengthen 
capacities for the long-term sustainable management of those landscapes. The investment will result in the 
provision of environmental services, private and public goods, including enhanced watershed services 
encompassing soil conservation, hydrological services, and biomass supply.  

 
Maps 1 and 2 : Project area 

 

 
 
 
Project Alternative 
 

33. The approach used by RPLP builds on a rich set of lessons learned from past projects and evidence from analytical 
work. The Project will take a landscape approach and operate at sub-watershed level, combining a socio-



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 17 of 33  

 

economic and an ecological approach to landscape management.
24

 The Project’s interventions in the selected 
sub-watersheds will build on the results of two watershed management participatory planning exercises piloted 
within one of the selected sub-watersheds during Project preparation (Rivière Froide) that will be implemented in 
the entire area of the Project by effectiveness with the support of J/P HRO. The operationalization of these plans 
will consist in the development of sub-watersheds’ investments plans, that will be providing more detailed 
information related to each category of intervention offered by the Project with the volume of activities, types of 
instruments pre-identified during project preparation based on lessons learned and pilot participatory planning 
exercises (see Component 2), location and corresponding estimated budget.  

 
34. Resilience-enhancement from RPLP in the selected sub-watersheds will result from actions  to decrease the 

vulnerability of: (i) farmers linked to increasing soil degradation and subsequent continuous reduction of 
production capacity, and insufficient capacity to sell productions in a profitable and sustainable manner, including 
due to poor infrastructure condition; and (ii) landscapes, linked to the lack of holistic, participatory planning 
capacity, required to establish a common understanding of problems, propose solutions, prioritize actions 
expected to have the larger positive impact on ecosystems and populations in a defined sub-watershed, including 
interventions aimed at reducing soil erosion and enhancing water retention capacities in gullies as well as around 
natural springs, mostly through intensification of vegetative and tree cover, as well as small water harvesting 
infrastructure reducing water run-off.  
 

35. RPLP is designed to contribute to break the natural resources degradation/increasing populations’ vulnerability 
cycle in the selected sub-watersheds by taking an integrated approach. Based on geographic concentration, the 
Project will work at both farm- and community level to simultaneously raise production and productivity using 
more resilient, adapted agriculture practices to the hydro-geological context, which will directly contribute to 
rebuild the natural resource base; by protecting and restoring top soil cover in particular, the Project will improve 
water retention capacity, reduce erosion, enhance soil quality, which are required to counter the soil quality 
loss/productivity loss/increasing vulnerability cycle.  The Project will also work along the entire value chain from 
inputs via production to processing and marketing to ensure that the changes introduced result in income gains 
for farmers that are essential for Project sustainability. It will also support the construction or rehabilitation of 
small infrastructures considered critical to enhance landscape’s resilience (e.g. related to water management or 
improved access to markets), taking care of their quality to ensure the best possible resistance to adverse climatic 
conditions. 
 

36. It will also strengthen the institutional enabling environment and build capacity for landscape level governance 
and management at both national and local levels as well as delivering a proof of concept of the approach by 
investing into selected watersheds, to create the enabling conditions for subsequent scale-up. 
 

37. RPLP will include four components: (i) Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacity for landscape 
level resilience; (ii) Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices; 
(iii) Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) Emergency Response Mechanism. The core of the 
investments and expected impact from RPLP shall be seen under Component 2 that will finance agricultural, value 
chains and infrastructure related activities to reduce land and farmers’ vulnerability in the four selected sub-
watersheds; while Component 1 shall establish the enabling environment for Component 2 to achieve its 
objectives and contribute to longer term implementation of sustainable productive landscapes approach by key 
institutions, in particular through the CBF mechanism to provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity.  

                                                           
24

 Landscape-level Land Management Efforts in Haiti. Lessons Learned from Case Studies Spanning Eight Decades. World Bank, 
2016 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 18 of 33  

 

 
Fig. 1: Theory of Change/Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of  RPLP 

 
Component 1: Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level 
interventions (US$ 5.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 4.2 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.4 M 
from J/P HRO).  

38. This component will support national efforts to : create Agriculture/Environment joint landscapes policy and 
action plan towards resilient agriculture and ecosystems; fill skills and knowledge gaps required to implement 
respective mandates; foster partnerships and communication; strengthen institutional capacity to analyze climate 
related data for improved planning and climate related disaster risk prevention; fund the set-up of a National 
Trust Fund that will provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity through the CBF; and will also pave 
the way for Component 2 interventions that will rely on communities’ participatory planning exercises in all 
selected sub-watersheds. Specifically, the component will support:  
 

39. Sub-component 1.1. Institutional capacity building (US$ 2.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 0.8 M LDCF- ; parallel 
financing of US$ 0.4 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component would finance: (i) the development of a joint 
MdE/MARNDR Master Plan for Resilient Landscapes Development, building on respective policies and action 
plans

25
 and recent international commitments under Climate Change/Climate Adaptation global agendas 

(including NAPA and INDC implementation), establishing areas of synergies, joint action plan and related M&E, 
that will be field-tested under Component 2, and serve as a reference under HTR ; ii) intensive technical trainings 

                                                           
25

 Relation to policies and mandates from other relevant institutions shall be included as well, e.g. CIAT (Comité Interministériel 
d'Aménagement du Territoire).  

http://ciat.gouv.ht/
http://ciat.gouv.ht/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 19 of 33  

 

within key line Ministries, including MARNDR and MdE, at national and at local level with the branches of line 
ministries, as well as local governments and other relevant stakeholders (in the selected sub-watersheds), to carry 
out their mandate towards sustainable landscapes management; exchange visits in-country and abroad to share 
landscapes restoration and management experiences ; and students sponsorships for Masters degrees related to 
landscape /ecosystems /environmental fields ; iii) capacity building in cartography, satellite imaging data 
collection and analysis for climate modeling, , development and application of spatial decision support tools, 
forecasting and early-warning systems ; and establishing linkages with global networks of expertise in this field 
offering options to get high resolution Agro-Meteorological data. Informed by a background study supported by 
the WB, a set of dynamic decision support tools driven by geospatial and hydro-meteorological data were 
selected that would be supported by RPLP: soil health & erosion risk monitor; drought risk monitor. The creation 
of these tools would (a) help establish a baseline in project areas on critical variables and 2) inform project 
implementation at farm and landscape level. 

 
40. Sub-component 1.2. Support to national level sustainable landscape management approach to agriculture and 

watershed management (US$ 0.0 M total -US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.0 M 
from J/P HRO). Activities under this sub-component would be financed entirely through parallel financing from J/P 
HRO. They will aim at supporting (i) HTR, to develop/update its strategic and action plans, and operate its 
secretariat; (ii) the establishment, and operation of the National Committee for Climate Change in charge of 
steering, monitoring and reporting on activities to be implemented under the INDC; and (iii) the development of 
detailed participatory sub-watersheds management plans in the four selected sub-watersheds and their update. 
The development of these plans will follow the methodology piloted by J/P HRO, in close collaboration with 
MARNDR and MdE through the PROFOR study referred to in section I.B. They will serve as a basis for the 
development of detailed participatory business plans focused on RPLP interventions out of which the selection of 
investments financed under Component 2 will be made. The participatory sub-watersheds management plans will 
be completed by effectiveness of IDA and LDCF financing.     

 
41. Sub-component 1.3. Sustainable Financing of Resilient Productive Landscapes and Environmental Investments 

(US$ 3.4 M total - US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 3.4 M LDCF-). As indicated in section I.B, it would support the 
participation of Haiti in the CBF to benefit from financial resources towards climate adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation objectives into perpetuity. In the context of RPLP, it would specifically contribute to ensuring the 
long-term sustainability of interventions financed under Component 2. This sub-component would finance (i) 
remaining activities required to set up the National level Trust Fund to receive funds from the CBF on a yearly 
basis, complementing other donor’s contributions and (ii) an initial endowment of US$3 million to the CBF, 
earmarked for climate adaptation related interventions, complemented by a US$7 million endowment for 
biodiversity to be provided through the German Development Bank (KfW). It is estimated that the fund will take 
up to 3 years to establish and disburse funds. In the interim the other sources of project financing (IDA and J/P 
HRO parallel financing) will be used to support adaptation activities. Therefore, the establishment of the Trust 
Fund does not present delays to overall project implementation. 

 
Component 2: Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and 
practices (US$ 12.1 M total -US$ 10.1 M IDA, US$ 2.0 M LDCF- and parallel financing of US$ 3.6 M from 
J/P HRO).  
 

42. This component will support individual farmers and communities within selected sub-watersheds to establish 
more resilient agricultural productions and practices, adapted to the agro-ecological contexts, and prioritized 
according to participatory planning exercises (under sub-component 1.2 and business plans under 2.2), supported 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 20 of 33  

 

by scientific expertise, in order to provide individual, and, to the maximum extent possible, landscape-level 
collective co-benefits from increased soil quality, water retention capacity and biodiversity. It will also support 
actions aimed at improving the revenues and livelihoods from better market access and improved food availability 
and nutritional quality, required to reduce people and, consequently, ecosystems’ vulnerability; and support the 
establishment or rehabilitation of small infrastructures supporting (i) and (ii) for increased farmers and landscape 
level resilience.   

 
43. Sub-component 2.1. Investments in resilient, sustainable agriculture and ecosystems (US$ 8.55 M total -US$ 6.55 

M IDA and US$ 2.0 M LDCF). This sub-component will support investments at individual and community levels 
that focus on increasing climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the selected sub-watershed. 
Specifically, the sub-component will finance (i) the development of a limited menu of “technical packages” 
(including inputs, such as tree seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-ecological zones, and priority issues to be addressed, building on 
participatory planning documents, and experts inputs; (ii) the development of participatory investments plans 
identifying priority investments and their geographical locations, and costs to be financed out of RPLP under 
Component 2; (iii) the selection of beneficiaries according to participatory business plans based on specific 
vulnerability criteria (including ecosystems and livelihoods) and their access to one of these technical package 
over the course of the Project to allow the implementation of climate smart productions and practices ; and (iv) 
the set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for producers focusing on transferring knowledge and know-how on 
Climate resilient productions and practices (such as planting following contour lines, improved tillage, 
boundary/live fences planting for wind and water erosion protection, soil coverage, inter-cropping, agroforestry 
systems management, soil and water conservation and so on)

26
, as well as organizational and marketing 

approaches to add value to these productions (related to sub-component 2.2). This sub-component will use 
RESEPAG II experience with its farmer’s incentive scheme using a voucher mechanism, and be implemented with 
the support of an operator (consulting firm). It will also benefit from the registry of farmers being developed with 
the support of RESEPAG II. 

 
44. Sub-component 2.2. Intensification, diversification and commercial agriculture (US$ 2.85 M total -US$ 2.85 M IDA 

and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.1 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will improve access to 
inputs and services from farmers, as well as marketing capacities and options, considered essential to ensure the 
profitability of investments, improve livelihoods and thereby contribute to sustain resilient landscapes. Under this 
sub-component, the Project will also seek to facilitate the mobilization of commercial credit both during and after 
project implementation. Before RPLP effectiveness, a market/value chains analysis for productions likely to be 
supported under sub-component 2.1, as well as an analysis of relevant inputs and services suppliers, would be 
carried out through J/P HRO financing. J/P HRO would also contribute to support these latter in order to meet 
expected quality and quantity of such inputs and services. This sub-component will both support (i) groups of 
producers within the selected watersheds to develop basic business plans identifying key inputs 
(equipment/services) to be financed under RPLP aimed at improving the quality and quantity of products sold to 
intermediaries or directly placed on markets ; and (ii) more advanced constituted groups of producers or small 
enterprises to increase their capacity to generate additional value to climate smart productions produced in the 
selected sub-watersheds (e.g. addressing logistics, agro-processing, reduction of food losses aspects), through 
improved business/marketing skills, as well as improved infrastructures and equipment to be financed through a 
matching grant mechanism. For this activity, the experience of the “Market Support Facility (MSF)” implemented 

                                                           
26

 The Farmer-Field-Schools will also be a vehicle to promote food diet-nutrition education which will be built from (i) the 
material being compiled in the context of J/P HRO arboretum, where a women repertoire of traditional plants used for 
medicine and diets is being created, and (ii) also re-use the food practice diet training developed under RESEPAG II. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 21 of 33  

 

under RESEPAG II.  
 

45. The sub-component will also finance trainings that will provide more capacity in technical, financial as well as 
management and strategy, to improve market access -for inputs suppliers’ and services providers’ organizations, 
as well as producers and other actors along the value chains. The same operator as sub-component 2.1 would 
support the implementation of this sub-component to facilitate coordination between these complementary 
activities.  
 

46. Sub-component 2.3. Protection of infrastructure and watersheds (US$ 0.7 M total - US$ 0.7 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M 
LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 2.5 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will finance works to: (i) protect 
/rehabilitate small public infrastructures (e.g. rural and access roads or tracks, river crossing structures) (ii) 
enhance water management in the selected areas (building small water harvesting infrastructures in gullies or 
slopes, rehabilitating small water catchments or small irrigation systems in plains). The activities to be carried out 
under this sub-component will be based on the investments plans developed in each of the selected areas. This 
stage would be followed by technical studies to inform the detailed scope and nature of works to be supported 
under the Project.  
 

47. Most of the works are expected to be simple, hence a community-based approach would be promoted using a 
labor-intensive workforce. This approach has been used various times by MARNDR successfully (including through 
RESEPAG II in response to Hurricane Matthew’s to restore some damaged infrastructures. A specific manual exists 
that would serve as a basis for RPLP. 

 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$ 3.5 M total – 100% 
IDA).  
 

48. The objective of this component is to support Project coordination and M&E as well as all aspects of management 
(including fiduciary matters, knowledge management, communication, gender and citizen engagement as well as 
monitoring mitigation measures related to safeguards). It will finance staff costs, goods, equipment and vehicles, 
incremental operating costs, assessments and studies (including technical and financial audits), construction 
and/or rehabilitation of Project Implementation Unit offices and in general eligible expenses associated with the 
overall management of the Project implementation. It will also provide resources to monitor progress and 
evaluate results and impact. For this purpose, an impact evaluation baseline will be established by no later than 
year one of Project implementation. 

 
Component 4: Emergency Response Component (US$0 - only IDA if activated).  

49. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation will be created to allow the 
Government to respond quickly in case of an eligible emergency. If an eligible emergency occurs, the inclusion of 
this component would provide a conduit for the use of uncommitted funds from the unallocated expenditure 
category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other 
project components to partially cover emergency response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate 
agencies to respond to the emergency. The CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they 
become available as a result of an eligible emergency. An Emergency Response Operational Manual, acceptable to 
the WB, will be prepared and adopted during the first year of project implementation and clearly outline the 
triggers, eligible expenditures and procedures for tapping into the CERC.   

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 22 of 33  

 

E. Implementation 
             Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

50. Joint Implementation, Project Duration and Geographic Coverage. The Project will be implemented 
jointly by the MARNDR and the MdE, with an expected duration of five years. This proposed 
duration (expected over calendar years 2018-2023) is set to allow a realistic timeframe for 
implementation. In terms of geographic coverage, four (4) specific zones have been selected based 
on detailed criteria (environmental, socio-economic, vulnerability, institutional, budget availability 
as well as relevance in view of proposed interventions).  
 

51. MARNDR and MdE Experiences. The MARNDR began implementing the US$5M RESEPAG I project in 
2009.  Within MARNDR, the Project will leverage the existing capacity – specifically on safeguards 
and fiduciary aspects – of the coordination unit currently supporting RESEPAG II and other donor 
projects. Conversely, MdE has no experience in the implementation of Bank-funded projects, and 
would develop its capacity building on MARNDR experience. The Project will collaborate closely with 
other development partners and receive parallel financing from the NGO J/P HRO.  
 

52. Implementation arrangements. It was agreed that the Project will be jointly implemented by 
MARNDR/MdE through one Project Implementation Unit; this latter would report to both Ministries 
through focal points nominated by the respective Ministers. The PIU will be split in two locations: at 
the Central Level (PIU-C or Unité de Gestion de Projet Centrale) based at Port-Au-Prince and at the 
local level (PIU-L or Unité de Gestion de Projet Locale) based at the Agricultural Communal Office 
(Bureau Agricole Communal – BAC) Anse-à-Veau, close to the areas of intervention. The two units 
will be staffed as needed (i.e. staff hired and paid for by Project resources and appointed civil 
servants by MARNDR/MdE paid for by the Government) with appropriate skills, taking into account 
existing human resources and arrangements as well as existing staff from active World Bank 
operations when relevant (i.e. RESEPAG II). All staff paid using Project resources will be hired on a 
competitive basis under terms of reference and qualifications acceptable by the World Bank. 
 

53. The PIU-C and PIU-L will ensure timely and effective coordination of activities in order to monitor 
progress towards PDO. The implementation arrangements will allow a joint technical coordination 
by MARNDR/MdE as well as capitalizing on the MARNDR’s existing capacity and experience with 
World Bank projects’ management, especially on the fiduciary aspects. In addition, the PIU-L will 
allow to coordinate with the local offices of MARNDR and MdE at Departmental and Communal 
levels, as well with the other local stakeholders. The PIU-C will be responsible for: (i) managing the 
project at national level, including financial management, procurement in accordance with World 
Bank guidelines and procedures, and M&E; (ii) finalizing the Project Implementation Manuel (PIM) 
before effectiveness; (iii) producing project progress reports; and (iv) project communication.  
 

54. Staffing. The PIU-C will be located at Port-Au-Prince and headed by one (1) General Coordinator. 
He/She will also coordinate aspects related to Component 1. Other members of the PIU-C will 
include the fiduciary staff: one (1) principal accountant and one (1) procurement specialist, receiving 
support from existing fiduciary staff from RESEPAG II. All PIU-C staff, including the General 
Coordinator, will be hired on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Support Staff will 
also be hired. All other staff will be based in the field at the PIU-L in the BAC Anse-à-Veau and hired 
on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Staff will include one (1) Coordinator in 
charge of Component 2 as well as one (1) communication & grievance redress mechanism specialist, 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 23 of 33  

 

one (1) environmental safeguards specialist, one (1) social safeguard/gender/citizen engagement 
specialist, one (1) M&E specialist. Support Staff will also be hired. In order not to delay the start of 
the Project, the recruitment processes of these specialists will be launched during the preparation 
phase with the preparation of Terms of References (TORs), and selection, using the existing 
RESEPAG II fiduciary team to manage the recruitment process according to WB rules. Under the 
LDCF Project Preparation Grant, a core team of two persons (technical and admin) should also be in 
place not later than February 2018 to support the MARNDR and MdE RPLP focal points carry out 
these tasks among others contributing to swift implementation post declaration of effectiveness.   
 

55. In terms of governance mechanisms, a Project Steering Committee – PSC will be created at national 
level and serve as a guidance and exchange body (Meeting Frequency: once a year) and endorse 
Annual Work Plan & Budget. The PSC will be co-chaired by MARDNR and MdE, and comprised of 
high level representatives of MARNDR, MdE, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Interior, 
as well as co-financiers, Audubon Society, HTR, other key stakeholders including donors (with 
observer status). The detailed composition and mandate of the PSC will be provided in the PIM. PIU-
C General Coordinator will assure the role of PSC Secretariat. In addition, a Technical Committee – 
TC will be established and ensure regular follow-up on the implementation of RPL activities 
(Meeting Frequency: quarterly, in Nippes Department). The TC will be chaired by the General 
Coordinator of the PIU-C and comprised of local stakeholders and authorities (DDA, DDE, other 
relevant Directorates, Civil Protection Committees, Municipalities, CASEC, ASEC), selected sub-
watersheds communities’ representatives, private sector representatives, etc.).  
 

56. A detailed PIM will be adopted before Project effectiveness, which will incorporate all operational 
details at the national and local levels, including the implementation of technical activities, M&E, 
safeguard implementation and administrative and fiduciary procedures. It will include detailed TORs 
for key RPLP/PIU-C/PIU-L staff. A harmonized IRM Operational Manual for the management of the 
CERC will be prepared and validated no later than three months after the Project effectiveness. 
Detailed Project implementation arrangements are found in the PAD. 

 
Figure 2:  Project risk mitigation matrix  

 

Risk  Level Mitigation measure 

Environmental and Social risks:  
The project has substantial positive 
environmental benefits.  
Negative impacts are likely to be 
small and highly localized, and are 
largely related to the commune 
level infrastructure activities that 
will be financed under the project  

Moderate The ESMF contains a screening 
tool to screen out works that will 
have a significant impact on the 
environment as well as a table of 
potential environmental impacts 
and associated mitigation 
measures. Robust technical and 
monitoring team will be in place. 

 

Climate and Disaster Risk: 
Haiti is highly vulnerable to the 
negative impact of climate change.   

Highly vulnerable 
country 

Project is designed to address 
these risks including through an 
unallocated component to 
reallocate IDA in event of a 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 24 of 33  

 

specific disaster/emergency. 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

RPLP will be implemented in four sub-watersheds offering a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, yet 
geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities : (i) Rivière Froide 
watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and (iv) Bondeau 
sub-wastershed and its mangrove. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nicolas Kotschoubey, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Asli Gurkan, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Felipe Jacome, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will have an overall positive impact on 
the environment. It will promote conservation 
agriculture, agroforestry, soil and water 
conservation, water harvesting, water stewardship, 
re-afforestation and sustainable livestock grazing. 
The negative environmental impacts will be small 
and highly localized.  Such impacts may be 
associated with the construction works that 
communes will be able to finance under the project 
(rural roads, small bridges, etc) and impacts may 
include noise, waste management, worker health 
and safety issues and so on.  Other negative impacts 
may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. 
inadvertent propagation of exotic species, expansion 
of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting 
that impacts the water table) and so on. For these 
reasons, the project is a category B and all activities, 
including those that seem environmentally harmless 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 25 of 33  

 

would need to be screened.  The completed ESMF 
provides a screening tool as well as a table of 
possible impacts and mitigation measures.  Proper 
and timely supervision from the Bank will also 
ensure that these activities are adequately 
monitored by the Environmental specialist in the 
PIU. 
 
For the sub component on planning and policy 
development, the intention is for the project to 
promote sustainability; however, the risk that a well-
intentioned plan or policy has negative impacts is 
possible, and therefore the ESMF that will be 
prepared, and the Operations Manual, will include 
measures to ensure that all plans and strategies 
prepared under the project are sustainable; support 
the preservation, maintenance and rehabilitation of 
the environment; are publicly consulted during their 
drafting process; take into account cumulative 
effects; and include measures to strengthen 
environmental management.  
 
For the CBF, for which activities are not yet clearly 
defined, and to ensure that the project does not 
indirectly finance activities with negative 
environmental impacts, the project ESMF will also 
apply. The Operation Manual will include a measure 
to ensure that the CBF adopts the ESMF as part of its 
screening mechanism.  
 
 
On the social side, no major safeguards risks are 
expected. A potential risk may include delays in 
compensation related to land acquisition. The 
project will avoid or minimize land acquisition based 
on the lessons learned. RPF will include measures to 
deal with such potential delays in payments should 
land acquisition be necessary. Another potential 
social risk may be perceived inequities in the 
selection of beneficiaries. The Project will mitigate 
this risk by focusing on citizen engagement 
measures and robust grievance redress measures.  
 
Risks linked to labor influx are expected to be 
limited. They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 
labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers coming 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 26 of 33  

 

from outside will be hosted through their stay in the 
host community and ensuring that contracts are 
consistent with ESMF and RPF provisions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

This project will improve and support natural or 
critical habitat by increasing tree and ground cover 
with appropriate natural vegetation. It will operate 
in mangroves, forests, wetlands and other natural 
habitats and therefore the policy is triggered. Where 
infrastructure is being built, the project will ensure 
that it does not denude natural areas or remove 
cover that can expose the soil to erosional forces. 
The project will have an overall positive impact on 
natural habitats, but will ensure through applying 
the ESMF that negative impacts such as improper 
technology transfer, introduction of alien invasive 
species, etc., is not financed. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project will finance activities related to forestry 
and improve, rather than cause destruction to forest 
cover.  Activities that involve conversion of natural 
forests or degradation of critical areas will not be 
financed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that the project involves significant 
interventions in agriculture, and that the 
improvement of crop production is an ultimate 
objective, it is likely that pesticides will be used.  The 
types of activities that may require pesticides 
include dissemination of technologies for 
sustainable agricultural intensification; forestry; 
agricultural storage programs; and livestock health 
programs. All pesticides that are disseminated or 
used under the project will comply with WHO's 
list/standards for acceptable pesticide use. An 
integrated pesticide management plan has been 
prepared by the project and the document will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project will not operate within or near known 
cultural or historical heritage sites. However, as a 
precaution, this OP is triggered in the event of 
chance finds of historical or cultural relics, which are 
numerous in Haiti, during works, soil sub-surface 
drilling or excavation. Chance finds language has 
been reflected in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are 
no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 
IPs of OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes The policy is triggered given that the project will be 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 27 of 33  

 

funding the rehabilitation of existing rural 
roads/tracks, possibly new small infrastructures for 
water harvesting/storage which are usually placed 
along the roads or in gullies, as well as potential 
expansion of local offices of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. These construction works may require 
land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement, 
including the loss of income sources and means of 
livelihood, such as the loss of fruit trees and crops. 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared by the GOH with guidance from the Bank 
to address the triggering of OP 4.12. RPF will be 
consulted and disclosed by appraisal. Upon the 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAPs) will be 
prepared, consulted and disclosed in accordance 
with the policy. 
 
Any activity that may potentially lead to changes in 
land-tenure agreements, result in the establishment 
of protected areas, or may cause restriction of 
access to natural resources will be excluded from 
the project. The environmental screening form, 
which will be part of the ESMF will also include 
questions on social risks and impacts. The PIU 
responsible staff received a training by the Bank on 
October 18 on how to screen OP 4.12 impacts. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
dams or the operation of dams.  The ESMF will 
screen out any dam-related activity. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not be on international waters as 
defined under this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not take place in any Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On the environmental side, there are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  The interventions are largely 
soil conservation, tillage, tree planting and other soil enhancing activities.  Where there may be investments in 
infrastructure, these will be restricted to low impact public infrastructures such as rural and access roads, small 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 28 of 33  

 

bridges for crossing rivers and water harvesting infrastructure.  Impacts will therefore be small and highly localized. 
Other negative impacts may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. inadvertent propagation of exotic 
species, expansion of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting that impacts the water table) and so on.  These 
can be effectively screened out and monitored, reducing the risk associated with these activities. On the social side, 
there are no large scale, significant and irreversible impacts expected. 
 
The promotion of policy and plans under the project will promote sustainable development; however, the ESMF 
prepared for the project includes measures to ensure that policies and plans developed under the project do not have 
long term negative impacts.  
 
Also, activities undertaken by the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund, which will be capitalized by the project, will be subject 
to a screening mechanism derived from the Project ESMF in order to screen out any activities with considerable 
negative environmental impacts, or mitigate impacts to an acceptable level.  
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are expected.  The environmental impacts will be 
small scale and limited in scope. The potential social impacts are described under OP 4.01 and OP 4.12. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In terms of the environment, the project focuses on improving the stability of slopes and enhancing the fertility of soils 
in Haiti by introducing trees, stabilizing vegetation and so on.  The types of vegetation to be considered will be 
carefully matched with the particular environment/climate related problem that is evident in a region. For example, 
one would plant deep rooted vegetation in some cases where slopes need to be stabilized.  These are the types of 
alternatives that have been discussed and will continue to be discussed throughout preparation.  In terms of financing 
infrastructure, the project focused on key infrastructure that would support climate resilience- for example, bridges to 
allow river crossings when the river level is high and so on. The chosen infrastructure (by the commune) will be 
screened to ensure that the type of infrastructure chosen does not have significant adverse impacts on the 
environment. 
 
On the social side, any activity that may potentially lead to changes in land-tenure agreements, result in the 
establishment of protected areas, or may cause restriction access to natural resources will be excluded from the 
project.  
 
Civil works to be financed under the project are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be placed on 
minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies  and screenings allowing to clearly identify 
areas of interventions, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and construction 
techniques etc. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project team has prepared an ESMF, an IPMP and an RPF, which will be consulted and disclosed by appraisal.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture, MARNDR, the primary agency responsible for the implementation of the project, has managed 
other Bank-funded projects in the past and they have experience with Bank safeguards policies and instruments, 
especially on the environment side. MARNDR will be hiring a second safeguards specialist to monitor social risks and 
impacts under this project. The second ministry that will be involved in this project’s implementation, the Ministry of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 29 of 33  

 

Environment, does not have familiarity or capacity to implement social safeguards policies.   However, they have been 
closely involved in the preparation of the ESMF, IPMP and RPF. The safeguards implementation will be the 
responsibility of MARNDR, which will house the safeguards specialists.  
 
In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank team will support the 
PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The project will develop a citizen engagement plan and a 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address 
project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a 
World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints to project-level grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders of this project are smallholder farmers and families living in the selected watersheds 
targeted by the project, that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. Other key stakeholders along the 
agriculture value chains are service and input providers, buyers, and retailers.  The national, regional and local 
institutions that play a role in the landscape management and agriculture services are also important stakeholders for 
this project.  
 
The Project team will conduct consultations with a group of these stakeholders at the regions, that are tentatively 
identified at this stage. The ESMF and RPF will be consulted by appraisal. with key local actors (such as local 
government staff, farmers’ organizations, regional representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Environment) in the 
tentatively identified municipalities.  Once the sites are identified, further detailed consultations that will take place 
with direct beneficiaries during project implementation.  People affected by involuntary resettlement will be 
consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with OP4.12. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 30 of 33  

 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
     

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
 13-Nov-2017 
 

Comments 

 
  

OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 31 of 33  

 

Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
NA    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
No      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 32 of 33  

 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Senior Livestock Specialist  

 

Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 
Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Jude Alix Patrick  Salomon 

Ministre de L’Économie et de Finances 

deshommesronald@yahoo.fr 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Carl Monde 

Focal point - MARNDR 

carlmonde@gmail.com 
 
 

Ministry of Environment 

Emmanuel  Philippe 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 33 of 33  

 

Focal Point - Ministry of Environment 

mangofil@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Preeti S. Ahuja 08-Dec-2017 

Country Director: Michelle C. Keane 08-Dec-2017 
 

    
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 
 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA20573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 2 of 18  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Zambia P161490 Zambia Integrated Forest 
Landscape Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 16-Jan-2017 04-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Interim Climate Change 
Secretariat 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits for targeted rural 
communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency. 
 
Components 

1. Enabling environment 
2. Livelihood investments 
3. Project management 
4. Contingent emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund    8.00  

Borrower    0.00  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    8.05  

International Development Association (IDA)   17.00  

Total Project Cost   33.05  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 3 of 18  

 

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Zambia is a lower-middle-income country with close to 16 million inhabitants. It had a Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of US$27.1 billion in 2015, equating to a per capita income of about US$1,300. Zambia 
has made significant socio-economic progress over the past two decades and achieved average growth 
of 7.4 percent between 2004 and 2014. However, since mid-2015 economic growth has slowed down 
considerably to 2.9% in 2015 and a forecasted 3.0 percent in 2016, as external headwinds and domestic 
pressures have intensified.  

2. In 2015, global economic conditions for growth deteriorated and the price of copper (typically 77 
percent of Zambia’s exports) fell further from its 2011 peak. This has put downward pressure on 
revenues, widening the fiscal deficit and reduced the value of exports, opening up a trade deficit. In 
addition, Zambia experienced domestic pressures in the form of: (i) repeat fiscal deficits (reducing 
confidence in the economy); (ii) reduced and delayed rainfall in 2015 (undermining agricultural incomes 
and lowering the water level in reservoirs); and (iii) increased power outages. Further, the strengthening 
of the US$ in 2015 put pressure on the Zambian Kwacha that combined with lower confidence so that 
the local currency lost 41% of its value against the US$. 

3. Close to the end of 2015 the government acted vigorously to contain the impact of ebbing confidence 
with monetary policy measures. These measures restored stability of the Kwacha, which appreciated by 
11.2 percent in the first 9 months of 2016, and helped curb inflation from its peak of 22.9 percent in 
February 2016 to 8.8 percent in November 2016. However, fiscal policy remained loose in 2016 and 
monetary policy has had to remain very tight, reducing liquidity, putting pressure on the financial sector, 
and causing a drag on growth.  

4. The August 2016 elections went in favor of the incumbent President and political party. After five 
elections in ten years the constitutional changes mean that a full five-year term is expected to be served, 
raising cautious optimism about the political space for reform in 2017 and over the medium-term. The 
Government has presented its economic recovery plan: “Zambia Plus” that provides a framework for 
restoring fiscal sustainability, closing the twin deficits and ensuring that structural reforms are carried 
out to boost the non-copper economy. The Government has requested the support of the World Bank, 
IMF and other partners to make it a success. Accordingly, GDP growth is forecast to rise to 4.0 percent in 
2017 and 4.2 percent in 2018. The forecasts are subject to upside and downside risks, but the return of 
investor confidence in the fourth quarter of 2016 (evidenced by over-subscribed bond auctions), bold 
measures by government (including the removal of fuel subsidies), and a rally in copper prices 
(November 2016), suggest that economic circumstances are improving.  

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 4 of 18  

 

5. The rapid and sustained growth achieved from the early 2000s to 2014 was insufficiently inclusive and 
despite the economy doubling in size, poverty remains widespread. As based on the 2015 Living 
Conditions Monitoring Survey Report of the Government’s Central Statistical Office, an estimated 54.4 
percent of Zambians live in extreme poverty (below US$1.90 per day, purchasing power parity terms) 
and poverty is higher among women. Rural poverty (at 76.6 percent) is more than three times the 23.4 
percent rate of urban poverty. The benefits of growth have accrued mainly to those already above the 
poverty line, inequality has remained high, and efforts are needed not only to restore the economy to 
faster growth, but ensure planned pro-poor policies are implemented and more inclusive growth 
follows. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. In Zambia’s Eastern Province (EP), the majority of the province’s 1.7 million people live in rural areas 
with livelihoods dependent on natural resources. As in Zambia as a whole, this rural population is 
characterized by high levels of poverty and addressing this challenge is the highest priority of the 
provincial administration. According to the World Bank’s Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia report, 
the Eastern Province is one of three poorest provinces in Zambia

1
. In addition, according to the Living 

Conditions and Monitoring Survey (2015), at 70 percent, the Eastern Province had the fourth highest 
proportion of population that was poor. The Zambian diet is mainly composed of cereals, predominantly 
maize, starchy roots and, to a lesser extent, fruit and vegetables. Cereals provide almost two-thirds of 
the dietary energy supply. According to the 2013-14 Zambia Demographic and Health Survey, the 
nutrition indicators for Eastern province stand at 43 percent for children under five who are stunted and 
20 percent of the women are overweight or obese (ZDHS, 2013-14).  Women and children are the most 
vulnerable to the problems related to nutrition because of their socioeconomic characteristics.  

7. Compounding the challenges of rural development in the EP is a changing climate, which models suggest 
will continue to change dramatically over the coming decades. The country is already experiencing 
climate-induced hazards. Droughts and floods have increased in frequency and intensity over the past 
few decades and have adversely impacted food and water security, water quality, energy generation, 
and livelihoods of people, especially in rural communities. Recent climate trends based on records from 
1960 to 2003 indicate that the mean annual temperature increased by 1.3 degrees Celsius, an average 
rate of 0.34 degrees Celsius per decade. Mean rainfall in Zambia has decreased by an average rate of 1.9 
mm/month (2.3 percent) per decade since 1960. The future trends in the country are towards a higher 
average temperature, a possible decrease in total rainfall, and some indication of more intense rainfall 
events. Zambia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) report to the UNFCCC has estimated 
national GDP loss due to climate change over a 10-20 year mid-term planning horizon will be in the 
range of US$4,330-5,440 million with the following sector GDP losses: agriculture (US$2,200 – 3,130), 
energy-related (US$270 – 450), health (US$460), and natural resources (US$1,400).  
 

8. In addition to being subject to the impacts of climate change, Zambia contributes to global carbon 
emissions. According to the Second National Communication (SNC), the latest data available from the 
UNFCCC, annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Zambia have increased by 6.2 percent from 51.52 
million tons carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 1994 to 54.72 million tons CO2e in 2000. The largest 
contribution to GHG emissions in 2000 came from land use change and forestry, which accounted for 

                                                           
1
 World Bank Group (2015), Mapping Subnational Poverty in Zambia. 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 5 of 18  

 

73.7 percent followed by agriculture at 18.9 percent. 
 

9. Addressing rural poverty and improving livelihoods, helping rural communities adapt to major impacts 
to be expected from climate change, and reducing national carbon emissions from the forest and land 
sector all require a carefully integrated landscape approach. Major sources of rural livelihoods in the EP 
are in agriculture, forestry, and wildlife, but all of these are inter-dependent and all are intertwined with 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. 

 
10. The Government of the Eastern Province is in the process of preparing a development vision in 

consultation with provincial stakeholders. The vision statement is “to improve rural livelihoods in Eastern 
Province by reducing deforestation and forest degradation using a low emission pathway through local 
community participation by 2030”. In order to address the challenges associated with the drivers of 
deforestation, local communities’ participation and commitments as well as private sector involvement 
will be critical in optimizing natural resources management at both communal and individual farmer 
levels. According to the vision, the targets for reducing drivers of deforestation include reducing the 
total annual area burnt from 16.7 percent to 5.0 percent by 2036 through forest fire management; 
establishment of a minimum of 3,000 hectares of plantations on deforested land by 2037; promoting 
ecotourism with community participation to combat poaching; and promoting soil fertility 
improvement, good agricultural practices, and land use planning among 40 percent of the farmers in the 
province to tackle food security and poverty at local level. The estimated financing investment to 
achieve these goals is US$140 million, part of which will be leveraging private sector investments and a 
significant part of which will be mobilization of additional financing for institutional strengthening and 
implementation of activities. The ZIFLP will contribute towards supporting activities for addressing the 
drivers of deforestation as stated in the vision. 
 

11. Institutionally, responsibilities for coordination of the national climate agenda falls to the Interim 
Climate Change Secretariat (ICCS), under the Ministry of National Development Planning (MNDP). The 
ICCS ensures coordination with the many other ministries and organizations which need to be engaged 
in a landscape-level livelihoods/climate change initiative such as this project. Responsibility for 
implementing projects is often with the line ministries. At the provincial level, the provincial 
administration of the Eastern Province exercises considerable control over activities in its jurisdiction, 
consistent with the recently adopted decentralization law of Zambia. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective  
 

 
 
Development Objective 
 

12. The PDO is “to improve landscape management and increase environmental and economic benefits 
for targeted rural communities in the Eastern Province and to provide an immediate and effective 
response to an eligible crisis or emergency”.  

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 6 of 18  

 

Key Results 
 

13. The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following indicators i) Forest area brought 
under sustainable management practices as a result of the project (ha); ii) Land area under climate-
smart agricultural practices (ha); iii) Yield change for selected crops (%); and iv) People in targeted 
communities with increased monetary and non-monetary benefits (% share of which women). The 
project outcome and intermediate indicators are presented below in the Results Framework. 

 
D. Project Description  
 

14. The project aims to provide support to rural communities in the EP to allow them to better manage the 
resources of their landscapes so as to reduce deforestation and unsustainable agricultural expansion; 
enhance benefits they receive from forestry, agriculture, and wildlife; and reduce their vulnerability to 
climate change. The project must also invest in ensuring that enabling conditions are in place for these 
changes to happen – conditions such as tenure security, planning at different spatial scales, and capacity 
development. Simultaneously the project will create the enabling environment for emission reduction 
purchases to be made in a subsequent project. 

 
15. ZIFLP will promote the adoption of sustainable landscape management practices and climate-smart 

agriculture (CSA) as an alternative. Community empowerment, strengthening local and traditional 
governance and land use planning are the key to integrating, optimizing multiple land uses within the 
landscape. However, collective action is unlikely in the absence of rights to use, benefit from, and 
protect natural resources. Leverage for transforming the system will include village land use plans, 
improved governance, matching land use with land characteristics, and poverty reduction outcomes 
including emission reduction payments. This will require strong monitoring systems for 
livelihoods/economics, governance, the implementation of land use plans, and resources monitoring 
and protection. 

 
16. ZIFLP would finance activities under four components over a five-year period using funds from the 

BioCFplus-ISFL (US$8.0 million), GEF (US$8.05 million) and IDA (US$17.0 million). The project 
components include 1) Enabling Environment, 2) Livelihood and Low Carbon Investments, and 3) Project 
Management. A fourth component, with a zero budget, is included in the event funds need to be 
reallocated for an emergency response. 
 

17. Component 1: Enabling Environment. This first component is intended to help create conditions that 
will allow the livelihood investment of Component 2 to be successfully implemented. This entails 
supporting plans, partnerships, and regulatory conditions to help rural communities in the project area 
to have the capacity to adopt sustainable and low-carbon land management practices. The component 
would include support for (i) Developing integrated district development and local planning; and (ii) 
Establishing emissions reduction framework leading to an Emission Reduction Payment Agreement 
(ERPA) (for future results-based emissions reduction payments). Enabling environment interventions will 
be financed through grant support from the BioCarbon Fundplus-ISFL. 
 

18. Component 2: Livelihood and Low-Carbon Investments. Component 2 will finance on-the-ground 
activities that improve rural livelihoods, conserve ecosystems and reduce GHG emissions. It has 2 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 7 of 18  

 

subcomponents: Agriculture and forestry management and Wildlife management. These activities will 
be financed by IDA, BioCFplus-ISFL and GEF resources. Although the subcomponents are sectoral in 
nature, the cross-sectoral and landscape approach of the planning activities that will underlie the 
activities will ensure a landscape approach is retained.  

 
19. Agriculture and forestry management. The objective of this subcomponent is to provide financing for 

interventions that increase agricultural productivity, enhance agro- and forest ecosystem resilience, 
reduce GHG emissions, and sequester carbon using a landscape approach. This subcomponent will cover 
the following activities: (i) scaling up of climate-smart agricultural practices; (ii) community forestry 
management; and (iii) land tenure and resource rights regularization, a pre-condition for the adoption of 
improved agriculture and forestry management. 

 
20. Climate smart agriculture. Interventions under climate smart agriculture will apply a train the trainers 

approach to introduce (i) conservation agriculture (CA) practices and integrated soil fertility 
management, (ii) agroforestry, and (iii) enhanced market access for smallholders and private sector 
engagement. In addition, the project supports community matching grants which can support livelihood 
interventions including climate-smart agriculture interventions, introducing small ruminants or poultry, 
supporting market access through agro-processing. Interventions will aim at enhancing the income and 
livelihood of the communities and farmer families through income generating and value added activities 
in the Eastern Province.  

 
21. Community forestry management. The objective of forestry management is to assist local communities 

and their organizations to improve the management and conservation of their natural resources, create 
income opportunities, and generate carbon benefits. This will be accomplished by developing and 
implementing participatory land and resource use planning and management–including fire control and 
prevention–and providing specialized technical assistance and training to identify viable investments 
from the sustainable production of timber and not-timber forest products. Activities to be supported 
will be consistent with the land and resource use plans developed at the village and district levels. The 
sub-component would finance specialized technical and extensions services, small works and 
equipment, operational costs and non-consultant services (e.g. workshops and study tours).  
 

22. Land tenure and resource rights regularization. The sub-component will provide analytical and 
technical assistance support to expand past and ongoing efforts at documenting land rights that could 
underpin adoption of sustainable low-carbon land management practices and private sector 
engagement.  Activities will feed into the National Land Titling Program, and will comprise (i) developing 
cost-effective systems to sustainably manage information on land rights and linking it to land use; (ii) 
identifying new possibilities of private sector engagement based on an assessment of the extent and 
impact of existing arrangements; (iii) documenting different types of land rights in ways that are 
supported by local stakeholders, and provide incentives for adoption of CSA, sustainable land use and 
intensification; and (iv) linking land rights to key parameters of land use (crop cover, soil moisture, soil 
carbon) using remotely sensed imagery.  

 
23. Wildlife management. This sub-component will have two major focus areas: i) improved management of 

the complex of protected areas centered on Lukusuzi National Park in the Eastern Province; and ii) 
adoption of improved management practices of wildlife at the community level, which can contribute to 



 
The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 8 of 18  

 

improved livelihoods of targeted communities. The project will support (i) preparation of park 
management plans; (ii) investments in infrastructure such as guard houses or other park buildings, 
upgrading of existing roads and tracks to facilitate park management and ecotourism, provision of water 
holes, fencing (only in limited areas where judged necessary to minimize human-wildlife conflict, HWC); 
(iii) purchase of equipment such as radios for communication, park guard equipment, patrol equipment, 
etc.; and (iv) support to park patrols, with a particular focus on management of poaching. 

 
24. Component 3: Project management. This third component will finance activities related to national and 

provincial-level project coordination and management, including annual work planning and budgeting; 
fiduciary aspects (financial management and procurement); human resource management; safeguards 
compliance monitoring; M&E and impact assessment studies; and communication strategy and citizen 
engagement).   

 
25. Component 4: Contingent emergency response. This is a zero budget component which is included to 

facilitate the use of IDA funds in the event of a disaster and to be able to respond quickly to a potential 
government request to reallocate some funding from existing World Bank projects to provide 
emergency relief.  

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

26. The major investments of the ZIFLP will take place in the Eastern Province. However, there are activities 
such as those related to REDD+ policy, MRV, safeguards, etc. which are national in scope. 
Implementation of ZIFLP will therefore be at both the national and at the Eastern Province level. A 
National Project Unit (NPU) will be responsible for activities at the national level, and will be located 
within the Ministry of National Development Planning. At the provincial level, the Provincial 
Administration of the Eastern Province will be the executing agency of the project. This implementation 
arrangement aims to: (a) ensure sectoral mainstreaming of investment; (b) lessen the approval layers 
for faster decision-making, enabling more efficient project implementation; and (c) respect the 
constitutionally mandated decentralization process and governance structures at the national and 
provincial levels, to the extent possible.  

 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project location is the Eastern Province of Zambia. Wildlife conservation activities will focus on improved 
management of Lukusuzi National Park (and surrounding areas). The land planning, agriculture, and forestry 
investments will take place throughout the Province. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 9 of 18  

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Kenneth M. Green,Majbritt Fiil-Flynn,Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as this is an integrated forest 
landscape project that will involve afforestation, 
reforestation, promotion of sustainable conservation 
farming methods as well as preservation of wildlife 
habitat in national parks and adjacent GMAs, all of 
which could have environmental or social impacts 
which must be assessed and managed. As a 
landscape management project its impacts are 
nonetheless expected to be overwhelmingly 
positive. 
 
The positive impacts of the program will be a 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions with 
improved forest cover, rural livelihoods 
improvement, and wildlife conservation. The 
potential negative environmental impacts will be 
known with more specificity as project activities are 
identified during project implementation but are 
expected to be limited, localized, small-scale and not 
significant given that many of the on-the-ground 
project activities will be from community-driven 
development initiatives. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared to assess and guide the screening and 
mitigation of any negative impacts of the program. 
The project will monitor possible cumulative 
negative impacts and take action as needed. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered given the potential impacts on 
natural habitats either directly or indirectly, through 
REDD+ activities, conservation farming, and the 
management of wildlife habitats. The expected 
impact on habitats is overall positive. Changes in 
livelihoods of rural farmers, due to increased 
agriculture activities and the introduction of new 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 10 of 18  

 

agricultural technologies, are likely to have limited 
negative impacts on natural habitats. The proposed 
avoidance and mitigation measures for these 
impacts are included in the project's ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The policy is triggered as the project forestry 
management activities seek to assist local 
communities and their organizations to improve the 
management and conservation of their forests. The 
project will have impacts on the health and quality 
of forests, will affect the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon and interaction 
with forests, and aims to bring about changes in the 
management, protection, and utilization of natural 
forests. However, the project will not lead to 
significant conversion or degradation of critical 
forest areas or related critical natural habitats. There 
may be continuing intrusion of smallholder farming 
into natural forests in the project area but the 
overall purpose of the project investments is to limit 
such intrusions and never to promote them. The 
project's Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and Process Framework (PF) 
address the potential impact of the project on 
forests and/or the rights and welfare of local 
communities. 
Since the project potentially finances harvesting 
activities carried out by local communities under 
community or even possibly joint forest 
management, such communities will adhere to a 
time-bound phased action plan to achieve a 
standard of forest management developed with the 
meaningful participation of locally affected 
communities, consistent with the principles and 
criteria of responsible forest management as 
outlined in paragraph 10 of OP 4.36. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as increased agriculture 
activities and the adoption of new climate smart 
agriculture technologies could conceivably result in 
increased usage of agrochemicals by farmer 
beneficiaries. The project additionally will procure 
supplies and equipment for nurseries which may 
include pesticides. While a stand-alone Pest 
Management Plan (PMP) is not required for this 
project, the ESMF contains an abbreviated PMP to 
avoid usage of restricted pesticides, promote use of 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 11 of 18  

 

personal protective equipment (PPE), training of 
producers in proper handling of agrochemicals, and 
to promote integrated pest management. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a preventative measure in 
the event of potential impacts on the known and 
currently unknown physical cultural resources (PCR) 
of the area. The ESMF contains measures for 
avoiding and managing impacts on known PCR in the 
project area as well as chance-find procedures in the 
event new resources are discovered in the course of 
project implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy is not triggered as the proposed program 
activities in the Eastern Province of Zambia are in 
areas that do not include indigenous groups as 
defined by the policy. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered and applies mainly to certain 
activities relating to project interventions in 
protected areas. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) was prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders, consulted, and publicly disclosed. A 
Process Framework (PF) will also be required given 
that the project will support improved management 
of Lukusuzi National Park, adjacent GMAs and 
possibly other protected areas, thus potentially 
limiting access to resources. 
 
The PF is intended to avoid or minimize any adverse 
impacts upon local livelihoods and to support the 
development of alternative livelihoods as needed, 
on the lands already available to the affected 
households or communities. The project will support 
the preparation and implementation of follow-up 
action plans to provide livelihoods support where 
needed, following the criteria and procedures 
specified in the PF.  
 
The Zambian Government has recently resettled 
communities who encroached into Lukusuzi National 
park in the recent past. The Government has 
prepared and sent to the Bank a review of how the 
resettlements were carried out and an action plan to 
cover any remaining gaps that might remain. 
 
During the project, the Government could be 
required to continue to deal with those who have 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 12 of 18  

 

already encroached into the park, or with new 
encroachers. If the project will in any way be 
associated with new resettlements, this would have 
to be done in strict accordance with the RFP. 
Additionally, the PF outlines the process of dealing 
with such situations following the Zambian laws, the 
provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices.  
 
The Land tenure and resource rights regularization 
activities will be informed by and will be 
complementary to the PF and RPF as appropriate. 
 
All project-supported civil works (such as 
construction of office space, staff accommodations, 
and ranger posts) will be on government, public, or 
voluntarily donated community lands. This will be 
verified through the environmental and social 
screening mechanism specified in the ESMF, before 
any civil works commence. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The policy on the Safety of Dams is not triggered as 
the project will not involve the construction of water 
retention structures that are likely to pose potential 
hazards to human or animal health and safety. The 
project will not fund any dams as defined in OP 4.37 
that would trigger the requirements of the policy. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy for Projects on International Waterways is 
not triggered as the proposed activities will not 
potentially impact any shared international 
waterway. Any conceivable increase in water use 
and direct abstraction of water resources in the 
Luangwa watershed will be of low significance and of 
local impact only. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Bank policy on Projects in Disputed Areas is not 
triggered by the project, as it is not located in any 
disputed territory of the country. 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 13 of 18  

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While there are environmental and social safeguard issues associated with the proposed project, no large-scale, 
significant, or irreversible negative impacts are foreseen. In general, the project is expected to generate positive, 
environmentally friendly land management practices including climate-smart agriculture and implementation of 
national park management plans. However, the project takes place in and could conceivably negatively impact natural 
habitats, protected areas, and forests. Additionally, as a project with an agricultural component, there are safeguard 
issues related to pesticide use. In all these cases, activities are largely community and demand-driven, and potential 
impacts are small-scale and localized. There may be cumulative impacts from these small-scale activities which will 
need monitoring. 
 
Zambia in the past has resettled persons illegally encroaching into national parks, including from Lukusuzi National 
Park, to be supported under the project. There could be possibilities of dealing with encroachment in the life of this 
project. The Government has conducted a review of how resettlement was carried out in the past in Lukusuzi NP as 
well as a gap analysis to identify any additional measures that may be needed to ensure compliance with both 
Zambian law and World Bank requirements. Any resettlement carried out during the project will be subject to the 
project's Resettlement Policy Framework. Additionally, the Process Framework (PF) outlines the process of dealing 
with limiting access to resources, following Zambian laws and the provisions of the PF in accordance with OP 4.12, as 
well as international best practices. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impacts are expected. As mentioned, a potentially indirect impact due to increased or new 
agricultural practices may be increased pesticide use but since such activities are largely community and demand-
driven, these issues are small scale and localized. The project will also support livelihood restoration activities and 
sustainable community forestry, which in turn is expected to be beneficial to the local communities. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In order to achieve the project objectives of promoting landscape management in the Eastern Province, in agricultural, 
forestry, and wildlife sectors, no project alternatives were identified that would further minimize environmental or 
social impacts and still allow for achievement of project objectives. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), and a Process Framework (PF) in order to address safeguard policy issues. Specifically for issues 
related to the resettlement of encroachers out of Lukusuzi National Park, the Government has prepared a review and 
action plan. Although not related to potential impacts of the project activities, it should also be noted that the project 
includes significant funding to support the preparation of the safeguard instruments that will be needed to advance 
toward signature of an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement, in the context of REDD+. 
 
The Interim Climate Change Secretariat, under the Ministry of National Development Planning is currently 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 14 of 18  

 

implementing the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in the Western Province of Zambia. Hence, the 
implementation unit has good knowledge of safeguards and of implementation requirements. At present there is a 
knowledgeable Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer with proven experience with implementing management 
measures in line with World Bank safeguard policies. Safeguards capacity is much more limited or absent in the 
provincial administration unit; staff will need to be hired or training will need to be provided. Safeguards training 
needs have been identified in the ESMF, which would be provided through the technical assistance component of this 
project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Citizen engagement and participation for the project’s implementation will build on the various multi-stakeholder 
consultations that have taken place in the Eastern province during project preparation, and will take account of 
existing communication structures.  
 
Specifically, the project collaborates with stakeholders regularly through the following channels: project preparation 
missions, Monthly REDD+ Working Group meetings organized by the Interim Climate Change Secretariat and Forestry 
Department and Chipata Round Table meetings. The Chipata Roundtable was established to provide a forum for 
government and non-governmental stakeholders to discuss major environmental threats to the Luangwa Valley 
ecosystem, and is chaired by the Permanent Secretary, with active participation of chiefs and civil society. The 
Roundtable will likely be expanded to cover the entire Eastern Province. The ICCS will also develop a clear consultation 
and participation plan and protocols to be operationalized during implementation of this project, to ensure that all 
relevant stakeholders are targeted by the project.  
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 15-Feb-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Zambia 
  09-Jan-2017 

Comments 

Posted on ICCS website and followed up by dissemination workshops in Eastern Province. 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

09-Jan-2017 10-Feb-2017  



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 15 of 18  

 

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Zambia 
  08-Jan-2017 

Comments 

Posted on ICCS website and followed up by dissemination workshops in Eastern Province. 
     

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

Yes 20-Jan-2017  

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Zambia 
 08-Jan-2017 
 

Comments 

Posted on ICCS website and followed up by dissemination workshops in Eastern Province. InfoShop submission is N/A 
because it is integrated into ESMF. 

  
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 16 of 18  

 

Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
No   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
Yes   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
Yes   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
No      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 17 of 18  

 

Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Ademola Braimoh 
Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec.  

 

Douglas J. Graham 
Senior Environmental Specialist  

 

Neeta Hooda 
Senior Carbon Finance Specialist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Finance 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 



 

The World Bank  
Zambia Integrated Forest Landscape Project (P161490) 

 

 

  
Dec 22, 2016 Page 18 of 18  

 

 

Interim Climate Change Secretariat 

David Kaluba 

National Coordinator 

dckaluba05@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Ademola Braimoh 
Douglas J. Graham 
Neeta Hooda 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Nathalie S. Munzberg 26-Feb-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Mark E. Cackler 26-Feb-2017 

Country Director: Ina-Marlene E. Ruthenberg 01-Mar-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA20709

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Maldives Project ID: P157801
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sustainable Fisheries Resources Development Project (Fourth South West Indian 
Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project) (P157801)

Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

10-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

10-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Environment & Natural 
Resources

Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Government of Maldives
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
IDA Grant 1.50
IDA recommitted as a Grant 16.50
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 18.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Maldives and eleven other countries border the waters of the South West Indian Ocean (SWIO) 
➢❨  the island nations of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles; and seven mainland 
countries: France, Kenya, Mozambique, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania and Yemen. Together 
these countries are members of the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), a 
regional fisheries body. The SWIO marine fisheries are part of a larger marine ecosystem shared 
by all countries of the region. They are a regional public good, whose health and sustainability 
require regional coordination to limit the negative and enhance the positive externalities yielded 
by national activities, especially on the migratory fish species, such as tuna. Conservation and 
sustainable harvesting of the regional public goods in particular, and the shared ecosystem in 
general are central to the economy of the island countries in SWIO region.  
 
Fisheries sector accounts for a substantial portion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the SWIO 
countries. Seafood export from these countries was approximately US$2.7 billion in 2014. Local 
industrial fisheries (mainly shrimp) and tuna processing constitute a substantial part of 
employment, income and foreign exchange earnings. Aquaculture and recreational fishing (sport 
fishing and diving) are rapidly growing industries and growing source of revenues in several of 
these countries. Fisheries, especially small-scale and subsistence fisheries play an important role 
for the livelihoods of estimated 107 million people living within 100 kilometers of the coast in the 
SWIO countries. They are often among the most vulnerable communities with high exposure to 
climate change impacts. The fisheries sector is a major contributor to nutritional health and food 
security in the SWIO region, especially for poor coastal communities with limited alternatives to 
fish for animal protein, as well as essential nutrients, vitamins, minerals and trace elements. 
 
Maldives, comprising of 26 atolls of 1,190 small coral islands of which 188 are inhabited by a 
local population of 338,434, has successfully built on its extraordinary natural assets to promote 
growth and socio-economic development. This was achieved mainly by developing a successful 
high-end tourism sector, whose sizeable rents have been redistributed to the population to address 
its development challenges. GDP per capita increased from US$268 in 1980 to US$7,681 in 2014 
(highest in South Asia), mainly driven by tourism and non-tradable tourism related activities. 
Incidence of poverty in Maldives is in line with that of an upper middle-income country, and its 
human development index is second only to Sri Lanka among the countries in South Asia. The 
share of the population living with less than US$1.25 a day was 4.9 percent in 2010, whereas the 
corresponding share using the US$2 a day poverty line was 17.02 percent in 2010. 
  
Despite this outstanding performance, the pace of poverty reduction has been below potential; and 
the level of inequality remains a major challenge. Limited job opportunities and skill-
endowments, especially for women and youth might have played an important role in limiting 
contribution of growth to poverty reduction. In particular, lack of growth in fisheries is an 
important cause of the limited impact of growth to poverty reduction, especially in the atolls away 
from MalÃ©.   
 
The World Bank➢❨ s Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2015 (SCD) provides a snapshot of the 
inherent vulnerabilities of Maldives➢❨  development program including immediate concerns 
about the fiscal, environmental and social sustainability. Due to its macro-economic vulnerability, 
given the small size, it is important to look for economic diversification away from tourism and 



Page 3 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

heavy reliance on imports; and to promote an inclusive development of the labor market with 
particular opportunities for women and youth. There is a need to augment climate-proofing of the 
economy as climate change could cause annual economic losses of more than 12 percent of GDP 
by 2100. Emphasis on environment and natural resources management, especially preventing 
damage and pollution of the coral reefs is important to sustain and increase climate resilience of 
tourism and fisheries, the crucial components of the national economy.
Sectoral and institutional Context
An estimated 28 percent of the SWIO regional fish stocks are over-exploited or depleted 
(especially the high-value resources, such as shrimp, lobster, and sea cucumber). A further 40 
percent of stock are fully exploited (SWIOFC, 2011) from overfishing by industrial vessels and 
artisanal fishers, and widespread use of destructive equipment and techniques (such as dynamite 
or beach seines). Critical ecosystems, already weakened by land-based pollution are further 
endangered by loss of biodiversity, and destruction of coral reefs and mangroves; and 
consequently the coastal resource base is acutely threatened. As a result, it was estimated that 
SWIO coastal states incurred annual losses of US$225 million in 2008. Furthermore, a weak 
investment and business climate, coupled with limited or underperforming infrastructure and 
services, significantly constrain industrial and artisanal private sector development.  
 
As small-scale fisheries modernize, the limited potential of many coastal fisheries will require 
that fishing effort be reduced to become sustainable. This will generally translate into fewer 
vessels or jobs in harvesting operations, and require that attention be devoted to alternative 
livelihood opportunities in post-harvest value addition, aquaculture, and recreational fisheries or 
in other sectors. Reduction or elimination of destructive fishing is also a significant governance 
and social challenge.  
 
The fisheries sector in the SWIO is already largely regional, with each country➢❨ s decision 
affecting other countries➢❨  activities. In particular, large national investments, such as ports, 
fishing fleets, or processing plants, are competing against each other. Regional coordination is 
therefore needed to avoid conflicts and suboptimal sectoral investments, and to promote equitable 
distribution of wealth. Furthermore, several technical aspects of the sector are regional in nature 
(e.g., monitoring, control and surveillance, safety at sea), and their implementation, at the least, 
has to be coordinated at a regional level. The countries also face common constraints with regard 
to their fisheries sector: weak governance, weak human and institutional capacity, and a fragile 
business environment. The SWIO countries will therefore benefit from addressing these 
challenges jointly. They already use regional platforms to share their experience in implementing 
more sustainable and economically viable fisheries policies and practices, including the Indian 
Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) and SWIOFC. Greater regional cohesion will enhance the 
countries➢❨  voice in international fora as well as in negotiating fishing-related agreements, 
where decisions made have significant impacts on the fisheries sector of the SWIO countries. 
 
The SWIO countries have repeatedly called for attention to regional collaboration in the sector, 
recognizing the important contribution by the marine fisheries to regional and national goals: 
poverty reduction, food security, economic growth, balance of payments, and the value of natural 
capital. In response, major donors (the European Union, EU; France; the Global Environment 
Facility, GEF; and the World Wide Fund for Nature, WWF) and the World Bank have all 
supported regional fisheries programs in the recent past.  Consolidating and expanding past 
projects and analytical advice, the World Bank committed in-principle to finance the multiple 



Page 4 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth (SWIOFish) series of 
projects (SOP) in 2015. Three consecutive series of projects are expected: SWIOFish Phase 1 
during 2015-21 (hereafter referred as the SWIOFish SOP); SWIOFish Phase 2 during 2022-27; 
and SWIOFish Phase 3 during 2028-32. Under the first series, the First South West Indian Ocean 
Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project (SWIOFish1) was approved in 2015 (covering 
Comoros, Mozambique, Tanzania and the Indian Ocean Commission). The second project 
covering Madagascar and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission) and the third project covering 
Seychelles are expected to be approved in 2017. Maldives is the fourth planned project in the 
SWIOFish, to be followed by similar country-level projects in Somalia, Mauritius and Kenya (all 
expected to be approved in FY18). 
 
At the national level, the fisheries sector is a critical contributor to the national economy and an 
important economic activity in all of Maldives➢❨  inhabited islands. In 2015, primary fisheries 
accounted directly for 1.4 percent of GDP {excluding manufacturing (3.5% of GDP); wholesale 
and retail trade (4.7%) and transport (8.7%) where fisheries has a major role} and 11 percent of 
employment. The sector generated US$140 million in export revenue in 2015 (and a high of US
$161 million 2013), which is amost all of Maldives physical exports. Although the relative 
importance of the fisheries sector has declined since the late 1970s (due to the rapid growth of 
tourism), its role in the economy remains significant, including in providing food and nutrition 
security and as a source of livelihood and employment in remote islands without a major tourism 
facility. In the atolls away from MalÃ©, 30 percent of the household heads work in fisheries.  
 
Although the country benefits from vast fishing resources spread over 923,000 square kilometer 
of exclusive economic zone (EEZ), the total fish catch has declined from 185,923 tons in 2005 to 
127,350 tons by 2015; and direct employment reduced from around 14,000 in 2001 to less than 
9,000 persons now. The bulk of fisheries catch (up to 95 percent) are skipjack and yellowfin tuna. 
The Maldivian tuna is considered a premium product due to high quality fish stocks, pristine 
water, and sustainable fishing methods. Reef fishes, which account for 5 (average) to 16 percent 
(in low ➢❨ tuna years➢❨ ) of catch are mainly used for domestic consumption and supply to 
resorts, but export is rising (especially for grouper, sea-cucumber and aquarium fish). The tuna 
fishery, especially the skipjack ➢❨ pole and line➢❨  fishery has been recognized as one of the 
most environmentally responsible fishery operations in the world (certified by the Marine 
Stewardship Council, MSC), a dimension that has helped maintain the higher than usual export 
prices in recent past. 
 
Sustainable and diversified development of the fisheries sector is part of the Government of 
Maldives➢❨  vision, which encourages economic growth based on a diversified economy and 
aims at increased job opportunities. The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA), with 
support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), is preparing a Master Plan for 
Sustainable Fisheries to: (a) update and implement fisheries management plans including 
diversification; (b) strengthen the country➢❨ s monitoring, control and surveillance systems; (c) 
establish a better knowledge of the impacts of climate change on the fisheries sector; (d) reduce 
the excessive use of live bait in tuna fishery; and (e) address the heavy exploitation of export-
oriented reef fishery.  
 
The business-as-usual (BAU) scenario suggests that the fishery sector is threatened, and the 
income and jobs from the sector is at risk. The challenges of the fisheries sector are threefold. 
First, given the dependence of so many island people on fisheries, sustenance of capture fishery at 



Page 5 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

about 120,000 tons and maintaining an export of about 60 percent of the catch are important for 
the national income and welfare of fishers and their families. Measures, such as compliance with 
the IOTC recommendations on improved surveillance and monitoring, or improved monitoring 
and generation of evidence to justify continuation of MSC certification, will be important to 
sustain exports and premium export prices. Operationalization of the Government of Maldives➢❨  
decision to focus on all value-added processing of tuna, and a quality control limit for tuna fishing 
are also required. Other challenges include inefficient use of infrastructure, inadequate 
distribution, and lack of access to finance to invest in fisheries value chains. 
 
Second, there is a need to ensure sustainability of live-bait and reef fishing. The high value tuna 
fisheries sector is dependent on live-baits and reef ecosystem. Excessive reef fishing as well as 
capture of live-baits (for tuna fisheries) is considered threats to coral reefs. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that capture of groupers is already unsustainable. Diversification and consequent 
(partial) shift away from capture fishery is important on three accounts: (a) to minimize impacts 
on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) ensure sustenance 
of the capture fishery to protect jobs and income of most of the households who are currently 
engaged in fisheries and associated vocations; and create alternatives for households who will not 
be able to continue in capture fishery; and, (c) to create dependable income and growth 
opportunities for communities and individuals who have gradually been excluded from the 
mainstay tuna fishing and related local processing operations, and who are involved in 
opportunistic reef fishing.  
 
The opportunities for diversification are, however, limited. Mariculture appears to be the only 
substantial opportunity, for benefiting the communities, reducing the excessive pressure from reef 
or bait fishing; and providing meaningful employment opportunities for individuals, including 
women and youth currently outside the gainfully employed workforce. Some initial mariculture 
works had been experimented so far: with pearl oysters, Maldivian clownfish, and brown marbled 
groupers. A private aquaculture farm is producing sea cucumbers, producing the larvae in 
hatcheries before growing them in lagoons. The future development of mariculture, however, is 
hindered by limited availability of fingerlings/juveniles, feed, financing and appropriate 
technology.  
 
Third, inclusive development of fisheries sector is important for substantive job creation. Towards 
this, mariculture, diversified capture of relatively deep-sea species and aquarium fishery appear to 
be ideal for Maldives. These have the potential to grow, and contribute to the reduction of 
unemployment among inhabitants of remote atolls. In implementing such a program, however, 
special attention needs to be given to the establishment of gender sensitive policy and regulatory 
framework, the establishment of benefit sharing mechanisms for the natural resources to be 
managed and, capacity building of atoll councils and small businesses. 
 
While Maldives➢❨  fisheries sector represents an undeniable engine of inclusive growth for the 
country, its sustainability and future will depend on three important and interrelated factors: (a) 
better and more transparent governance over fishing through all aspects of the value chain 
including post-harvest processing; (b) ensuring that greater value is captured across the value 
chain and that wealth generation opportunities are shared with marine resources dependent 
communities, especially youth and women; and (c) improved livelihoods and meaningful income 
opportunities for communities in the remote atolls, who should squarely be at the center of future 
sustainable mariculture development efforts. 



Page 6 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

 
Fisheries in Maldives is intricately connected with the wellbeing of the regional fishery stock. In 
spite of using sustainable fishing practices, the capture of tuna has come down from 184,000 tons 
to 127,000 tons ➢❨  arguably due to the diminishing stock in the Indian Ocean as a whole. In 
recent years, Maldives was focusing on yellowfin tuna as one way of offsetting the reducing catch 
of skipjack tuna. In spite of practicing sustainable fishing in the Maldivian waters, the yellowfin 
tuna population in the Indian Ocean Region has shrunk, and the IOTC has now specified reduced 
quota for yellowfin catch. It is evident that these regional level issues have had implication at the 
national level. The tuna stock in the Indian Ocean is somewhat at risk, and it is expected that tuna 
catch will reduce further in the coming years.  
 
The best option for Maldives is to work with other countries to ensure sustainable practices over 
all of the Indian Ocean Region. At the same time, Maldives needs to (a) augment its own systems, 
procedures, compliance mechanisms, and skills to retain the ➢❨ environmentally sustainable➢❨  
branding to capture premium price in international markets, and (b) offer to share the knowledge 
of its own systems, procedures, compliance mechanisms, and the ➢❨ environmentally 
sustainable➢❨  fishing technology to the other countries. By demonstrating higher capture of 
value and premium price, Maldives can demonstrate to the other countries that conservation 
indeed pays.  
 
Nevertheless, Maldives will need to grow, and this need threatens other parts of the ecosystem 
even if tuna fishing is at the current sustainable level. Maldives cannot afford to espouse the cause 
of conservation of tuna fishery (in its own waters and in the region) and at the same t ime destroy/
diminish reef fishery. Therefore, diversification into mariculture and consequent (partial) shift 
away from capture fishery (in particular for new entrants) is important on two accounts: (a) to 
minimize impacts on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) to 
create dependable income and growth opportunities for communities and future generations, 
especially women who had been gradually excluded from the mainstay tuna fishing and related 
local processing operations, and youth who are involved in opportunistic reef fishing. The agenda 
of conservation of reef and waters, reef fishery, and development of mariculture as the best 
diversification option, therefore are closely linked to the regional conservation agenda.  
 
As discussed above, a Regional IDA investment in Maldives is a crucial part of the SWIOFish 
SOP. SWIOFish1 and SWIOFish2 mention specific investment in Maldives. Maldives is currently 
co-chairing (and will take over as chair in 2017) the SWIOFC, and is participating in the 
SWIOFish Bureau meetings, the Scientific Committee Meetings, meetings of the Working Group 
on Fisheries Data and Statistics, meetings of the Working Party on Cooperation and Coordination 
in Tuna Fisheries; and the overall SWIOFC meetings including annual SWIOFC Sessions ➢❨  all 
supported by SWIOFish1. Maldives also benefits from SWIOFish1 regional support to develop a 
National Observer Program, in line with the IOTC➢❨ s recommendations, to eventually be able to 
participate in the SWIOFC Countries➢❨  Regional Observers Program. Under SWIOFish2, 
Maldives will benefit from training by IOTC Secretariat➢❨ s technical teams to better implement 
Maldives➢❨  international fisheries obligations under the IOTC, such as the Port States➢❨  
Measures to combat Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing. 
 
In essence, an investment in sustainable fisheries resources development in Maldives will be 
beneficial to the countries in South-West Indian Ocean region, due to (i) economies of scale from 



Page 7 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

shared infrastructure, technologies, and knowledge; (ii) positive externalities yielded by national 
activities to avoid the ➢❨ tragedy of the commons➢❨  scenario; (iii) addressing common 
constraints jointly through regional platforms and workshops; (iv) greater regional cohesion in the 
international fora as well as in negotiations of fishing-related agreements where decisions need to 
be collective and impacts are shared; and, (v) upgraded value-chain linkages by collectively 
helping their fisheries sector integrate into more competitive value chain.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
To improve management of fisheries at regional and national levels including support to establish 
mariculture in targeted atolls in the Maldives.

Key Results 
The project seeks to achieve the following key results: 
(a) Compliance rate of SWIO countries with IOTC resolutions (Regional-level Indicator; 
same as SWIOFish2 indicator)  
(b) Vessels complying with IOTC and European Union requirements on monitoring and 
reporting (Regional-level Indicator) 
(c) Value of production from mariculture 
(d) Direct project beneficiaries (of which share of female beneficiaries) 
(e) Share of target beneficiaries with rating ➢❨ satisfied➢❨  or above on project 
interventions.

D.  Project Description

The proposed project is the fourth in the SWIOFish SOP. As articulated in the SOP description, a 
central thrust of the SOP is that while the challenges are regional in nature, addressing them 
requires action at the national level, which will yield regional benefits, enhance ownership and 
efficiency, and strengthen national institutions to help enhance the overall health of fisheries in 
the region. The project components are directly linked to the wellbeing of the regional fishery 
stock. Other than ➢❨ Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation➢❨ , the project will 
consist of two components ➢❨  one will focus on improving the currently inadequately managed 
capture fishery, and the other one will support diversifying the fisheries economy so that 
sufficient jobs and income are created outside capture fishery to reduce stress on the regionally 
shared fish stock. Both components will build improved resilience in Maldives.  
 
Component A: Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management. This 
component seeks to enhance the Government➢❨ s capacity to implement a more effective 
monitoring of fisheries sector and internal control system of key marine fisheries value chains, 
and will focus on delivery of the Indian Ocean Regional agenda (as well as the intended 
adaptation agenda) of improving the overall fisheries management, marine zoning for long-term 
benefits, and a longer-term plan to establish and operationalize in-country skill and capacity 
building activities, essential for sustenance and growth of the fishery sector in Maldives. The four 
sub-components include: (A1) Development of key fisheries management and planning 
instruments including updating fisheries policy and legislative framework, zoning covering the 
entire Maldivian EEZ, and support to grouper fish management, coral reef and reef fishery 
management plans which are essential for regional conservation and improved compliance with 



Page 8 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

IOTC recommended conservation and management measures; (A2) Development and 
implementation of fisheries management activities to ensure  compliance with IOTC and EU 
requirements, including expanded MCS, vessel registration and monitoring systems, electronic 
observer systems and augmentation of related reporting systems for commercial marine fisheries; 
collaboration with the SWIO Sub-Regional Fisheries Monitoring Centers; and, support and 
facilitation to regional agencies and international actors on the common agenda of conservation 
and management measures; (A3) Support to long-term program for fisheries management 
including sampling programs for tuna and recreational fish species, stock assessments and 
conservation zone surveys which will contribute to regional assessments and subsequent actions; 
and preparation of protocols disease surveillance, and quality control of brood stocks and fish 
feed; (A4) Fisheries sector capacity building including short and medium-term training, 
development of curriculum and teaching aids, collaboration with National Geographic 
Information System (GIS), and development and operation of a fisheries management information 
system ➢❨  all focusing on strengthening local and national skills that will contribute to national 
and SWIO Region agenda related to fishery management and consequent diversification into 
mariculture.  
 
Component B: Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries. Potential economic 
growth from diversification of capture fishery and from mariculture are pre-requisites for 
sustenance of the capture fishery resources in the Maldivian EEZ. However, mariculture is 
nascent in Maldives; and to be able to develop this sector, research, demonstration and provision 
of extension services will play key roles in addition to the three primary inputs: seeds, feed and 
access to finance. The four sub-components, therefore, include:  (B1) Development and 
demonstration of mariculture production and technology package, including completion and 
operationalization of, and preparation of medium-term operations plans and service standards for 
the Maniyafushi research and development facility (MRDF) as a center of excellence for the 
entire SWIO region; development and demonstration of technology packages for mariculture 
species; and market studies in support of mariculture choices; (B2) Promotion of mariculture out-
grower schemes and seafood growth clusters, including assessment of carrying capacity and 
supporting community custodianship of the coral reef resources, start-up investments including 
training, advisory support and compliance monitoring in out-grower farms, technical support to 
small enterprises for establishing out-grower contractual arrangements between small producers 
and larger private sector aggregators, and studies to help develop gender actions in mariculture; 
(B3) Supporting design, construction and operation of a multi-species hatchery including breeder 
stock development programs and professional training plans; and, (B4) Scoping of long-term 
marine fisheries diversification studies including planning and scoping of studies related to 
technology packages and conservation plans for new marine species to be explored in future.  
 
 
Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.15 million).  This 
component would provide equipment, technical assistance, training, and incremental operating 
cost to strengthen the overall administrative capacity and capability of the Ministry of Fisheries 
and Agriculture and its Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage, implement, and monitor and 
evaluate project activities. Specifically, support will include staffing and operation of the PMU; 
establishment of adequate financial management and procurement management systems; 
implementation of the communication plan and grievance redress activities; monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) and third party audits; preparation and implementation of specific 
environmental impact assessments as per the national laws; coordination with other ministries 



Page 9 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy and the private sector; special evaluation studies; 
and sharing of monitoring protocols, evaluation studies and specific experience of implementation 
of various aspects of fisheries management activities that are of interest with SWIO Region 
countries.

Component Name
Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep 
Islands. The Maldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls. The 
country➢❨ s atolls encompass a territory spread over roughly 90,000 square km, making it one of 
the world's most geographically dispersed countries.  Of the 1,192 islands, 188 are inhabited by 
the country➢❨ s population, with an average of 5-10 islands in each atoll being inhabited islands 
that have infrastructure such as housing, roads and other facilities built in. The country➢❨ s total 
land area is estimated to approximately 300 square km, with islands varying in size from 0.5 to 
5.0 square km. A significant number of uninhabited islands in each atoll have also been converted 
to resorts and tourism facilities as well as house infrastructure such as industrial facilities and 
airports. 
 
The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submerged ridge 960km 
long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. Maldives is noted as the country 
placed at the lowest elevation in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of 
only 2.4 m and 1.5 m above sea level, respectively. More than 80 per cent of the country's land is 
composed of coral islands which rise less than one meter above sea level. The islands consist of 
coral, sea grass, seaweed, mangrove and sand dune ecosystems which are of great ecological and 
socio-economic significance. Maldives is home to a number ecologically sensitive marine habitats 
in shallow and intertidal zones which have been designated as protected areas by the Ministry of 
Environment and Energy (MEE) and these regions and any activities in their vicinity are 
stringently monitored and managed. 
 
Climatic conditions in the Maldives belong to the tropical-monsoon category with temperatures 
ranging between 24Â°C and 33Â°C throughout the year. Climatic conditions in the Maldives is 



Page 10 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

predominantly affected by the large landmass of South Asia situated to the north. The presence of 
this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of 
moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. 
Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern 
monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms. The shift from the dry 
northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May and the 
southwest monsoon Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. Annual 
rainfall averages 254cm in the north and 381cm in the south, with the southern region 
experiencing more rain.  
 
The project focuses on the whole nation. The island of Maniyafushi where the project will finance 
the augmentation of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre, is an uninhabited 
island and the airport island located in South MalÃ© Atoll, where the physical infrastructure has 
already been set up. The establishment and subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms 
(in the remote northern atolls, selected specifically to avoid any potential impacts corals and water 
quality).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSU06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA) has the mandate, jurisdiction and experience in 
managing fisheries, and will lead project implementation. The MoFA has implemented or 
participated in implementation of Bank-financed projects several years ago, not in the recent past. 
While MoFA has a large mandate, it has limited staff. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) 
has therefore been established within MoFA, with adequate number of technical staff, including 
expert staff on mariculture development, extension, research, and market studies; environmental and 
social management; financial management, procurement, communication, monitoring and evaluation. 
 
The responsibilities of MoFA including the Steering Committee include providing national policy 
and implementation framework; approval of the project and securing the required budget from the 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MoFT); approval of the project➢❨ s overall annual action plans 
and annual budgets; and overall implementation oversight. MoFA will ensure that most of the project 
activities are duly executed by its regular divisions and field offices. MoFA has also prepared a 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP), which describes the project activities and their estimated costs, 
allocation of implementation responsibilities, procurement and financial management arrangements 
and plans, to guide implementation. 
 
The PMU mimics the organizational structure of the MoFA. This is important because: (a) the actual 
execution of project activities will take place using the MoFA divisions and their field offices, and a 
clear coordination between the PMU and the relevant MoFA division is needed, as PMU staff will be 
deputed in those divisions and field offices; (b) an appropriate part of the additional expertise and 
staff recruited under the PMU will be absorbed in the respective MoFA divisions at closure of the 
project for long-term improvement of institutional capacity; (c) even if most of the staff will be 



Page 11 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

recruited from market (including expatriate consultants given the shortage of qualified fisheries 
experts in Maldives), the organizational structure of the PMU will allow MoFA to depute permanent 
staff of regular divisions to the PMU in a manner that staff can make career progressions and based 
on performance can return to their parent divisions when the deputation is over.  
 
The PMU will be responsible for project implementation, facilitating statutory clearances, including 
environmental permits; procurement of works, goods and services; and implementation of specific 
capacity building activities as per the PIP. PMU staff working on procurement, financial 
management, knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation will be located in MalÃ© while all 
other PMU functions, including fisheries management, fisheries compliance, marine research, and 
mariculture will be co-located with the MoFA divisions at MalÃ© or at the field (including at the 
offices of Island Councils) and/or the offices of MRC, MRDF, or the site of the multi-species 
hatchery. The PMU, through its marine research, fisheries management, and compliance cells, will 
support MoFA for its retained role in coordinating with IOC, IOTC, SWIO Region countries; and 
through its central cell, will provide research and logistics support to MoFA in its incoming role of 
chairing the SWIOFC. 
 
The PMU will collaborate with and seek support and partnerships with a range of other agencies to 
strengthen the capacity of the main implementing actors. These will include international knowledge 
centers, including the World Aquaculture Alliance; academic and research institutes including the 
Maldives National University; private sector business houses and industries including the Maldives 
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry; civil society groups, atoll level community 
organizations and other government departments responsible for development and protection of 
marine resources (such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy).

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The project was categorized as an Environmental Category B 
project, due to the potential, unless avoided, of direct and 
indirect impacts flowing from physical interventions such as 
(a) establishment of a multi-species hatchery; (b) augmentation 
of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research and 
Development Facility (MRDF); and (c) establishment and 
operation of out grower farms for mariculture in different 
atolls. To avoid, mitigate and/or manage such potential 
environmental impacts, an Environmental and Social 
management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, which 
provides detailed analysis of the scale of due diligence 
required (such as specific guidance site selection, preparation 
of environmental assessments, environmental management 
plans, etc.) as may be required, or generic but appropriate 
avoidance and environmental mitigation measures in the 
project. Specific standalone environmental impact assessments 
(and subsequent permits from the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy) will also be needed for the multi-species hatchery; 
augmentation of the infrastructure of the MRDF; and out 
grower farms for mariculture. The ESMF provides budgets to 



Page 12 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

prepare such environmental impact assessments (which contain 
the respective environmental management plans). A standalone 
EA (including the relevant environmental management plan) 
has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine 
and disease control research laboratory of the MRDF (which a 
front-runner intervention) and has been annexed to the ESMF 
and disclosed accordingly.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy was triggered as all of the islands in Maldives are 
surrounded by coral reefs, with some reefs, island and waters 
around being legally protected; and it is important to avoid any 
significant impacts on these natural resources. As per the 
criteria included in the ESMF, the project design avoids any 
activity in and around of the protected marine or terrestrial 
areas. The ESMF has in place the due diligence measures to 
avoid or reduce the impacts on coral reefs, marine ecosystems 
and associated fauna and flora during the establishment and 
subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms (in the 
remote atolls, selected specifically to avoid impacts on corals 
and water quality). The project will not involve the 
introduction of any non-native/naturalized species for the 
purpose of mariculture.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no areas classified as forests in Maldives. Any 
potential impacts on island or sea vegetation (such as sea grass, 
seaweed) are covered through OP/BP 4.01.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

No This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance the 
purchase, use or promotion of any pesticides, herbicides or 
similar other synthetic chemicals.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No No project-supported activities are expected in the vicinity of 
or will affect physical cultural resources, as defined by OP/
BP4.11. All sites of physical cultural resources value in the 
Maldives are already designated and mandated as protected 
areas where no physical interventions can take place. Measures 
for safeguard chance finds have been included as part of 
mitigation measures defined in the ESMF.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No This policy is not triggered as there are no identifiable 
indigenous communities in the project locations (islands and 
atolls).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No No involuntary resettlement from land, livelihood or access to 
livelihood is expected in the project. Project activities such as 
capacity-building, research, MRDF, quality control and disease 
surveillance, establishment of household-level mariculture out-
grower farms do not give rise to any involuntary resettlement 
from land, livelihood or access to natural resources. However, 
there remains a possibility of indirect impacts that could arise 
if the marine zoning, zoning plans, and conservation plans for 
reef fishes financed by the project proposes restrictions on 



Page 13 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

non-sustainable practices, establishment of new conservation 
areas if any, or increased level of enforcement of management 
regulations for existing conservation areas. In all such cases 
the short-term economic and/or livelihood interests of local 
communities currently engaged in activities that rapidly 
deplete resources including fish stock could be impacted. 
Although the OP4.12 explicitly provides exemption to actions 
such as natural resources management, or preparation of 
fisheries management plans, the ESMF contains a framework 
compliant with the principles of OP4.12, to specify that any 
activity which has the chance of adverse impact on citizens and 
communities, or any chance of restricting traditional access to 
natural resources will be excluded from the project (throughout 
during implementation), and the process of preparation of 
zoning and other fisheries sector conservation plans will 
employ participation and citizen engagement. The policies and 
priorities that drives preparation of any zoning plans and 
regulations, conservation plans and/or strategies in Maldives 
are to protect the rights, claims and access of Maldivian 
citizens to the territorial waters of Maldives. These principles 
are also be strictly adhered to by the project, and all such 
zoning plans and conservation regulations will require 
approval of the Atoll Councils. Therefore, it is not conceivable 
that any restriction of access to traditionally used natural 
resources will be restricted by zoning plans, regulations, 
conservation plans and enforcement supported by the project. 
Further, while the exact locations and potential impacts of all 
activities, especially the mariculture grow-out facilities, are not 
yet known, the ESMF and the site specific social assessments 
will guide these sets of activities.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities that 
invest on dams or water retention structures.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities in 
international waterways or activities that will have impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The policy is not applicable because there are no disputed 
areas in Maldives.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project is classified as environmental category B, the project is expected to bring 
positive environmental benefits to the project areas as the entire design of the project is based on 
the need to conserve the marine resources, avoid and stop unsustainable capture and yields, 



Page 14 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

comply with the best regional and international standards, and diversify into mariculture as an 
alternative to threatened reef fisheries. The project will not lead to potential large scale significant 
and/or irreversible impact as the impacts will be largely localized to project sites and can be 
managed via stringent due diligence and adherence to national and international sectoral standards. 
Specific standalone environmental impact assessments and subsequent permits from the Ministry 
of Environment will be needed for the (i) multi-species hatchery; (ii) augmentation of the 
infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre; and (iii) out grower farms for mariculture and 
it is through these assessments that site specific impacts will be identified. 
 
The project will support the establishment of infrastructure such as training and research centers 
and laboratories as well as infrastructure to conduct mariculture activities such as fish cadges and/
or pens. These could, unless carefully managed and mitigated, lead to localized environmental 
impacts typical to civil works, such as the generation of construction wastes, generation of dust, 
noise, etc., and occupational and safety impacts that will be managed accordingly. The civil works 
contracts may involve the use of expatriate/ migrant/ non-local labor but no influx related issues 
are expected - two out of the three islands involved are uninhabited (therefore, there is no host 
community), and the work at the Airport Island/ Hulumale will be expansion of an existing small 
building to create the required laboratory facility. 
 
The project will finance start-up investments into household-level aquaculture/mariculture 
production, for example, cage cultivation of native/naturalized fish species. Operations of the 
multi species hatchery, and the MRDF could also pose potential operational impacts. During 
mariculture operations, typical environmental impacts include eutrophication from feeds and 
effluents, release of antifouling chemicals and antibiotics, and impacts introduction of alien 
invasive species. The project, in conformity with the Maldivian national environmental regulations 
will support mariculture of native/naturalized species. Careful site selection of grow-out 
mariculture farms will avoid eutrophication, pollutant loading on undersea surfaces, and use or 
accumulation of synthetic pollutants. Other impacts include scenarios of fish escaping from farms 
may compete with wild stocks, or transfer of parasites and diseases, or genetic interaction between 
escaped farmed fish and wild fish stocks. However such site-specific impacts will be regulated, 
controlled and managed, especially through specific EA/EMP that will be undertaken, and 
incorporating stringent measures for mitigating and managing operational impacts in the design 
and operation of the grow-out mariculture farms. Mariculture is not entirely new to the Maldives; 
in the last decade two projects have been initiated in the islands, for which EAs were undertaken, 
and the recommended mitigation and management measures were undertaken. Similar EAs will be 
prepared for the grow-out mariculture farms, which will also comply with the requirements under 
Maldives➢❨  own regulatory framework.  
 
While the project does not envisage any adverse social impacts, some of the Component 1 
activities may lead to possible restrictions in access and increased cost to some fishers. Sub-
Components A1 and A3 in particular seek to improve the regulatory and management practices of 
the fishing industry but, in doing so, may restrict access to fisheries resources and could reduce 
income for some fishers. However, given that any fishery management plan will, by its 
characteristic intent, will try to curb overexploitation of fish stock without exception, the 
management plans (sub-components A1 and A3) will need to adopt a transparent and participatory 
process of agreement on the actions  to be included in the management plans. 
 
Overall, there is no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts likely from the 
project.



Page 15 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The social and environmental impacts of the proposed project is deemed to be positive and 
sustainable in the long term. The project is also expected to improve the overall socio-economic 
status of the communities, including youth and women, as a result of the potential opportunities 
via employment creation and livelihood activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
No alternatives have been considered, predominantly as the fisheries sector, after tourism, is the 
main source of livelihood and income generation in the Maldives and the proposed project 
activities will provide the most environmentally sound management options of the sector in 
comparison to current practices.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Social Assessment (SA) has been prepared as 
details of all specific sites and design of the project➢❨ s physical interventions are not known. A 
standalone EA has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine and disease control 
research laboratory, which is a front runner intervention and is annexed to the ESMF and disclosed 
accordingly.  The ESMF outlines detailed guidelines of measures for environmental and social risk 
mitigation and institutional arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessment, 
instruction to the preparation of Environmental and Social Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental 
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and other such measures as well as implementation and 
monitoring. 
 
All interventions will be subject to an environmental and social screening with the objective to: (a) 
determine the anticipated environmental and social impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; 
and (ii) determine if the anticipated impacts and public concerns warrant further analysis, and if so 
to recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental and Social Assessments needed as 
per the criteria set in the ESMF. The ESMF also provides the screening and selection criteria for 
household-level mariculture out-grower farms. 
 
The ESMF takes the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and World Bank environmental Health and Safety Guidelines, which 
serves as a guide to the level of environmental and social analysis and mitigation required for all 
interventions supported by the project that will have any potential to cause negative environmental 
and social impacts; and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank➢❨ s safeguard policies 
and the relevant national regulations during implementation.  
 
The implementing agency of the project, the MoFA, has not led implementation of any World 
Bank-financed project the recent years. Capacity within MoFA to manage environmental and 
social risks within a project setting is be limited. Therefore, in the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) set up for implementation of this project, staffing includes an Environmental and Social 
Officer with relevant technical and sectoral expertise to take up the role of environmental and 
social coordinator.  S/he will report to the Project Director and will work closely with the assigned 
PMU team, the Ministry of Environment and Energy, the Island Councils, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and will be responsible for ensuring the overall implementation of the ESMF. 



Page 16 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

S/he will liaise with other agencies, contractors and consultants at the activity levels to implement 
the required mitigation and management measures. The E&S Coordinator will be responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation of implementation of the environmental and social management plans, 
and will prepare regular reports on compliance and status of performance indicators. The Island 
Councils will be the first level of contact for any grievance/feedback for the community, and the 
E&S Coordinator will work closely with the Island Councils to redress any grievance. The E&S 
Coordinator will lead to orient PMU and MoFA staff, consultants and contractors on the ESMF 
and on operationalization of the ESMF for each of the project activities. 
 
The project will provide training in environmental and social management to improve institutional 
capacity. The cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social 
project regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost. In addition, the 
project will also provide capacity building to potential operators of out grower farms on 
maintaining a good mariculture environment, and mitigating and managing potential 
environmental impacts during the operation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders included fisherpersons, fishing vessel-owners, fisherpersons➢❨  
associations, exporters and transporters involved in export of capture tuna and reef fishes, and 
relevant government officials. The MoFA organized elaborate discussions and consultations with 
these key stakeholder groups during November 2015 ➢❨  September 2016. The ESMF has been 
developed based on suggestions and recommendations from these key stakeholder groups. The 
project activities do not lead to adverse social or involuntary resettlement impacts, and 
consequently, there is no adversely affected person. The ESMF document was disclosed prior to 
appraisal of the project. Specific consultations at national, atoll and island levels will continue 
during implementation of the project, including during preparation of activity-specific 
environmental and social assessments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 17-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Maldives 17-Jan-2017
Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is available in the 

website of the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (http://www.fishagri.gov.mv/
images/download/MSFDP/msfd-esmf-january-17-2017.pdf).

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



Page 17 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Tapas Paul
Title: Lead Environmental Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Government of Maldives
Contact: Ismail Alimanik
Title: Permanent Secretary
Email:

Implementing Agencies



Page 18 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Name: Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture
Contact: Zaha Waheed
Title: Executive Coordinator
Email: zaha.waheed@fishagri.gov.mv

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tapas Paul
Approved By
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (PMGR) Date: 08-Feb-2017

Country Director: Name: Fabian Seiderer (CD) Date: 15-Feb-2017

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 
 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 2 of 21  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P160606 Afghanistan Strategic 
Grain Reserve ( SGR 
Project ) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 10-Apr-2017 13-Jun-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan - Ministry of 
Finance 

MAIL  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their needs following emergency situations and improve the efficiency of the grain storage 
management.” 
 
Components 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
Component B: Physical Infrastructure 
Component C: Project Management: 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   18.00  

Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund   11.45  

Total Project Cost   29.45  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Afghanistan is a landlocked country, surrounded by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan in the north, 
Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and southwest, and China in the northeast. The country is divided 
into thirty four provinces, each province consists of a number of districts. Within these districts, most 
families live in villages. Rural households make up around 80 percent of the population, which is estimated 
to be 32.5 million (World Bank, 2015), with one of the highest growth rates of population worldwide (3 
percent / year). The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Afghanistan is around $ 19.2 billion (World Bank, 
2015).  

 
Over the last several decades, the country went through wars, and internal conflicts, resulting in weak 
economy, and absence of some of the basic services in parts of the country. All economic activities, and the 
potential for economic growth in Afghanistan have been badly affected by the deteriorating security 
situation, and the uncertainty about its political future, with around 39 percent of the Afghans falling under 
the poverty line (World Bank, 2013). Recently, Statistics showed negative levels of consumers’ prices index 
reflecting the high unemployment rates, and the weak economic conditions. The security situation remains 
a serious challenge, it has even deteriorated recently in some areas of the country, with limited presence or 
control from the government. 
 
Agriculture is the main pillar of the Afghan economy, being the second contributor to the GDP, following 
the services sector, which primarily depends on the presence of the international community in 
Afghanistan. The agriculture sector employs around 40 percent of the working force of the country

1
, and 

provides support to approximately 80 percent of the population in their livelihood. Direct agriculture 
activities contribute 25 percent to the GDP of the country. The number would be much higher if other 
related activities such as food processing, logistic, and trade of food items, are included. Wheat and its 
related activities such as logistics, and milling represents around 6.5 percent of the national GDP on the 
country.  

 
Agriculture productivity per unit of land in Afghanistan is low compared to world standards and some of its 
neighboring countries for most of the crops. Arable land in Afghanistan is around 12 percent of its total 
area, with less than half of the cultivated land is irrigated, while the larger portion of crops is rain-fed. 
Along with the high annual growth rate of population, this makes the country import-dependent for a large 
number of major food products, including wheat.  
 
Malnutrition is another chronic challenge in Afghanistan. It is estimated that 33 percent of Afghans are 
food insecure. Access to basic food items is limited for many Afghans, with around 34.7 percent of rural 

                                                           
1
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 4 of 21  

 

households suffering from caloric deficiency in normal condition. This become even worse during times of 
shortages of supply. 
 
Given the fact that the agriculture sector in Afghanistan is not yet developed, in terms of adopting modern 
technologies, especially those related to climate resilient seeds, water management, and improved farming 
practices, this makes its agriculture production highly volatile, and vulnerable to sudden shocks, resulting 
from any unforeseen situation. 
 
Agricultural production in Afghanistan consists mainly of wheat, horticulture, nuts, and poppy

2
. Due to the 

very high level of consumption per capita, and being major part of the Afghan diet, wheat accounts for 
more than 60 percent of total areas cultivated, with a total area of around 2.4 million hectares

3
, almost 

equally split between irrigated and rain-fed cultivation, which creates high level of volatility in production 
every year. This has resulted in a fluctuating supply of wheat for households’ consumption on annual basis. 
This deficit of supply is mainly addressed by imports.  
 
Additionally, the political relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, affects to a large extent the flow 
of goods to the country, bearing in mind its position as a landlocked country, with limited access to 
international trade and supply routes.  
 
By nature, Afghanistan is also prone to other natural disasters such as earthquakes, which adds to the 
already weak situation in the country. When such incidents occur, supply of wheat through the regular 
channels become more challenging, and many Afghans especially the poor lack access to wheat for their 
daily diet.   
 
Altogether, these factors puts Afghanistan in a very fragile situation with regard to its ability to secure basic 
food requirements specially wheat, for the need of its citizens especially at times of shortages of supply due 
to unforeseen situations, and emphasizes the need to establish a strategic reserve of wheat to be utilized 
during possible deficits of supply.     

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Wheat is the largest crop grown in Afghanistan, covering nearly 60 percent of all cultivated lands. 

Production of wheat in Afghanistan comes mainly from the northern regions, which is mostly rain-fed 

cultivations, this increases the risk of volatility of production on annual basis. Over the last ten years (2005 

– 2015), annual production of wheat fluctuated between 2.1 million tons in 2008, to slightly above 5 million 

tons in 2014. There are several factors resulting in this large variability, mainly adverse climate conditions- 

specifically drought. Afghanistan is affected by global climate change, which is resulting in less rains, and 

increase in temperature, which accordingly have negative impact on its agricultural production in terms of 

areas cultivated and productivity per unit of land, bearing in mind that more than half of its cultivated lands 

are rain-fed. Additionally, the poor quality of seeds, and the limited adoption of modern farming practices 

adds to the situation.  

The recent significant shortages of local production were observed in 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2011, with 

                                                           
2
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

3
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 5 of 21  

 

the unfavorable weather conditions being
4
 the main reason.  During these years, supply of wheat for 

household consumption dropped sharply, it was also accompanied with ban on exports of wheat from 
some of the neighboring supplying countries facing the same unfavorable climate conditions. This 
resulted in limiting the access of many Afghans to wheat for their daily consumption.  
 
In Afghanistan, bread constitutes around 70 percent of the daily caloric intake

5
. Globally, the country 

has the highest annual rate of wheat consumption per capita (160kg)
6
. This makes the availability of the 

crop a significantly important factor for the social stability of Afghanistan. Each year large quantities of 

wheat are imported primarily by the private sector, which mainly serve the urban community, along 

with donations from other countries.  With the limited availability of data in Afghanistan, different 

sources have different estimates for the annual imports of wheat ranging between one to two million 

tons every year, which roughly represents 20 – 40 percent of the overall consumption of the country, 

depending on the size of domestic production. For the 2016 / 2017 crop season, MAIL estimates that 

import requirements will be around 1.25 million tons.  

Regularly, the government of Afghanistan receives grain donations from other countries (mainly India), 

over the period 2011 – 2014 the government received 250,000 tons from India, and in 2016 – 2017 

season only, India is planning to provide around 100,000 tons to Afghanistan. All these quantities are 

stored and distributed to the poorest in Afghanistan. Irregularly, the government purchases much 

smaller quantities from farmers for the same purpose, in 2015 MAIL purchased only 900 tons from 

Afghan farmers. 

 Imports of wheats by the private sector usually offsets the deficit of domestic production, however in 

some years, and due to various reasons including market forces, political issues, and the impact of 

climate conditions, the availability of wheat in neighboring exporting countries becomes quite limited. 

Coupled with the shortfalls of local production of wheat in the country, this results in strong shocks to 

the supply for Afghan households’ consumption, especially the poorest in the country. In 2008 with the 

global hike in price of commodities, along with the decline in production is many countries, Pakistan 

which is the main supplier of wheat and wheat flour to Afghanistan banned exports of wheat, although 

some quantities of wheat were illegally exported, Afghanistan witnessed a serious situation in this 

regard.  

In 2008, and as per the historical data from MAIL, price of one ton of wheat reached around $750 in 

Afghanistan, compared to around $250 in 2007, and around $350 in 2009, the situation was similar 

earlier in 2004, 2006, and then later again in 2011, however it was not as severe as it was in 2008. These 

hikes in wheat prices make it very hard for average households in Afghanistan to secure their needs of 

bread, considering the poverty rates in the country, and the high level of wheat consumption per capita. 

During all these circumstances the government of Afghanistan was not able to respond to these 

unforeseen situations, by providing support to its people, especially poor households, which were 

already struggling to earn their living. 

                                                           
4
 FAO, 2013  

5
 FAO, 2013 

6
Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 6 of 21  

 

Productivity levels per unit of land for both irrigated and rain-fed wheat in Afghanistan remains low, 

compared to neighboring countries. Additionally, the weak post-harvest practices, and value addition 

activities, such as threshing, handling, and milling, and also the poor condition of the storage facilities, 

results in losses in the harvested crop, and deterioration of quality.  

 The World Bank through other agriculture projects in Afghanistan, specifically the ARTF funded project; 

Afghanistan Agriculture Inputs Project (AAIP) is already providing support in areas of wheat productivity 

enhancement, through introducing high quality seeds, and providing support to farmers on the adoption 

of improved agricultural practices. The government of Afghanistan have an ambitious goal to be self-

sufficient of wheat by 2020 through increased productivity, and expansion of irrigated wheat 

cultivations. This represents a real challenge at least on the medium term, considering the limited 

resources of water, arable land, and the need to 

expand beyond the high growth rate of the 

population. However, the challenge is even 

higher with the supporting activities such as 

storage and handling, which are currently weak, 

and have large impact on the quality of wheat, 

and is a direct result for high post-harvest 

losses.  

 

The government owns five large silos located in 

the provinces of Kabul, Kandahar, Heart, 

Baghlan, and Balkh as spotted on the map of Afghanistan. These silos operate as State Owned 

Enterprises (SOEs), operating under supervision of MAIL, and they charge the government for the 

quanities of wheat stored. The five silos are concrete constructions, and were built during the Soviet 

presence in Afghanistan during the 1970’s. Combined together, the silos have a total theoretical storage 

capacity of 170,000 tons. There are a number of warehouses owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), adjacent to the silos with a total storage capacity of approximately 

65,000 tons, additionally, fifty two small scale warehouses are owned and operated by MAIL, and are 

distributed over 17 provinces, and all facilities are used for the storage and distribution of wheat. 

However, none of five large silos are operating at capacity, it is estimated that the utilization of the silos 

storage capacities is around 25 percent of its original capacity. This is mainly due to the lack of 

maintenance, human skills, and spare parts, accordingly the actual available storage capacity is much 

less. More importantly, the poor condition of these storage facilities, and its outdated operating 

procedures negatively affects the quality of the wheat stored. Generally, skills of the technical team 

operating these facilities are weak, and their knowledge on modern practices in managing grain stocks 

are quite limited. Although there is no specific assessment, some officials and donors estimates storage 

losses to be around 20 percent.  

Although, there is a directorate under MAIL responsible for the management of the grain reserve of the 

country. However, this directorate has limited capacities, and lacks the required set of skills to engage in 

managing such program, and due to the implementation of the standard governmental procedures and 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 7 of 21  

 

regulations, their ability to directly engage in the wheat market is limited. While operating in such a 

dynamic market requires certain level of flexibility, to make decisions and engage in the procurement 

process when there is a good market opportunity.  

 

These factors altogether, from the importance that wheat represents in the afghan diet, and the fact 

that the country is wheat import-dependency, along with the volatile ties with its main suppliers, make 

it significantly important to build up wheat reserve, that can be used in responding to any unforeseen 

situations that may occur similar to those which the country witnessed several times, over the last 

twelve years. This wheat reserve can also be utilized in addressing the malnutrition situation in 

Afghanistan, through including a fortification program to the wheat stored.  

However, building up such a reserve requires solid storage structures, by which wheat can be stored in 

compliance with international standards in storing, handling, and quality control of wheat. More 

importantly, there is a need to establish an entity to be responsible for managing this reserve, with the 

required highly skilled human capital. 

The government of Afghanistan represented by MAIL, have been prioritizing the establishment of a 

Strategic Grain Reserve, and have been engaged in discussion with the World Bank seeking support in 

this regard. Initially, the government was interested in developing the grain reserve to serve two 

purposes, firstly, responding to emergency situations, and secondly to be utilized in stabilizing the wheat 

market in Afghanistan for the benefit of the farmers, through setting up minimum guaranteed price. The 

Bank advice on this regard was that such a practice would result in crowding out the private sector from 

the market, and eventually harm the farmers themselves, as this would limit the market opportunities 

for them, especially that it would require the allocation of significantly large financial resources from the 

government side, which is not available. 

Recently, and following extensive discussions between the World Bank and the Government of 

Afghanistan (GoA), an agreement was reached that the objective of establishing a strategic grain reserve 

should only be to efficiently respond to emergency situations, enabling the government to be able to 

secure basic food supplies of wheat for at least two million people for one year.  

In preparation for the proposed engagement in building a grain reserve, the World Bank conducted an 
engineering assessment for the five silos and the warehouses adjacent to it. The findings of the 
assessment covered the condition of building, machinery, other equipment and supportive activities on 
site. All five facilities were found in need for extensive rehabilitation, with different level of work 
required according to the condition on each site, and accordingly different cost estimate for each 
location. The study also provided a brief cost estimate for establishing Greenfield silos using modern 
storage technologies. In parallel, MAIL, reached out to a number of international suppliers, and obtained 
tentative cost estimations for Greenfield silos.  

 

Also, during the preparation for this project, a vulnerability assessment was conducted to study the 
current status of the food security in Afghanistan, and access to basic food supplies, based on trends in 
wheat production and to identify the areas within the country that are highly vulnerable in case an 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 8 of 21  

 

emergency situation occurs, based on previous incidents, and the current storage capacities. The 
objective of the assessment was to advise on the suitability of the locations of the existing storage 
facilities, and provide recommendation on other locations (if any), to ensure efficient coverage, and 
ability to respond to sudden shocks.  

 

The vulnerability assessment reviewed a range of food insecurity assessments undertaken by the Bank, 
the government of Afghanistan, World Food Program, and others.  The assessment used to the most in 
depth degree was the 2013/14 Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS) as this data resource had the 
most in depth data set on food insecurity which could be effectively used to evaluate the spatial 
distribution of vulnerability in the country.   Two of the main findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were; a) food insecurity in the country is generally widely distributed around the country, and b) the 
existing placement of the silos infrastructure, in most cases, if improved can be relatively well placed to 
address problems of food insecurity for most of the population, with one exception for a specific region 
that showed a deficit on food security in relation to the available storage capacity. 
 
The table below uses data on populations of severely and moderately food insecure populations from 
the 2013/14 ALCS survey disaggregated by region to develop an estimate of potential grain storage 
needs to respond to problems of food insecurity.  The evaluation makes the assumption that severely 
food insecure populations would be provided a 100 percent ration of wheat though the three month 
winter lean season.  On a per capita consumption rate of 170kg/annum, this would be a ration of 42kg 
of wheat grain for the period per person.  For moderately food insecure populations, a ratio of 50 
percent of consumption would be provided for the same three month lean season.  This would be 
equivalent to 21kg of wheat grain per person

7
.   

The analysis revealed that those regions near already planned large storage facilities; Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, and Herat, do not have wheat requirements larger than the scale of the existing storage facilities 
if improved.  Similarly, a centralized facility in Kandahar would be able to serve the southwest of the 

                                                           
7
 Equivalent to 170kg/capita/annum x 0.25 years (3 months) x 50% 

Region 

Severe Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Moderate 
Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Total Est. 
Req. (MT) 

Service Point and Comments 

Central 27,058 18,920 45,977    Area effectively serviced from Kabul 

Central Region 12,168 17,950 30,118 
   Decentralized facility or met from Kabul or Herat  
(jointly) 

Eastern 4,191 4,757 8,948 Area could be serviced from Kabul 

North 17,488 21,736 39,224 Area effectively serviced from Mazar Sharif 

North-east 28,970 24,334 53,304 
Capacity in Mazar Sharif not sufficient for need.  
Would also need decentralized facility 

South-east 10,045 5,523 15,568 Serviced from Kandahar or from Kabul 

South-west 21,204 16,034 37,238 Kandahar or serviced from Heart 

West 21,490 16,046 37,536 Area effectively serviced from Herat 

     

National 142,613 125,301 267,914 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 9 of 21  

 

country, or feasibly this region could also potentially be served from Herat.  The ALCS data show 
relatively low rates of food insecurity in the east of the country (estimated food requirement in this 
region is less than 10,000MT), this region could very likely be served out of Kabul.  In the Southeast 
region total estimated food requirements are also relatively modest, estimated at roughly 15,000MT.  
This region might also be served out of Kabul or if need be, the facility in Kandahar could also contribute 
to address needs in this area.      
 
The areas that present the most substantial challenges are the Central region and the Northeast regions 
of the country.  The Northeast, according to this analysis, has a wheat requirement of 53,000MT.  At this 
requirement level it is not likely that it would be feasible to service this area from the facility in Mazar-e-
Sharif.  In addition, the facility in Pul-e-Khumri is potentially too distant to be able to effectively address 
needs in this area.  As such it seems that it would be a reasonable approach to develop smaller 
decentralized facilities in this region able to address food insecurity problems in this area.  Government 
data show that there is an estimated storage capacity of 6,000MT in Badakhshan province.  This 
infrastructure could be built on and further developed.  ALCS data by province show that in the 
northeast the large bulk of food insecure populations are in Badakhshan more so than Kunduz or 
Takhar.  As such, infrastructure would need to be developed to respond to the structure of current 
needs.   

 
The Central region are also an area where the quantity needed is relatively substantial (30,118 MT).  
According to government data, there are 5,000MT facilities in each of Central region provinces of 
Bamyan, Ghor, and Daykundi that were built in the last 10 years.  This total storage level of 15,000 MT 
for this region would be a very good start in terms of having available local storage capacity in these 
provinces.  For needs over and above this, it is likely that the balance of required foods could be 
supplied from Mazar-e Sharif and Herat.   

 

Ultimately, the assessment confirmed that the enhancement of the current storage facilities or the 

consideration of a greenfield silos at the same locations, along with the sufficient stock of wheat 

available, can help the Government of Afghanistan be in a good position to respond to emergency 

situations, and be able to supply Afghans with wheat as the basic and main food item consumed, of 

course with the presence of other factors such as solid logistics, and distribution mechanism. However, 

the study also revealed that a need exists for an additional large storage facility in the northeast region 

of the country, where productivity rates of wheat are very low since wheat cultivations in this area are 

mainly rain-fed, in addition to the absence of large storage facilities for wheat, and the fact that this 

region is generally prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, plus the difficulty in reaching out to 

some of the areas of the region especially during winter time. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 10 of 21  

 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of the grain storage management”.  

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following PDO results indicators:  
 
Increased availability of wheat stocks.  

Increased number of households whose wheat needs can be met immediately after the occurrence of 

an emergency situation affecting their access to wheat, and  

Reduced losses in wheat stored, as a result of the upgrade of the storage facilities, relative to pre-

project intervention.  

 
D. Project Description  
 

The project aims to support the Government of Afghanistan, in building up a reserve of wheat that can 

be utilized in responding to any emergency situation the country may face, which usually leads to 

shortages of supply of wheat, which is considered the most important food item for household 

consumption in the country.    

Emergency situations occurring in Afghanistan are generally due to unforeseen weather conditions such 

as severe drought resulting in share decline in the local wheat crop, natural disaster such as 

earthquakes, which is frequent in the country, and usually results in limiting people’s access to wheat.  

Declaration of an emergency situation is assigned to a ministerial committee. The entity that will be 

established by the project to manage the reserve will coordinate with this committee as part of its tasks 

in working closely with relevant stakeholders.  In this regard, the entity will be prepared to act on up the 

declaration of an emergency situation in the country, to do so, the new entity will have its own 

operational procedures for actions to be taken to respond accordingly.    

The objective of the project will be achieved through the establishment of an autonomous entity to 

manage the grain reserve. This entity will be responsible for obtaining and receiving wheat 

internationally and locally, from aid provided by other countries, and also the purchase of wheat from 

local and international markets, and managing the handling, storage, and distribution operations of 

wheat, while ensuring that quality is maintained through the adoption of global best practices in this 

regard. In order to enable the new entity in becoming well-positioned to help in responding to 

emergency situations, the project will work on building existing capacities under MAIL, and benefit from 

those have gained the required knowledge in the activities of the new entity, in addition to adding 

additional calibers as needed.  

The objective of the project will also be achieved through the improvement of the existing storage 

capacities through rehabilitation process, and also the establishment of Greenfield facilities. On this 

regard, the project will decide on the selection between different options of silos rehabilitation versus 

the establishment of Greenfield facilities. Currently, the proposed activities includes the rehabilitation of 

the two silos located in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, considering that both are in relatively good 

condition, while establishing three greenfield silos in Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat considering the level of 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 11 of 21  

 

work required for rehabilitation is significant, and also the fact that one of these silos (Kabul), is now 

being in the center of the city, which may have negative impact on the surroundings if rehabilitated.   

The objective of establishing the grain reserve will remain only to respond to emergency situations in 

the country. However, in order to maintain the quality of the wheat stored, and as a common practices 

in managing grain stocks, a portion of the wheat will be offered for sale annually on basis of stock 

replenishment. The sale of wheat will be at the prevailing market prices, and will be in a manner that 

has no impact on market dynamics, and will not engage in price setting.  

The project will utilize new technologies in developing a wheat crop estimation tool, which will provide 

accurate forecasts for the locally grown wheat in Afghanistan, to assess the needs for imports based on 

local supply, and annual consumptions rates.  

The project will also seek to partially address the malnutrition situation in Afghanistan through the 

introduction of a fortification program for the wheat / wheat flour distributed under the project.  The 

fortification of wheat flour will be achieved in collaboration with the World Food Program, which enjoys 

solid on ground presence in Afghanistan, and have already established large network with hundreds of 

local wheat millers to ensure implementation of the fortification program during wheat milling.  

Both activities of the development of the crop estimation, and the nutrition support, will be 

subcomponents under the first component, which covers the establishment of the grain reserve 

management entity, and the related intuitional infrastructure development.  

Implementation will of project activities will be carried out by a transit Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), until the entity that will be in charge of managing the grain reserve is established, then it will take 
over from the transit PIU.   

 
The project will be implemented over five years, and will consist of the following three main 

components: 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building: (US$ 3.9 million) 

This component will be focused on the establishment, and support the start-up activities of the 

proposed entity to be in charge of managing the grain reserve. Activities of the component will also 

include the development of the crop estimation system, and also include activities related to the 

nutrition, and wheat fortification.  

Component B: Physical Infrastructure: (US$ 23.1 million) 

The silos are located mostly in urban centers, except Kandahar. Kabul silo is located in a growing urban 

center, surrounded mostly by residential and commercial development. Pul-e-Khumri silo is also 

surrounded by residential areas on the north and south side of the facility and lies directly on the main 

road running through the town. Mazar Sharif silo is approximately 4 km from the city center, surrounded 

by residential and commercial development. Herat silo is also located in an urban area on a valuable 

land site. Kandahar silo is located on the outskirts of the city, but this silo is in a very poor condition.   



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 12 of 21  

 

This component will finance the required physical engineering work including the rehabilitation of the 

existing 2 silos, and also the establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos and a new warehouse facility in the 

northeast region of the country considering its high vulnerability.  Activities of the component are based 

on the outcome of the field assessment conducted during the project preparation process.  

Activities under this component will be implemented through a gradual work approach, so that the 

timeframe for the rehabilitation of the existing facilities, and the construction of new facilities allows the 

utilization of each of the storage facilities once completed, while maintaining sufficient storage capacity 

available at other facilities prior undergoing an upgrading process. The work schedule will be designed 

to ensure that by end of the fourth year of the project all five silos are fully operational, and the new 

warehouse facility in the north east region is fully functioning.  

Both the physical assessment of the silos which was undertaken recently as part of project preparation, 

and also the vulnerability assessment will guide the work under this component. From the results of the 

assessment and the cost effectiveness analysis, three new Greenfield silos will be constructed in Kabul, 

Kandahar and Herat as the cost of rehabilitating these facilities is more than new Greenfield 

construction.  The facilities on Mazar Sharif and Pul-e-Khumri will be rehabilitated as this is the most 

economical way to restore these facilities to full operational capacity, and considering that both are in 

relatively good condition.  For rehabilitation, substantial repairs will need to be made to the actual 

concrete silos as these have deteriorated over time.  In most cases the grounds around the facilities also 

need to be upgraded and rehabilitated to facilitate the movement of trucks into and around the facility.  

Truck weigh scales will also have to be replaced.  The mechanical equipment such as elevators, conveyor 

belts, cleaning and drying equipment, scales, and other machinery will need to be replaced in full as it 

has deteriorated from a long period of disuse.  In most instances, replacement of this mechanical 

equipment comprises roughly 50 percent or more of the total rehabilitation expenses.  In the cases of 

new Greenfield construction, new steel silos will be constructed on the grounds of the existing storage 

facilities.  The location of the existing facilities are sufficiently large that there should be more than 

sufficient room for this new construction.  .  Finally, a new laboratory along with testing equipment will 

be installed in all storage facilities.   

In addition, as recommended a new flat warehouse will be built in Badakhshan province to address food 

insecurity problems in this region of the country as was identified by the vulnerability assessment.  The 

activities of this subcomponent will commence by assessing different plots of land owned by MAIL in 

Badakhshan province, preferably close to the capital city of Faizabad. Criteria for land selection will 

include the topography of the land being flat, with no signs of elevation or slopes, with an area of 

around 5 - 6 hectares, and are connected to main roads for ease of access.  

Design and preparation work will be carried out to establish a modern warehouse, with steel 

construction, suitable for the storage of bagged and bulk wheat. The site should include a weight bridge 

scale, ventilation system, quality control laboratory, and pest and dust control systems. The site will 

include area for trucks’ movement and maneuvering.  

Component C: Project Management: (US$ 2.46 million) 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 13 of 21  

 

This component will finance activities related to the establishment and operations of a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), to be in charge of managing all project activities. The PIU will be located at 

MAIL in Kabul, and will be responsible for all implementation activities including the finalization and 

development of the required institutional structure which will eventually be responsible for managing 

the grain reserve.  

The PIU will be transitional, so that once the new entity in charge of managing the strategic grain 

reserve is established and fully functioning, the PIU will be handing over all of its assignments and 

activities to it. It is anticipated that this step will take place by the end of the third year of the lifetime of 

the project. However, prior to the establishment of the grain reserve managing entity, the PIU will be in 

charge, and will coordinate all its activities with the SGR directorate and other units under MAIL.   

The PIU will be responsible from the start of the project for the rehabilitation of the 2 silos, and 
establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos, in addition to construction of a warehouse in the north east region, 
and in hiring of consultants, advisors, and carrying our all related procurement work. The PIU will be also 
responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies, and carrying our all related 
procurement work. The PIU will be also responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies.  
The PIU will include managerial, technical, and fiduciary staff, and will be also responsible identifying the 

areas where it will require international expertise, and will carry out all their hiring process in line with 

the World Bank guidelines.    

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 14 of 21  

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The implementing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL). 
Implementation of all project activities will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will 
be established under MAIL, and will be located at the ministry’s premises in Kabul.    
 
The PIU will be responsible for the managerial, financial, operational, and technical aspects related to the 
implementation of all components, and will be reporting regularly on progress of project activities to MAIL and 
the World Bank in relation to all project activities. The PIU will develop the project procurement plans, identify 
requirements for international expertise, and obtain the required resources accordingly.  
 

The PIU will coordinate its activities with relevant partners, and stakeholders including donors, governmental 
agencies, consultants, and private sector.  
 

With the establishment of the proposed entity that will be dedicated to manage the grain reserve, this new 
entity will take over the full responsibility of activities, and will seek to coordinate the work with the relevant 
stakeholders. The entity will be overseen by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by MAIL.  
 
 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by H.E. Minister of MAIL (or his delegates), will oversee project 
activities, and the implementation process carried out by the PIU, the committee will provide guidance and 
support, and will facilitate the interaction with other stakeholders. 

 
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project is rehabilitating two silos in the cities of Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, in addition to the 
construction of three new Silos in the cities of Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat, and also constructing an 
additional Greenfield warehouse in the northeast region of the country. This may have minor potential 
environmental, health and safety issues/impacts during construction and operation on site. Therefore, the 
World Bank OP 4.01 is triggered and MAIL has prepared an ESMF to be applied during the whole project 
cycle. Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the current two sites of rehabilitation operation, similar site 
specific ESMPs will be prepared based on guidelines and check lists provided by the project ESMF. The site 
specific ESMPs will be properly implemented by the Ministry and the relevant contractors. An 
implementation level Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be prepared to for any environment health and 
safety issues that may raise from the fumigation process for preserving the quality of the wheat stored in 
the silos. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 15 of 21  

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Mohammad Arif Rasuli,Qais Agah 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The WB OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project 
will rehabilitate two silos, and construct three new 
silos, and also a new storage facility at the northeast 
region. The rehabilitation and operation of the old 
facilities as well as selection, construction and 
operation of three new storage facilities may have 
minor potential environmental, health and safety 
issues and impacts on the operators and the labors 
as well as on the local environment.  Therefore, in 
order to mitigate such potential impacts an ESMF 
was prepared by MAIL and found acceptable by the 
Bank. Based on the direction and guidelines as well 
as check lists of the ESMF, two site specific ESMPs 
were also prepared for the existing silos that will 
undergo rehabilitation and will be implemented to 
avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential impact. 
Once the location of the three new sites are 
identified, site specific ESMPs will also be prepared 
during implementation stage and will be applied on 
the new sites of the remaining three new silos. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The WB Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) is 
triggered as the silos will be using fumigation for 
maintaining the quality of wheat stored as a general 
practice in managing grain reserves. Use of 
fumigants should be according to the USEPA and 
WHO guidelines . Health and Safety measures should 
strictly be followed for Operation and Maintenance 
of silos to ensure the safety of the workers at the 
site of the silos . MAIL and the project with the help 
of WB safeguards team will prepare a Pest 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 16 of 21  

 

Management Plan during the project 
implementation much in advance before the 
facilities are used for storing wheat which is not 
expected to be before the second year of the 
project. The plan will consider the current practices 
and knowledge about the issue, e.g., what 
technology is used for preservation of wheat and 
availability of fumigants in the market. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP/BP 4.12 is applicable since the project will 
support the construction of new three Silos, which 
may require land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. 
Since the scope and other details of all proposed 
activities, including the exact locations of the new 
silos are not yet determined, an ESMF and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared by the client and the executive summary 
was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s 
external website prior to project appraisal on 
4/11/2017. 
The ESMF and RPF will guide preparation of the 
social safeguards studies, such as limited Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA), ESMPs and RAPs (where 
needed). The RPF includes the requisite Terms of 
Reference (TORs) for the RAP.  
ESMF and RPF consultations with stakeholders have 
been conducted and minutes from public 
consultation have been included. 
 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts and might only have minor reversible impacts as the 
civil works would only be either rehabilitation of two existing silos, and construction of three new silos. When the 
ESMF tools and the ESMPs for the two locations under rehabilitation are properly applied during the implementation, 
this potential impact will be mitigated. ESMPs will carefully chalk out the sanitation and drinking water needs and their 
interaction and will give specific mitigation measures, and will also provide directions in sites of labor camps if any, 
selection and rehabilitation of specific areas, transportation routes, and the occupational health and safety measures 
for the labors and the local relevant communities. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects will include rehabilitation of two silos in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri and construction of three 
new silos in Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar in addition to the establishment of a new warehouse facility in Badakhsan. 
The project ESMF, the subprojects site specific ESMPs have been prepared, and an outline for the  Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) is also included in the project ESMF, and during project implementation, a full PMP will be developed. With 
these instruments, the project will be positioned to reduce and mitigate any potential impact. However, due to the 
nature of the Project compoentnts there will be no indirect and /or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities 
The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, because the physical infrastructure activities under 
component B may  involve implications that could impact individuals and/or communities in different ways. Therefore, 
the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the preparation of any Social 
Impact Assessments (SIA) or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that may be needed. However, it is expected that all 
new constructions will be all on lands owned by MAIL, and free from any settlers.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project aimed to use government owned land and environmental friendly technologies for establishing and/or 
renovating the Silos, and also for the construction of the new warehouse in the northeast region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will address all safeguards related issues under a framework approach. A project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework(ESMF) has been developed by the borrower and a safeguards specialist will be hired 
by the project in order to implement the ESMF and to comply with the world bank safeguard policies. The borrower, 
the implementing agency, MAIL has experience with the WB safeguards implementation and will hopefully implement 
the relevant project safeguards at a satisfactory level.  
For each of the subprojects a site specific Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESMP) would be prepared 
based on the project ESMF. Already two ESMPs for the two locations that will undergo rehabilitation have been 
developed. The borrower will mainstream relevant clauses in the relevant contract documents and will follow the 
Occupational Health and Safety as well as sanitation issues in project sites as well as in the project labor camps. During 
the implementation stage a PMP would be prepared and the outline of the proposed PMP is included as an Annex to 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 18 of 21  

 

the project ESMF.  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are government agencies, local populations residing close to the silos facilities, donors, 
consultants, and private sector. Relevant citizen engagement tools  were used during preparation of the ESMF, and 
the ESMPs for the two already identified sites (the two silos which will be rehabilitated), once the other four locations 
have been identified during project implementation, site specific ESMPs will be developed. The ESMF and the site 
specific ESMPs as well as the PMP will all be disclosed on the Ministry Website as well as in the Bank Intranet system. 
Consultation and disclosure procedure is also illustrated in the ESMF. Already the executive summary of the ESMF 
have been translated to local language, and published. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
     



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 19 of 21  

 

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

No   

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

The executive summary of the ESMF & RPF, have been translated to local language and have been disclosed in the 
MAIL website on 4/11/2017. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No     

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 20 of 21  

 

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
Sr Agricultural Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 21 of 21  

 

 

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan - Ministry of Finance 

Moheb  Jabarkhail 

Aid Management Specialist 

moheb.jabarkhail@mof.gov.af 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

MAIL 

Abdul Qadir  Jawad 

Deputy Minister 

ajawad.mail@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Martien Van Nieuwkoop 24-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Stephen N. Ndegwa 25-Apr-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20672

Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kosovo Project ID: P158710
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P112526

Project Name: Kosovo Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Third Additional 
Financing (P158710)

Parent Project 
Name:

Agriculture and Rural Development (P112526)

Region: EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

28-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 22.00
LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.84
Total Project Cost 27.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 14

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Over the past decade, Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic growth has been generally positive, 
averaging about 4-5 percent annually, driven mostly by massive donor-funded reconstruction 
efforts as well as remittances from its diaspora. The economy has demonstrated a considerable 
degree of resilience, with principal macro fiscal and financial indicators reflecting that the country 
has performed considerably better than any of its neighbors in the Western Balkans over the past 
decade. Kosovo is a potential EU candidate country and economic reforms are largely driven by 
the prospect of eventual EU accession. 
 
Despite the positive trend in growth and relatively stable and resilient economy, Kosovo remains 
one of the poorest countries in Europe. As of 2011, approximately 30 percent of its population of 
1.8 million lived below the national poverty line of ➢❪¬1.72 a day and about 10.2 percent were 
living in extreme poverty on less than ➢❪¬1.20 day. Unemployment is widespread, estimated at 
about 30 percent in 2013, the highest in South Eastern Europe. Unemployment among women is 
higher, estimated at 38.8 percent. Demographically, Kosovo is Europe➢❨ s youngest country, 
where the average age is estimated at 26 years.  Unemployment among the youth is especially 
high, estimated at 61.0 percent in 2014. 
 
The main driver of Kosovo➢❨ s economic growth has been consumption, fueled by remittances 
rather than income earned domestically. The steady consumption demand has been met mainly by 
imports given the country➢❨ s narrow, undiversified, and uncompetitive production base.  There 
is little export-orientation and imports remain large.  The current growth model based on large 
financial inflows is unsustainable and the main challenge for the country remains the 
establishment of conditions conducive to promoting self-sustained growth founded on increased 
domestic productivity and export competitiveness, within the framework of reducing high 
unemployment, improving human capital and building physical infrastructure. 
 
Kosovo➢❨ s location, EU membership prospects and free market access to the EU and Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) countries offer strong opportunities for sustained and 
rapid overall development. The government is committed to instituting reforms to promote 
sustainable economic development and is working to put in place the policies, institutions and 
investments that will help unleash the country➢❨ s growth and export potential. In this context, 
the National Development Strategy 2015-2020, adopted in January 2016, emphasizes four priority 
pillars: (a) human capital and employment; (b) good governance and rule of law; (c) competitive 
industries; and (d) infrastructure development.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture plays a significant role in Kosovo➢❨ s economy.  It is an important contributor to 
GDP, accounting for about 11.4 percent of GDP in 2014 (second only after wholesale and retail 
trade). Over 62 percent of the country➢❨ s population lives in rural areas and depends, directly or 
indirectly, on agriculture for its livelihood. The sector is the largest private employer, accounting 
for about 35 percent of total employment, although primarily on an informal basis.  Poverty in 
rural areas is especially high and over 40 percent of the rural population is unemployed. The lack 
of job perspective, especially among the rural young population is putting a strain on social 
cohesion and encouraging out-migration. Often, agriculture serves as a safety net for much of the 
population. 



Page 3 of 14

 
Despite a steady growth in the sector since independence, Kosovo is the largest importer of food 
per capita in Europe. The country is highly dependent on imports to meet its food demands and 
the export/import ratio has been steadily increasing over the past decade.  In 2011, the value of 
imports of agricultural products was approximately ➢❪¬561.4 million while the value of exports 
was ➢❪¬26.2 million. Exports of agricultural products thus generated revenues to pay for only 4.6 
per cent of the cost of importing such products. Agricultural products account for about 10 
percent of all imports; of this, 30 percent comprises food products. 
 
This is primarily because the sector faces several diverse and inter-related challenges that prevent 
it from meeting its productive potential and hinder commercialization. Before the 1990s, Kosovo 
was largely food self-sufficient with large quantities of agricultural products exported to the 
region. However, after the war, this trend was reversed so that today, agriculture is largely 
subsistent/semi-subsistent in nature. The sector is characterized by small, fragmented land 
holdings, with average land holding size ranging between 1.5 and 2.0 ha, often spread across an 
average of seven smaller plots. Lack of and/or limited access to, inter alia, modern technologies, 
good quality inputs, irrigation, post-harvest management and processing infrastructure, credit, and 
markets pose serious challenges to the development of the sector.  In its current state, agriculture 
attracts limited private investments which effectively inhibit commercialization of the sector and 
the realization of socio-economic gains thereof. 
 
Two areas that offer good opportunities for the development of Kosovo➢❨ s agricultural sector 
include the horticulture and livestock subsectors. Horticulture and livestock farming are 
traditional economic activities in Kosovo, representing a rural cultural identity and there is a 
strong preference among the farming communities to remain engaged in these subsectors for their 
livelihood. Over the past decade, demand for high value horticulture products has surged more 
than any other food category and there is a strong consumer preference for locally grown fruits 
and vegetables, both for fresh consumption and processing. Livestock farming is predominant in 
the mountainous and remote areas of Kosovo where it often serves as the primary source of rural 
livelihood. With increased productivity and production  there is good potential for: (i) promoting 
import substitution; (ii) boosting exports, especially to EU and CEFTA countries; (iii) generating 
employment in rural areas; (iv) creating economic opportunities for women in agriculture 
production and especially value-added processing activities; and (v) providing opportunities for 
young farmers to be gainfully employed in these remunerative value chains. 
 
To harness the potential of these subsectors, especially the horticulture subsector, there is a 
critical need for improving irrigation delivery and services. Rainfall patterns show high variability 
in Kosovo and there is a crucial need for supplementary irrigation, especially during drier spells. 
For fruits and vegetables, irrigation is essential for increasing yields and ensuring quality and 
timely production. It is expected that with irrigation small farmers would move to more high-
value crops and specialized markets, and away from near-subsistence agriculture. 
 
Ageing irrigation infrastructure and lack of maintenance are reducing the level of irrigation use 
and impacting development of agriculture.  Most of the irrigation schemes were built in the 1970s 
and are showing signs of ageing. Moreover, the war of the 1990s damaged or destroyed large 
sections of country➢❨ s irrigation infrastructure. This coupled with expansion of urban and 
industrial areas in recent years has sharply reduced actual irrigable area and jeopardized existing 
irrigation investments. The area equipped for irrigation fell from approximately 71,000 ha before 



Page 4 of 14

the war to approximately 43,900 ha in 2014.  The area of irrigation use is also far lower than in 
the past. Between 2006 and 2012, the average area irrigated was only about 12,000 ha - 4,000 ha 
in small schemes and 8,000 ha within the areas serviced by the country➢❨ s three regional 
irrigation companies in Kosovo: Iber-Lepenc, Radoniqi-Dukagjini and Drini i Bardhe. 
 
Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic development, the 
government is undertaking critical measures to re-vitalize the sector. The objectives of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development Plan (NARDP 2014-2020 are to undertake actions 
to overcome bottlenecks holding back sustainable rural development in the country and align 
Kosovo➢❨ s rural sector with the axes of the EU Instrument for Pre-accession for Rural 
Development (IPARD). The NARDP lays out several measures for implementation support over 
the next five years, including inter alia, investments in the physical assets of agricultural holdings 
as well as processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products; agri-environmental 
measures and organic farming; farm diversification and business development; improvements in 
training, advisory services and vocational training; land consolidation; and  irrigation.  On the 
institutional front, the government is building the capacity of important institutional structures, 
such as the Managing Authority and Paying Agency, for improved performance of the agriculture 
sector as well as to approximate their functioning with EU requirements. These efforts are being 
carried out with assistance from several donors, including EU, DANIDA, Suisse Interco-
operation, USAID, Austrian Development Agency, GIZ and the World Bank (through the 
ongoing IDA-financed Agriculture and Rural Development Project).

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the project is to assist the Recipient to promote competitiveness 
and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors over the next decade through 
implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutionaldevelopment.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The development objective of the project is to improve productivity of and access to markets by 
project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo and strengthen 
institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.

Key Results 
The PDO-level Results Indicators comprise the following: (i) increased yields of key crops 
supported by the project ➢❨  tons/ha; (ii) increased yields of milk production per animal on 
livestock farms supported by the project ➢❨  liters/cow; (iiiu) increased sale of milk to processing 
companies; (iv) increased sales of horticultural products from farmers supported by aggregators; 
(v) increased number of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies; (vi) preparation of 
Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) sub-measures for investment support in line with 
EU-IPARD Guidelines

D.  Project Description

The Additional Financing, a US$22.0 million IDA credit, to be implemented over four years, 
would support the following activities: 
 
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.  The AF will continue support for the 



Page 5 of 14

following sub-components: (a) Rural Advisory Service (RAS) Contracts under which training 
would be provided to potential applicants for the Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) as 
well as to municipal advisors to assist the farming community in the preparation of such grant 
proposals as well as to national extension staff on technical topics; (b) Regional Knowledge 
Exchange under which the project will support the organization of study tours/visits to countries 
in the region to enable farmers and processors in the horticulture and livestock subsectors to learn 
and benefit from the knowledge and experiences of other agri-food producers and processors in 
the region; and (c) Institutional Strengthening of Rural Advisory Services. The AF will continue 
to support the municipal advisory service centers in delivering effective services to the rural 
community through the provision of training, equipment and select operating costs. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development. The AF will 
support the following activities: 
(a) Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP). RDGP support will be provided to farmers and 
processors in the livestock subsector.  As under KARDP, the RDGP will be implemented at the 
national level ➢❨  for potential beneficiaries in all municipalities of Kosovo.  The Call for 
Proposals would be open to all farmers and processors residing on the territory of Kosovo. 
Implementation of RDGP would follow the same processes and procedures as under the ongoing 
project, including extra points for women applicants and additional co-financing for beneficiaries 
(both men and women) under the age of 40 as well as for climate friendly agricultural practices.    
 
(b) Promoting Development of the Horticulture Subsector. The objective of this component is to 
promote the development of the horticulture subsector by strengthening backward and forward 
linkages in the value chain of the subsector. The aim is to improve productivity, quality, value 
addition, and ma rket linkages within the subsector to enhance its competitiveness towards 
increased exports and import substitution as well as job creation, improved beneficiary incomes 
and increased economic opportunities for women and youth in the rural sector.  It will target 
support to small holder farmers that dominate the rural landscape and provide them opportunities 
for assured markets and  improved livelihoods while assisting the commercial and semi-
commercial agro-enterprises to reach both domestic and export markets, create jobs and improve 
incomes.  
 
The entry point for project support will be the Aggregators, i.e. private Collection Centers (CCs) 
and Agro-processors, handling or procuring horticultural produce.  The project will provide 
matching grants to qualifying Aggregators, who will: (i) promote and strengthen backward 
integration strategies through the provision of supply contracts and extension services to small-
holder farmers, thereby guaranteeing farmers markets for their produce as well as enabling them 
to enhance their productivity while improving quality (including meeting Global GAP 
certification requirements); and (ii) exploit the value addition potential of the sector through 
improved postharvest management by increasing their capacity for handling and processing.  
Thus the project will enable Aggregators to increase the intake of fresh produce from farmers 
(upstream) and increase their supply of fresh produce and processed products to domestic and 
export markets (downstream).  By introducing upgrades in the value chain - quality checks, 
packaging, labeling, etc, the project will reorient firms towards more lucrative export markets. 
 
Potential aggregators will be invited to prepare business plans and submit applications to enhance 
and expand their operations.  Funding for selected subprojects would be allocated through a 
competitive bidding process. The maximum size of the grant would be Ã¢➢❨ Â¬200,000.  The 



Page 6 of 14

submitted business plans will be reviewed, evaluated and scored against clearly defined criteria 
by an independent Evaluation Committee. Eligibility criteria and detailed arrangements for 
implementation of the matching grants will be elaborated in the Horticulture Development Grant 
Manual. 
 
(s) Institutional Capacity Building. The AF will continue to support capacity building of the 
Managing Authority and Paying Agency through the provision of training, personnel and 
equipment as needed. Project support will assist in approximating their functioning to EU 
requirements and contribute to their efforts towards EU accreditation.   The project will also 
support capacity building within the Kosovo Institute of Agriculture (KIA) to enhance its ability 
to promote food safety and quality standards in the livestock and horticulture subsectors of 
Kosovo through the provision of select equipment to strengthen capacity of the food testing 
laboratory. 
 
Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The AF would support rehabilitation works in the Radoniqi-
Dukagjini Irrigation Scheme, located in an area of high agricultural productivity.  Horticulture is 
the dominant economic activity in the region and with improved irrigation delivery and services 
there is a high likelihood of improved productivity of high value crops. Specific rehabilitation 
investments in the scheme will focus on, inter alia, lining and repair of main canal sections, 
replacement of moving parts; pipes, where necessary, aqueduct crossing on the Drini river, and 
the restoration of irrigation delivery in two blocks, namely the Janosh scheme in the upstream part 
of the system; as well as the Doblibare scheme which is currently dysfunctional. Minor dam 
safety actions (non-structural), as identified by the dam safety assessments, will be supported as 
well. Modernization will include selective automation of scheme monitoring to increase water and 
energy use efficiency. A technical study is underway to further specify the technical requirements 
and prepare bidding documents for scheme construction works as well as identify equipment and 
spare part requirements. 
 
In providing rehabilitation support to the scheme, the project will take a broader modernization 
approach and integrate managerial upgrading with the technical rehabilitation to improve both 
resource utilization and water delivery service to users, optimizing resource utilization and 
ensuring institutional and financial sustainability. This includes the support for a Management 
Information System, SCADA for improved operations, support for maintaining a strategic supply 
of spare parts and maintenance equipment; harmonization of planning and budgeting with 
municipal plans as well as water users➢❨  demands. 
 
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. The existing 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MAFRD will be responsible for the daily management, 
administration and coordination of the project's activities in accordance with Bank requirements, 
including procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and audits.  Its 
capacity would be enhanced through the hiring of an irrigation specialist who will be responsible 
for the implementation of the irrigation activity as well as additional short-term technical 
specialists as needed.

Component Name
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.
Comments (optional)



Page 7 of 14

Component Name
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 3: Support for Irrigation
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project will be undertaken throughout Kosovo.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Bekim Imeri (GSU03)
Esma Kreso (GEN03)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development 
(MAFRD).  A dedicated Project Implementation Unit, headed by the General Secretary, has been 
established under the ongoing KARDP for overall management of the project, including the fiduciary 
(procurement, financial management), monitoring, evaluation, training and administration 
requirements as well as coordination with donors and other government units.  The Rural 
Development Grant Program (RDGP) will be implemented by the Managing Authority (MA) and 
Paying Agency (PA). The  MA is responsible for identifying the measures for support under the 
RDGP and prepares the procedures for implementation of the selected RDGP sub-measures.  
Towards this, it establishes Working Groups with representation from the private sector and civil 
society.  The PA is in charge of administering the RDGP, including the selection, awarding, 
monitoring and disbursement processes for the sub-projects.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable 
Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. 
The major portion of Component 2 remains the provision of 



Page 8 of 14

grants which were also administered under the original project. 
The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth 
in the ESMF prepared for the project in October 2010 and 
subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely dealt with 
changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in 
any form alter the overall screening procedure within the 
ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF helps to 
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and 
to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case basis for 
the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision in 
January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been 
added in the project description and small changes were made 
to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered 
through the process in the ESMF. The screening and due 
diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the original 
ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will 
apply to the rural grants, matching grants, irrigation rehab and 
any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the 
project or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and 
planning documents to be produced under Component 3(b) 
will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within 
the Terms of Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program 
and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated through sound 
construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be 
mitigated through environmentally friendly farming 
approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions 
from food processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3, rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation 
scheme is foreseen which would lead to better management of 
water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor 
construction related impacts (noise, dust, waste generation).   
A full and robust ESMP will be prepared to address risks and 
impacts of implementation of this scheme, including assessing 
impacts to other water users. 
➢❨❫

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No There are no implications on natural habitats foreseen.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no implications on forested areas foreseen.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Due to the fact that the project would more than likely lead to 
increased agricultural production, it is safe to assume that there 
would be an increased need for pest management. As such, an 
Integrated Pest Management Plan was part of the original 
ESMF (2010) andalso the revised ESMF (2015 and 2017).



Page 9 of 14

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No There are no activities involving physical / cultural resources 
foreseen.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no implications for indigenous people.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No This safeguards will not be triggered because the potential 
works proposed for the scheme rehabilitation are as follows: 
 
(i) Lining and repair of main canal sections, replacement 
of parts such as valves, etc.   
(ii) rehabilitation of of irrigation delivery in two secondary 
sub-schemes  
(iii) minor works related to dam safety and the Drini river 
aqueduct 
 
Given the nature of rehabilitation works, there will be no need 
for land take although there might be some crop damages for a 
temporary period of time while the works are ongoing. The 
protocol defined in the ESMF addresses the crop damage 
compensation which will be operationalized with concrete 
ESMPs .

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although the project will not build any dams, the Radoniqi 
Irrigation scheme depends upon the existing Radoniqi Dam for 
its effective functioning as the scheme draws its raw water 
directly from the Radoniqi reservoir controlled by a 61 meter 
high clay-core embankment dam. Several  Dam Safety 
Assessments have been carried out in the recent past for 
Radoniqi Dam, including in 2000, 2002, and 2006 under the 
WB supported Pilot Water Supply Project, and most recently 
in 2012 by the Water Task Force as part of a countrywide Dam 
Safety Review. While none of these reviews raise any concerns 
on imminent dam safety they make recommendations for 
operation and maintenance procedures and safety-related 
measures that are required to ensure an acceptable standard of 
safety. More precisely, this includes the need for critical 
documentation and information on dam safety, including 
geotechnical information, an update on and improvement of 
status of control instruments (inclinometers and piezometers 
are reported as largely dysfunctional) and electrical 
installations. Also, it is observed that there is no dam safety 
(monitoring) plan, although a letter from the dam operator 
states that geodetic measurements have been carried out to 
some extent over the past years. Most of the recommendations 
have not been fully implemented since. The project proposes to 
adopt a composite of the 2005 and 2012 recommendations, to 
be confirmed by a dam safety panel to be established, and to 



Page 10 of 14

finance those under the project. The following activities are 
envisaged to be included under the program: updated safety 
analysis, including full geodetic survey, rehabilitation of dam 
safety instrumentation and an emergency preparedness plan.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes Component 3 includes works on rehabilitation of the Radoniqi 
irrigation scheme, which is part of the trans-boundary Drini 
river basin. However, considering that the works will focus on 
better use and management of the existing irrigation scheme 
the team does not foresee any issues on water quality or 
quantity to downstream users. As such, an Exception to 
Notification was granted on December 16, 2016 by ECA VP.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 2: Enhancing Investments to 
Promote Sustainable Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The major 
portion of Component 2 remains the provision of grants which were also administered under the 
original project.  The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth in the ESMF 
prepared for the project in October 2010 and subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely 
dealt with changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in any form alter the 
overall screening procedure within the ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF 
helps to screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due 
diligence on a case-by-case basis for the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision 
in January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been added in the project description and 
small changes were made to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered through the 
process in the ESMF. The screening and due diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the 
original ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will apply to the rural grants, matching 
grants, irrigation rehab and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project 
or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and planning documents to be produced under 
Component 3(b) will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within the Terms of 
Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be 
readily mitigated through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be mitigated through environmentally 
friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions from food 
processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3 rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation scheme is foreseen which would lead 
to better management of water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor construction 
related impacts already described above that can be mitigated through a site-specific ESMP, while 
additional concerns include dam safety issues and also the potential for impacts on international 
waterways as the reservoir and the scheme are located within the Drini river basin. 
The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having 



Page 11 of 14

implications on pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan as prepared under the original ESMF.  There are no social safeguard related issues. The 
works proposed are rehabilitation of existing schemes. Rehabilitation of lining of open main canal 
and secondary pressurized (piped) schemes where necessary in two sections. There will be no need 
for neither land take nor establishment of right of way. Crop damages because of the rehabilitation 
works will be addressed in ESMFS and related ESMPS 
The Terms of Reference for Component 3(b): Strategy and Investment Framework for the 
Irrigation Sector, will incorporate safeguards requirements to ensure that there is due diligence of 
all potential safeguards aspects under the propsoed Strategy/Investment Framework.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential 
increase in agricultural production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  
Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the original ESMF should apply.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
There are no project alternatives considered. The screening mechanism for the grants would allow 
to either accept or deny a sub-project based on their associated impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has applied the ESMF screening in the later grant calls, while some issues remained 
in the first call and the due diligence was carried out by an independent consultant retroactively. 
The borrower has also provided educational trainings and seminars on ESMF compliance and 
sound environmental practices in 2014. The Borrower has a dedicated M&E staff that also 
provides support to the implementation of the ESMF, and as required can hire an external 
consultant to be engaged in the implementation of the ESMF policies. The site-specific ESMP for 
the Radoniqi irrigation scheme will more than likely be carried out by a company or consultant 
outside the Borrower's team and will try to streamline the WB requirements and those of the 
Kosovo environmental legislation into one process. As for the grants, one of the requirements is 
that no grant is awarded without the environmental and social due diligence in place. This 
requirement is strictly supervised by all of the PIU and also by the World Bank team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Implementation Unit and the MAFRD, 
as well as the members of the local communities where projects will take place. As such, the 
ESMF was subject to public consultations and disclosure in 2010 (as documented in the original 
ESMF) while each of the subsequent ESMPs prepared for each specific project was subject to 
disclosure and public consultations. For small scale projects public consultations were replaced by 
consent forms signed by all of the neighbors. The revised ESMF (as of January 2017) will be 
disclosed through the MAFRD website and Bank's Infoshop prior to the Appraisal of the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 02-Dec-2010



Page 12 of 14

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The revised ESMF that would make it applicable also to the Irrigation scheme was 

disclosed on January 18, 2017.  
This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 09-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The PMP is an integrated part of the ESMF that was revised and re-disclosed on 

January 18. This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent 
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the 
Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 13 of 14

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Meeta Sehgal
Title: Sr Agricultural Spec.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Contact: Memli Krasniqi
Title: Minister
Email: memli.krasniqi@rks-gov.net

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Contact: Kapllan Halimi
Title: General Secretary
Email: kapllan.halimi@rks-gov.net



Page 14 of 14

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Meeta Sehgal
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA) Date: 19-Jan-2017
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Julian A. Lampietti (PMGR) Date: 20-Jan-2017

Country Director: Name: Marco Mantovanelli (CD) Date: 02-Feb-2017

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21901 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 2 of 12  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

P161473  Lao Agriculture 
Commercialization 
Project (P161473) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Nov 06, 2017 Mar 30, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

Department of Planning and 
Cooperation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrowing Agency    2.00  

International Development Association (IDA)   35.00  

Total Project Cost   37.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 3 of 12  

     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Lao PDR has achieved good progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the past decade. Average 
growth of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the past decade was around 8 percent per annum. Poverty declined from 
41.4 percent in 2002/03 to 28.8 percent in 2012/13. With a GDP per capita of around US$1,600 in 2014, Lao PDR has 
become a lower-middle income country.  
 
2. Despite impressive macroeconomic achievements, poverty still remains high, especially in rural areas and 
among ethnic groups. Over 80 percent of the poor are concentrated in rural areas. About 40 percent of Mon Khmer and 
Hmong ethnic groups are poor, compared to 15 percent of Lao-Tai people, and ethnic groups account for about two thirds 
of people having no access to formal education. Stunting is also pronounced among ethnic groups.   
 
3. In many rural areas of the country, a high prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition is still a major problem. 
Rice shortage often takes place for about 3-4 months per year. Prevalent farming systems are largely subsistent and 
generally lack diversification. Although the country is able to achieve self-sufficiency in rice at the national level in the 
normal year, there are still challenges in addressing food security due to the instability of annual production resulted from 
poor farming practices, ineffective water management, and frequent natural disasters (i.e. floods and droughts). 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Agriculture is an important sector in Lao PDR, but it is currently underperforming. The sector employs two-thirds 
of the country’s labor force, but generates only 22 percent of the GDP. In the last decade, agricultural growth averaged 
3.7 percent, which is less than half of the overall GDP growth. Agricultural farming is largely subsistent, producing one 
crop a year, mainly paddy with low productivity. Currently, irrigated agricultural land accounts for less than 15 percent of 
cultivated land and the remaining 85 percent is rain-fed. Recently, there have been emerging signs of agricultural 
commercialization and diversification (i.e. crop rotation or aquaculture with rice cultivation in low land areas; commercial 
production of maize in Xayabury province, and vegetables in Vientiane province). In the bigger context, however, these 
developments are still relatively scattered and small. 
 
5. Lao PDR’s agriculture sector is constrained by subsistent farming and small scale production with low level of 
commercialization, limited processing capacity, underdeveloped supporting infrastructure, and weak public services. 
Value chains of rice, maize, and vegetables are currently underdeveloped. There are good opportunities and potentials 
for improving their performance substantially through improving farm productivity and enhancing value chains. While the 
former could be realized by adopting quality seed/ farm inputs, improved farming technologies, upgrades of irrigation and 
improved water management, improved extension services/applied research, enhanced farming mechanization, 
improved harvest/postharvest facilities, and better farming diversification/crop rotation, the latter could be achieved by 
improved regulatory framework to facilitate trade and monitor quality standards, market analysis/research, 
transportation/ logistics, strategic support to agribusinesses, contract farming, and product branding and marketing. The 
recently completed project “Engaging the Private Sector to Develop the Lao Rice Industry” (EMRIP) demonstrated the 
readiness of the growing number of rice mills to modernize their facilities, engage in contract farming and develop 
marketing strategies.  

 
6. There are concerns related to the quality and sustainability of agricultural growth. Rice is the most important 
crop in the agriculture sector of Lao PDR. Rice production dominates agricultural land use, occupying nearly 56 percent of 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 4 of 12  

     

the total harvested area of all crops. More than 80 percent of the Lao rice crop consists of various types of glutinous rice. 
Maize, which constitutes about 12 percent of the harvested area, is the next most important crop. No other single crop or 
category of crops takes up more than around 5 percent of the cultivated land. In terms of the tonnage of crops produced 
at the national level, rice represents 81 percent of total weight of crops produced. Lack of diversification and heavily 
reliance on rice while there is an increasingly fierce competition in global rice markets are the key challenges to 
competiveness and sustainability of the agricultural growth of Lao PDR in the future. 
 
7. Addressing the risks and shortcomings of the sector will require re-organization of agricultural production and 
greater commercialization to support strategic value chains. According to the findings of the Project Identification 
Mission jointly carried out by Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the World Bank in November 2016, three 
strategic value chains were identified, which include: (i) rice value chains in the selected low land provinces; (ii) maize 
value chains in Xayabury province; and (iii) vegetables value chains in Vientiane province and possibly Vientiane Capital. 
These value chains are currently operating far below their potentials due to: (1) weak agriculture knowledge and 
information system (i.e. weak research and extension and private sector linkages, inadequate/weak delivery of extension 
and training services, use of poor quality seeds, lack of agricultural diversification); (2) poor production infrastructure (i.e. 
lack/degraded irrigation canals, poor maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, poor feeder roads to facilitate in-scheme 
mechanization); (3) inadequate mechanization facilities and equipment (i.e. lack of mechanization for harvesting and post-
harvest drying and processing, lack of  equipment and facilities for quality testing and storage); (4) lack of access to finance 
(i.e. underdeveloped banking sector, low capacity of rice mills to prepare business plans and secure loans); (5) inadequate 
enabling environment (i.e. constraints to new business entry/ business licensing, quality control and certification, public 
services to promote trade); and (6) insecure agricultural land tenure (i.e. risks of conversion of agricultural land to other 
uses, reduced incentives to invest and manage land by farmers). These constraints not only result in low farm productivity 
but also are generic causes for the poor performance of the agriculture sector and slow process of agricultural 
commercialization. 

 
8. The Government has recognized the need to promote a substantial shift in the agriculture sector from 
subsistent farming to sustainable commercial agriculture following cluster development and value chain approaches. 
On November 18, 2016, the Government through Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) sent an Official Letter to the 
World Bank requesting the support on agricultural commercialization in order to improve the sector’s performance 
especially along the rice value chains. Yet, there is also an increasing attention of the Government to other crops such a 
maize, horticulture, beans and pulses, and aquaculture, to increase diversification and farm incomes, as well as to improve 
food security and reduce malnutrition. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

9. The proposed project is aligned with the National Agriculture Sector Plan to 2020 and Strategy to 2025, in which 
improving the commercialization and competiveness of the agriculture sector are the top priorities. The proposed 
project also supports several objectives of the Eighth National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), namely 
Outcome 2.2 “Food security ensured and incidence of malnutrition reduced” and Outcome 3.3 “Reducing the instability 
of agricultural production caused by impacts of natural disasters.”  
 
10. The proposed project is consistent with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016), which placed an increase in 
agricultural productivity to support incomes among the top priorities to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity in 
Lao PDR, and with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2017-2021. It contributes to achieving its Objective 1.2 
“Making it easier to do business and create jobs” under the Focus Area 1 “Supporting Inclusive Growth” and Objective 2.1 
“Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition” under the Focus Area 2 “Investing in People.”     



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 5 of 12  

     

 
11. The proposed project is closely aligned with the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity and with the global Sustainable Development Goals, including Zero Hunger (Goal 2) and Climate Action (Goal 
13).   The project would directly provide benefits to local farmers in four provinces, namely Xayabury (those associated 
with maize value chains), Vientiane Province (vegetables value chains), and Bolykhamxay and Khammouane Provinces and 
Vientiane Capital (rice value chains). Most farmers in these provinces are practicing subsistent agriculture with low/ 
unstable productivity and low incomes. Generally speaking, rural farmers among poor groups in Lao PDR and some of 
them are living under extreme poverty. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project 
areas. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The proposed PDO-level results indicators are:  
 

(i) Number of project beneficiaries (men and women; core indicator);  

(ii) An increase in productivity from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iii) An increase in the sale volumes (percentage) from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iv) An increase in the quality of the produce sold to agribusinesses through production alliances. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed Agriculture Commercialization Project (ACP) seeks to enhance the competitiveness and 
sustainability of Lao PDR’s agriculture sector through technical and financial support to increase in agricultural productivity 
and commercialization in selected strategic value chains. The project would focus on: (i) the geographical areas with high 
agricultural development potentials; (ii) the farming systems with high potentials for commercialization (i.e. paddy, maize, 
vegetables); (iii) promotion of good agricultural practices and climate smart agricultural technologies and farming system 
diversification to enhance food and nutritional security; (iv) building capacity for farmers’ organisations, agribusinesses, 
public and private service providers; and (v) building on and developing synergies with other government/donor programs.  
 
15. Proposed project areas: In line with the above strategy, the project would select Provinces and Districts with: (i) 
high potentials for agricultural production (farm land and production volume); (ii) high potentials for commercialization 
and value chain development; (iii) availability of basic public infrastructure (i.e. irrigation, roads,  etc.); (iv) public services 
in place to support commercialization and diversification; and (v) availability of agribusinesses interested in inclusive value 
chain development. The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, 
Khammouane, and Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts will be identified before pre-appraisal mission. 
Three selected value chains could be initially selected for project preparation purposes – namely high value commercial 
rice (not subsistence), maize, and vegetables -- while allowing flexibility to add other, high-value crops during the life of 
the project. 

 
16. It is envisage that the Project would have three components: (A) Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems; (B) 
Support for Improved Value Chains; and (C) Project Management. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 6 of 12  

     

 
17. Component A: Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems: This component would aim at enhancing productivity 
of farming systems and it would include the following activities:  

 
(i) Production organization and promotion of the use of good quality seeds;  
(ii) Research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote good and 

sustainable agricultural production, diversification and commercialization;  

(iii) Upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and improvement of water management practices; 

(iv) Establishment and capacity building for farmer groups and their members; and  

(v) Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems in the project area on a block basis (not 
for individual plots).  

 
18. Component B: Strengthening Agricultural Value Chains. This component would aim at strengthening and 
leveraging private sector investments in selected food value chains, and it would include the following activities:  
 

(i) Provision of matching grants to farmer groups and their members to promote investments in harvesting 
machines, drying and storage facilities to reduce pre/postharvest losses; 

(ii) Provision of matching grants and capacity building assistance to agribusinesses to strengthen their role in 
driving the value chain development; 

(iii) Upgrades of feeder access to production areas and farms;  

(iv) Training and consulting support to farmer groups and their members to build their management skills, 
business development and marketing of farm produce through adopting contract farming, value addition 
and product branding;  

(v) Support MAF, Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC), their research institutes and technical agencies 
in conducting relevant market research, agricultural policy analyses, and improving intelligence and 
management skills; and  

(vi) Improving the enabling environment through strengthening capacity for quality control and standards 
certification (i.e. seeds, produce, mills, etc.) including improved inspection services, test kits and 
laboratory capacity to certify for clean and safe foods. 

 
19. Component C: Project Management. This component would provide equipment and incremental operating costs 
for project monitoring, financial management, and procurement activities, ensure compliance with the safeguards, 
support the short and long-term technical assistance to the project management team in selected areas, and support 
analysis and dissemination of findings related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different 
institutional and technical models being applied or piloted under the project.  
 
20. The project would establish and support linkages with ongoing and future interventions by other donors including 
ADB, IFC, NGOs, and government projects/programs. For instance, farmer groups and agribusinesses which received 
previous supports from the Netherlands Development Organization SNV’s Enhancing Milled Rice Production in Lao PDR 
(EMRIP) will be eligible for further support from this project in order to be more effective and efficient. The farmer groups 
and agribusinesses participating in this project would be well positioned to graduate and become potential clients of IFC 
in the future. This proposed project would seek to create complementary and enhance synergy of existing 
projects/programs in the areas. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 7 of 12  

     

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, and 

Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts within identified before pre-appraisal mission.   
 
Component A (Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems) would include production promotion of the use of good 

quality seeds, research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote sustainable 
agricultural production, diversification and commercialization, upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and 
improvement of water management practices. Component B (Support for Improved Value Chains) would strengthen and 
leverage private sector investments in selected food chains. Component (Project Management) would support project 
management including monitoring and evaluation, financial management and procurement to ensure compliance with 
the fiduciary safeguards requirements. 
 
The project’s overall impacts are expected to be positive. Some negative impacts are envisaged to be limited, localized, 

manageable and reversible. It is anticipated that the following World Bank safeguard policies will be triggered: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and International Water Ways (for irrigation rehabilitation). At 
present, there is insufficient information to determined if Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Culture Resources 
(OP/BP 4.11) are triggered, hence it is classed as TBD. Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems 
are not expected to cause changes in land use types and land ownership as they will be carried out a block basis (not for 
individual plots). Forced child labor and labor influx are not anticipated from the project. The project would comply with 
the three gender tags proposed by the World Bank Standards. This is to ensure that the project will address gender in 
terms of (i) analysis; (ii) action; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation framework. During project preparation, the project will 
develop specific/tailored measures to enhance equal access/opportunities for women to benefit from the matching 
grants and other project activities. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be executed though the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) with its provincial and district offices 

(PAFOS and DAFOs) in collaboration with Provincial Industry and Commerce Offices (PICOs) to be responsible for actual 
implementation of day-to-day activities. The capacity of MAF is assessed to be adequate as they had extensive experience 
in managing and implementing donor-funding projects, including those from the WBG namely Agriculture Development 
Project (ADP), 2004-2008, Rice Productivity Improvement Project (RPIP), 2009-2012 and Lao Upland Food Security 
Improvement Project (LUFSIP), 2010-2014. Some of PAFOs and DAFO staff had have previous experience with the World 
Bank-financed projects but some are new especially to safeguard policies. To mitigate residual risks, technical assistance 
will be recruited and in place to provide specific technical capacity for the implementing agencies involved in safeguard 
preparation and implementation. A staff from MAF and each of PAFOs and DAFOs will be appointed as focal points for 
safeguards. These safeguard focal staff will be responsible for impact assessment, consultation, and preparation of 
safeguard instruments, implementation and compliance monitoring and reporting with technical support from the 
consultants. Safeguard training and assistance will be also provided by the Bank safeguard specialists and the National 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 8 of 12  

     

University of Laos which delivers a safeguard training program supported through the ongoing Bank-financed Lao 
Environmental and Social Project II (LENSII). 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance irrigation and drainage 
refurbishment and upgrades and water management 
practices. Investments in harvested machines and 
storage and training, and equipment provision.  
 
The envisaged investments are typical to similar 
agriculture development projects and are not 
expected to have adverse and unprecedented 
environmental and social impacts. Implementation of 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure and land 
improvements investments on farmer fields under 
Component 1 are mainly rehabilitation by their nature 
and not expected to have significant negative 
environment and social impacts.  
 
Given that the scope and targets of the project are still 
to be determined during the project preparation, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be developed and applied by the project. 
ESMF will provide policy provisions, principles and 
process to address the environmental and social 
impacts. The policy framework will describe 
procedures for impact assessment, consultation, 
preparation of subsequent safeguard instruments and 
implementation arrangement. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

It is expected that the project is only limited to areas 
of land already utilized for agriculture. NH will not 
likely be triggered as it is not anticipated at this stage. 
The project will have a ‘chance finds’ mechanism built 
into the ESMF to address the potential issues on NH. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Forestry is not triggered as it is envisage that no 
project activities will take place on forest areas. The 
project would apply a screening process to eliminate 
subprojects which will impact on forests or involve 
forests in the early planning stage. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 9 of 12  

     

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will develop a Pest Management Plan in 
line with Lao legal regulations and World Bank Policies 
on pesticide uses. A negative list of chemicals will form 
be included. The Pest Management Plan will be the 
part of the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project may impact on physical cultural resources 
although it is expected to be limited to areas of land 
already utilized for agriculture. The project will have a 
‘chance finds’ mechanism built into the ESMF to 
address the potential issues on PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Target beneficiaries and project areas will be identified 
during project preparation. It is likely that the project 
will operate in areas where there is a presence of 
ethnic groups, belonging to Mon-Khmer and Hmong- 
Hmong – lu Mien ethno-linguistic families, that meet 
the four characteristics specified as defining criteria 
for indigenous people in the World Bank Policy on 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). The project would 
conduct a Social Assessment to inform the preparation 
of the Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF) to 
ensure that free, prior and informed consultations 
would be conducted with affected ethnic groups 
leading to their broad community support, and that 
they receive project benefits in a culturally 
appropriate manner. The EGPF will be prepared as a 
standalone document in line with OP 4.10 
requirements, and will be finalized before the project 
appraisal. 
 
Due attention will be given to ensure that ethnic 
groups do not suffer adverse impacts and that they 
receive culturally compatible social and economic 
benefits. Necessary steps and procedures will be 
included to ensure that the cultures of the multi-
ethnic society are respected and that gender 
dimension are integrated at all levels and cycles of 
project implementation. A feedback and grievance 
resolution mechanism will be developed and applied 
under the project to provide affected ethnic groups a 
legitimate platform for monitoring and reporting on 
the safeguard policy compliance as well as on project 
implementation. 
 
The project will provide training to its staff, 
consultants and their partners on the EGPF to ensure 
that they are aware of and able to comply the policy 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 10 of 12  

     

requirements. Details of due diligence procedures will 
be described in the EGPF. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Under Component A of the project: Enhancing 
Productivity of Farming Systems aiming at enhancing 
productivity of farming systems, minor land 
acquisition are envisaged from the rehabilitation of 
existing irrigation schemes. The civil works may 
involve expansion of intake, local reservoirs and 
irrigation canals.  These potential impacts can be 
avoided or minimized through proper design, impact 
assessment, consultation and application of mitigation 
measures. Given that the irrigation subprojects and 
areas to be covered are still unknown and to be 
identified during the project preparation, a 
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework 
(CRPF) will be developed and applied by the project 
which is in compliance with OP/BP 4.12 requirements.  
The CRPF will complement the EGPF and ESMF, 
especially in terms of implementation arrangements.  
If land or asset loss are unavoidable, the principles and 
procedures described in the RPF will be applied to 
address negative impacts.  Project staff, consultants 
and its partners will be provided with training and 
support to enable them to comply the policy 
requirements. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Although the project does not plan to include 
construction/rehabilitation of dams, it may include 
small scale irrigations which use or rely on dams. The 
project will prepare safeguard documents to comply 
with OP/BP 4.37 requirements. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered as the proposed project 
investments are located in areas that are part of the 
Mekong River Basin. However, the project targets 
rehabilitation and improvements of existing irrigation 
systems and the rehabilitation works will not involve 
any adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of 
waters in the Mekong River. The team will prepare for 
a notification process for downstream riparian nation 
states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be active in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 31, 2017 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 11 of 12  

     

 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard consultants will be recruited in April 2017. Draft safeguard documents will be available for review in June 

2017. Final safeguard documents will be available for disclosure in August 2017. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Binh Thang Cao 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Lao People's Democratic Republic 

Phouang Parisak Pravongviengkham 

Vice Minister - Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 

pppravongviengkham@yahoo.com 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Department of Planning and Cooperation 

Xaypladeth Choulamany 

Director - Department of Planning and Cooperation 

Xaypladethchoulamany@yahoo.com 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Binh Thang Cao 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 12 of 12  

     

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Peter Leonard 20-Apr-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: William R. Sutton 21-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Ulrich Zachau 24-Apr-2017 
    
 
 
 
 
 

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18811 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 2 of 16  

     

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Moldova P155968  Moldova Climate 
Adaptation Project 
(P155968) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Feb 21, 2017 May 04, 2017 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency GEF Focal Area 

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Environment Land degradation 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    2.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   18.60  

International Development Association (IDA)    1.40  

Total Project Cost   22.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Click here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Moldova is a landlocked country between Romania to the west and Ukraine to the north, east and south; the country 

has a surface area of 33,840 km2, and is home to 3.6 million people. Moldova’s rich soils and mild climate are ideal 

for farming, and agriculture has traditionally been a key sector in Moldova’s economic structure. The sector 

represented about 13 percent of Moldova GDP in 2014 with a value of about 14.5 billion MDL (about US$1.05 

billion). Agriculture employs nearly a third (28 percent) of the country’s population, and agro-food exports account for 

roughly 50 percent of the country’s total exports. In spite of its large size and significant contribution to the economy, 

the average agricultural sector growth rate performance has been low at 3.6 percent per annum over the last 10 years, 

mainly due to the sector’s vulnerability to the weather. 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 3 of 16  

     

 

In the context of overall economic growth, Moldova has made significant progress in reducing poverty and boosting 

shared prosperity. The economy was growing at 5 percent annually after 2000, and the national poverty rate (below $5 

per day) dropped from 68 to 11.4 percent between 2000 and 2014. Public and private transfers, namely pensions and 

remittances, as well as labor markets had an important role in reducing poverty. The Moldovan economy, however, 

moved into recession in 2015 (-0.5 percent growth in GDP) because of weaker external flows, large-scale banks fraud, 

and a drought. Economic troubles in Russia and Ukraine, together with Russia’s restrictions on agro-food imports from 

Moldova sharply reduced remittances from and halved Moldova’s exports to Russia. Further, a banking crisis brought 

on by massive fraud in three banks has lowered confidence in the banking sector, leading to significant interest rates 

and reduced credit to the private sector. The monetary and fiscal resolution of the three insolvent banks (12 percent of 

GDP) has led to higher public debt and lower foreign exchange reserves, damaged business confidence and reduced 

macroeconomic buffers to sustain economic shocks. 

 

Political instability became more marked between 2013 and 2015, manifesting itself as frequent changes of governing 

coalitions. There were seven prime ministers or acting prime ministers and three periods without a Government 

between September 2014 and January 2016. The November 2015 Public Opinion Barometer (bi-annual poll measuring 

political, social and economic sentiment) showed that 88 percent of Moldovans thought that the country was moving in 

the wrong direction. Corruption and governance indicators have also worsened markedly. Moldova fell from the 30th 

to the 20th percentile for Control of Corruption between 2012 and 2014 (2015 World Governance Indicators). The 

Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey shows a fourfold increase in the percentage of firms that 

rate the bribing of both officials and members of parliament during 2005-13 as negatively impacting the business 

environment. 

 

Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe. Poverty is largely a rural phenomenon as rural national 

poverty stands at 19 percent compared to 5 percent for urban areas. With 57 percent of the population living in rural 

areas, 84 percent of the poor are concentrated there. Those in rural areas, poor and non-poor, rely more on agriculture 

and remittances for income sources than their urban counterparts who derive more income from non-agricultural 

employment. Therefore, rural areas felt the shock of the 2007 drought much more than urban areas, with poverty ($5 

per day) increasing from 31 percent in 2007 to a peak of 36 percent in 2009. Stocks of agricultural products vanished 

in many rural households, and prices and expenditure in households’ budgets for food and energy rapidly grew. A 

severe summer drought in 2015, along with lower remittances and higher inflation, has further pushed the poverty rate 

up to 41.9 percent. Climate change impacts, if not properly managed, could undermine progress made in poverty 

reduction, and adversely impact food security and economic growth in vulnerable rural areas.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Despite being landlocked and therefore having no exposure to sea-level rise, the ND-GAIN  methodology ranks 

Moldova as the most climate vulnerable country in Europe, based on a range of social and economic indicators. 

Temperature and rainfall have increased in Moldova over the last century. Climate models predict future mean 

temperature rises exceeding 20 by mid-century, and a slight increase or significant decline in precipitation, depending 

on region. Extreme climatic events and other climate-related challenges are expected to worsen in the future, with 

important implications for economic growth, and especially for the rural poor, who are more dependent on natural 

resources and more vulnerable to climate-related shocks. 

 

In 2014, the Government of Moldova, through the Ministry of Environment and with support of UNDP and the 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 4 of 16  

     

Government of Austria, developed and approved a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, reviewing climate 

change vulnerabilities in the six sectors considered most vulnerable, agriculture, water resources, forestry, human 

health, energy and infrastructure. The strategy included an initial action plan to 2020, at an estimated budget of 

US$155 million, based on institutional and investment activities recommended within each sector. More recently, the 

Bank has supported the Government to carry out a more systematic analysis of the costs of inaction on within each of 

these sectors, and the potential volumes and cost-benefit of physical investments for climate adaptation. Given the 

importance of the sector, a parallel climate-smart agriculture profile was prepared through collaboration with CIAT. 

The studies identified key current investment needs in warning and response systems to extreme climate events, in 

resilient land management through improved agricultural practices and forestry, and in water resources management, 

and findings are summarized below (see annex 3 for more detail). 

 

Agriculture: For most crops, yields in Moldova are around a quarter to a third lower than other Eastern European 

countries. Only around 1% of land is irrigated, and droughts occur every few years, and results in estimated annualized 

costs of around $20 million. The most severe droughts, such as that of 2007, have significant impacts on GDP and 

food security. Crop losses are also incurred from flooding, late frosts, hail and windstorms. Climate change is expected 

to reduce the productivity of most current crops by 10-30%, as well as increasing the frequency and intensity of most 

extreme events, and presenting new pest and disease challenges. Annual crops will be more severely impacted than 

perennials, with typical conditions for fruit orchard and vineyards potentially even improving under climate change, 

but recent trends have seen an increase in annual cropping over perennials due to a lack of investment in rejuvenating 

orchards and vineyards when they reach the end of their productive lives. 

 

With rural finance only available at high interest rates, lack of investment is a general problem in the sector. Around 

43% of agricultural land and 80% of pasture land (which is mostly communally managed under local government 

authorities) is degraded to some degree, which makes the land even more vulnerable to climate variability and change. 

The productivity of pasture land has been estimated at 20-50% of its potential. The annual opportunity cost of inaction 

in the agriculture and livestock sectors is estimated to be around $240 - $480 million at present and to rise significantly 

over coming decades. Scaling up adoption of irrigation and a range of other climate-smart and sustainable agricultural 

technologies will be critical to the productivity and resilience of the sector. 

 

Forests: Moldova has the lowest forest cover in Europe at only 11.4 percent. Forests tend to occur in hilly areas with 

the majority of them located in the central part of Moldova, slightly less in the north and even fewer in the south. Tree 

species are mainly broad leafed - oak, ash, hornbeam, black locust and poplar being the most significant. Moldovan 

forests are already fragmented and stressed, and climate-related changes in species growth and composition are being 

observed. Climate change is expected to reduce the productivity of natural forests and change pathology patterns. 

Annual opportunity costs of inaction are estimated to be around $40 million, and to increase marginally over coming 

decades. Areas for immediate interventions are ecological reconstruction of the present forest estate and the expansion 

of forest vegetation, including the creation of new forest shelter belts, which play an important role in protecting crops 

from high winds, desiccation and uneven snow cover. 

 

Water Resources: Most of Moldovan territory lies between two main rivers (the Nistru and Prut) which originate 

outside its territory, but surface water resources are limited in much of the area in between. About 65 percent of the 

population use water abstracted from groundwater supplies. Utilization of water resources is already much lower than 

during Soviet times. Only around 6% of the previous area is currently under functional irrigation, and irrigation and 

potable water supply from ground water is a problem within many rural areas owing to decreased water level and its 

quality. Even with the potential for slightly increased rainfall in some areas, overall water availability is expected to 

decrease with climate change due to the combined changes in precipitation and temperature. Despite low levels of 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 5 of 16  

     

current use, total water availability is expected to fall below total demand within a couple of decades, as demand grows 

but supply falls, and Moldova is among countries predicted to have high water stress in 2040. The most populated and 

economically important regions are the most vulnerable to expected climate change, and some regions are already 

facing water shortages. Addressing deficits in these regions will be critical for supporting a sustainable economic 

recovery. The costs of water shortages could be measured in the hundreds of millions or billions of US$ by the 2040s, 

and investments in improving the efficiency of water usage and additional storage will be needed to avert them. The 

current project would make its contribution reducing water deficit for farmers by providing access to irrigation 

schemes, by promoting better and more adapted to climate changes agricultural practices, as well as by conducting 

large-scale information dissemination and demonstrational activities in this regard. 

 

Climate knowledge and emergency response: Moldova suffers from a range of natural disasters, most of which are 

weather related. Current annualized costs of flooding are estimated to be around $60 million, and to increase to several 

times that over coming decades as flood frequency and the volume of assets at risk increase. The World Bank has 

already invested in disaster response management through the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project, 

DCRMP (2010-16; US$12 million), which is assessed to have had a significant effect on reducing economic losses. 

Nevertheless, recent hail and rain storms (June 2016) showed that the country is not as well prepared for natural 

hazards as it aims to be. In particular, and as recently highlighted by the Prime Minister, local delivery and translation 

of early warning to early action, as well as effective response, need further strengthening. This requires not only 

bolstering of sub-national command structures and facilities/equipment, but also ensuring that local first responders, 

authorities, public services and businesses are better prepared.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed project is fully consistent with and anticipated in the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) that 

was approved on August 9, 2013. Specifically, the project combines two operations anticipated in the CPS - on 

sustainable forest management and climate adaptation - contributing to the third pillar on “promoting a green, clean 

and resilient Moldova.” Through the proposed project, the Bank will support the country in identifying and 

implementing interventions for improved environmental practices and natural resource management, and greater 

adaptation to the impact of climate change. The project also aims at ensuring that poverty reduction and shared 

prosperity are delivered in an environmentally sustainable manner, while also reducing the vulnerability of rural 

households, which represent a disproportionately high share of the bottom 40 percent and largely rely on self-produced 

foods, to the vagaries of extreme weather events. As described in the CPS, the project will assist in improving under-

developed weather mitigation instruments as part of adaptation efforts, which leave the rural population, farmers in 

particular, highly vulnerable to adverse weather events, thus compromising their food supply. All these efforts are 

expected to support the Bank’s major emphasis on increasing resilience to climate related risks and disasters.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
The PDO is to enhance adoption of climate-smart agriculture and forestry practices in targeted landscapes and 
strengthen national disaster management systems. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 6 of 16  

     

 
- Area of agricultural land with increased productivity; 

- Number of farmers adopting new agricultural management practices promoted by the project; 

- Area of degraded land restored (of which forest, of which pasture); 

- Number/% of at risk population covered by effective early warning and response systems); 

- Direct beneficiaries (of which female, of which poor).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
The emerging findings of the Climate Adaptation Technical Assistance show that there are substantial needs for (i) pro-

poor and complementary adaptation investments across a range of sustainable land and water management activities and 

(ii) cross-cutting climate information and emergency response. Accordingly, the Moldova Climate Adaptation & Forestry 

Project (CAFP) is proposed to focus on a mutually reinforcing set of investments that help to address several key 

adaptation issues and target the most vulnerable through: 

 

i. An integrated approach to supporting resilient rural landscapes through investments in on-farm irrigation and other 

adaptation activities, and forest-based restoration of degraded lands. 

 

ii. Strengthening of climate knowledge and disaster-risk management systems to improve understanding of climate 

impacts, and preparedness and response mechanisms, that will benefit a range of sectors. 

 

Project structure and key activities: 

 

Component 1: Resilient rural landscapes [$32 million indicative] 

 

Rural productivity in Moldova is lower than regional standards, and agriculture, livestock and forest systems are 

vulnerable to climate pressures. Only around 6% of the area covered by soviet-era schemes and less than 1% of 

Moldova’s arable land is under functional irrigation, and crops are vulnerable to flooding, late frosts, hail, windstorms and 

snow accumulations, as well as droughts. Many forests and pasture lands are degraded, and faced with intensifying 

climate-related threats such as fire and pests/disease. Particularly lands managed by local public authorities are degraded  

due to weak management capacity of the LPAs. Improving the management of these systems in unison is mutually 

reinforcing as it will support diversified rural incomes (thereby increasing resilience to individual climate shocks) as well 

as reducing vulnerability and increasing productivity through synergistic ecological services- e.g. the role that forests play 

in sheltering fields and protecting soil and water sources. 

 

The component would rely on investments in the following complementary activities within one or more target 

landscapes. 

 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to the Agricultural Sector [$10 million indicative] 

 

The project would support the up-scaling of activities that have been previously tested through donor-supported pilot 

projects and have demonstrated successful mitigation and adaptation measures with potential for larger scale 

interventions. A number of resilience practices have been tested, generating locally-tuned models, farmer experience, and 

implementation-service delivery capacity has been created. stimulated emulation by the neighboring farmers. Discussions 

with producers confirm that these programs have been well-received and that there is a degree of emulation by 

neighboring farmers, but there is still considerable scope and need for upscaling. 

 

While on-going analysis indicates that access to irrigation represents the highest-return option for increased resilience of 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 7 of 16  

     

Moldovan agricultural production systems, the project will not focus on the rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation systems. 

These are not likely to be feasible in the context of the existing financing envelope for the project and current institutional 

constraints in the sector. Instead, the project would focus on building upon the results of the Millennium Challenge 

Corporation’s institutional and investment efforts in the rehabilitation of 10 large irrigation schemes, to provide further 

capacity building and/or investment resources to emerging water users associations/farmer groups for the sustainable use 

and expanded up-take of irrigation services. 

 

The project will provide financing for:   

 

a) Upscaling adoption of irrigation through assisting groups of farmers to access existing large-scale pumped systems 

rehabilitated by MCA, and by providing access to small-scale irrigation in the hinterlands through investments in shared 

equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of existing and construction of new water harvesting ponds). Both 

potential categories are likely to be located in the central and southern regions of the country. The potential ‘ready’ 

demand is assumed at around 15 percent of the potentially equipped irrigated area i.e., 30 000 hectares @ 15% = 4500 

hectares. The irrigated areas are used mostly for high value vegetable crops (tomato; cucumbers; onions; peppers; 
eggplants, etc.) and orchards. Based on the previous experience in the country the proposed activities do not 

cause any risks and impacts related to child and forced labor. 
 

b) Upscaling demonstration activities on climate smart agriculture technologies: i.e. integrated climate resilient practices 

and investments such as drip irrigation, greenhouses, minimum and no-till agriculture, UV/hail nets, etc. The project 

would aim to support around 100 producers, leading to at least 200 demonstration events and to around 3000 knowledge 

beneficiaries. 

 

c) Extension and knowledge dissemination on lower-cost on-farm adaptation practices: multi-cropping, inter-cropping, 

silage, climate smart herd management, introduction to organic farming, etc. The project would aim to support 

compilation of existing knowledge into publications and practical guidelines, with more on-hands delivery of knowledge 

to around 1000 farmers in dedicated workshops. 

 

The project would support the upscaling investments mentioned in (a) and (b) above with matching grant financing. 

Matching grants would not exceed 30% of the overall cost for any particular climate smart investment, as well as be under 

US$50,000, and would be provided on a competitive basis (in transparently held calls of proposals), against clearly 

established eligibility and performance implementation criteria, including a public good element, such as associative 

collaboration between farmers and/or a public demonstration element. Demonstration investments will be subject to 

commitments for inclusion in a demonstration plot circuit and allowing access by agri-consultants and interested farmers. 

 

Support for these activities is likely to be delivered to local communities and farmers through the country’s National Rural 

Development Agency (ACSA) for the proliferation of climate smart agriculture practices and technologies (through 

demonstration plots, farmer schools and climate-informed extension), and through the involvement of ACSA and of the 

Millennium Challenge Account Unit for irrigation activities. The spatial focus of these interventions, given the relatively 

uniform levels of vulnerability of agricultural production systems throughout the country, is likely to be widespread and 

responsive to local demand and proactivity, but the menu of interventions would be fine-tuned to local agro-climatic 

conditions. 

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Forest and pasture management [indicative US$22 million indicative] 

 

In forest and pasture land management, project activities will aim at supporting ecological reconstruction, new forest belts 

and riparian buffers and restoration of degraded land. The precise selection of activities will be conditioned on progress on 

institutional restructuring in the forest sector. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 8 of 16  

     

Specific activities are in line with national forestry plans and could include: 

 

Institutional strengthening ($0.5 million) to support the implementation of the Forest Institutional Reform Strategy of 

Moldova (FIRSM, prepared in 2012 with support from ENPI-FLEG I program) through building capacity (equipment, 

enhancing professional and institutional capacity, etc.). 

 

Ecological reconstruction and improving the genetic diversity of state forests ($12 million) are high priorities. The aim is 

to consolidate existing forest resources by focusing mainly on the Central region where most forests are concentrated and 

to a lesser extent in the South. The project would support ecological reconstruction in an area of 5,000 to 10,000 ha 

depending on the intensity of presumed intervention ($9.5 million).This includes investments in the forest agency 

Moldsilva’s afforestation capacity along with financing forest reconstruction activities such as sanitary cuttings and 

selective cutting/clearing of nonnative species, as well as afforestation activities. For all areas proposed for ecological 

reconstruction a specialized design institute/agency will design a concrete scheme for such activities which will be 

preliminary reviewed and approved by the State Ecological Inspectorate in order to avoid any potential impacts on critical 

or important natural habitats with high biodiversity values. This will be done during the initial stage of project 

implementation and before contracting implementing agencies for these activities. 

 

Provision of appropriate seeds and seedlings material to support regeneration of native forests (mainly comprising oak 

species) would be addressed by investment in the National Centre for Forest Genetics and Seeds (NCFGS) under 

Moldsilva. Native seedling production would be enhanced through investments in irrigation and capacity for containerized 

seedlings production at the NCFGS ($2.5 million). Knowledge gaps in ecological reconstruction of forests would be 

addressed through a training program on the ecological reconstruction for the Moldsilva staff ($0.25 million). 

 

Agricultural shelterbelts, riparian buffers and afforestation on Local Public Authorities’ land ($6.5 million). This would 

include reconstruction of degraded shelterbelts on 1,000 ha ($0.75 million), creation of new forest belts on 1,000 ha ($1.5 

million) and riparian buffers on 1,000 ha ($1.5 million), as well as afforestation of around 1,500 ha of degraded land ($3.0 

million). These interventions would mainly target land owned by Local Public Authorities (LPAs). 

 

Improved management of LPA forests and pastures ($4 million) would increase the capacity of LPAs for managing 

communal land resources (mainly forests and pastures) in a participatory, planned and integrated way. This will support 

management planning for all forests that belong to LPAs but which do not have management plans yet (appr. 40,000 ha). 

The project would also support rehabilitation of degraded communal land, through improved pasture (and livestock) 

management, and silvo-pastoral approaches. 

 

Feasibility of activities on state lands currently managed by Moldsilva depend on if and when the FIRSM is implemented. 

The reforms are expected to be launched in fall 2016. If, however, they are delayed, more project resources will be 

allocated to management of locally administered lands. This alternative allocation of investments is represented in the 

table below. 

 

Private landowners have not yet been active in re/afforestation or production of e.g. for wood energy. This is due to 

fragmentation of private land ownership (average private property is about 1.2 ha) and due to very few degraded lands 

being privately owned. If feasible, the project may look at options (e.g. incentives or extension services) to promote wood 

production on private lands. 

 

Component 2: Disaster preparedness [$15 million indicative] Strengthened disaster management systems are needed to 

support a wide range of sectors with risk management planning and response to extreme hydrometeorological events. The 

Emergency Situations and Civil Protection Service (ESCPS) of the Minister of Internal Affairs has identified three 

priority investment areas that the project will seek to support, building on advances achieved during the DCRMP: 

 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 9 of 16  

     

(i) Establishment of two regional Emergency Command Centers. The DCRMP successfully established a modern national 

Emergency Command Center (ECC) in Chisinau. DCRMP’s scoping and feasibility studies indicated that to deliver 

effective management of emergency situations and preparedness across the country, two regional ECCs are also needed in 

the north and south of the country, in Balti and Cahul respectively. The project will therefore complete the national 

integrated risk management technical strategy by establishing the two regional ECCs. This will ensure better quality of 

services nationally at the local level, improve efficiency of support for remote locations, better support tactical field 

operations, and increase redundancy for critical ESCPS infrastructure. Cost is estimated at US$4 million, to be 

implemented over 5 years. 

 

(ii) Improving preparedness and emergency response capacity. Much of the equipment that ESCPS deploys to respond to 

climate and disaster emergencies is outdated and inefficient. For example, 90% of fire response equipment, which is used 

to manage both property and wildfires, is over 20 years old. Older equipment is also not compliant with modern 

environmental management approaches, often leading to negative environmental impacts during deployment. The project 

will therefore improve ESCPS’ preparedness and response capacity through investments in modern equipment, including 

but not limited to fire and rescue vehicles, extreme winter conditions access capacity, temporary flood management 

modules, electricity and heat generation, and equipment to support preparedness activities during non-crisis times. Base 

cost is estimated at US$3 million to be implemented over 3 years, scalable depending on financing availability. 

 

(iii) Establishment of a national training center. Currently Moldova does not have a national training center properly 

equipped for capacity building in theoretical and practical management of emergency situations. This prevents the state 

institutions, local public institutions of level I and II, the private sector and the public to effectively understand and 

manage disaster risk. Such a national training center would help ensure state and public preparedness for disaster and 

climate risks, improving risk management and awareness. The project will establish an ESCPS national training center, 

equipped for capacity building in both theoretical disaster risk management and practical training through simulations of 

emergency situations. The center will train ESCPS staff and first responders, as well as local leaders/authorities, managers 

of critical infrastructure (hospitals, schools, etc.), private sector leaders and the public. A location has already been 

identified and secured, with the cost estimated at US$5 million to be implemented over 5 years. 

 

Component 3: Providing immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency as needed. A zero-budget contingent 

emergency response component (CERC) will enable funds to be rapidly reallocated to disaster response in the event of an 

eligible climate-related incident during the lifetime of the project. A crisis or emergency is defined for CERC eligibility in 

the same way as it is defined in World Bank OP/BP 10.00: an event that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a 

major adverse economic and/or social impact associated with crises or disasters due, in the case of this project, to 

hydrometeorological hazards. While the World Bank provides the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) to consolidate 

CERCs across national IDA projects for potentially larger multi-sectoral response financing, the preference is currently 

for a standalone CERC limited to funds under this project. Global experience has shown that standalone CERCs are more 

flexible and quicker to trigger ex-post. An IRM would require restructuring of existing projects to add CERCs to them. 

The Republic of Moldova would need to adopt a CERC Operations Manuals (OM), describing the actions to be taken 

when a crisis or emergency occurs, as well as the monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements of the emergency 

response. 

 

Component 4: Project coordination and management [$3.5 million indicative] 

This component will support knowledge and project monitoring systems, as well as overall project administration, 

including coordination across implementing agencies. As a member of the Intergovernmental Board on Climate Services 

(IBCS), Moldova has endorsed the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS). The GFCS strives to develop and 

incorporate science-based climate information and prediction into planning, policy and practice through close partnership 

between providers and users of climate information. The GFCS Partner Advisory Committee (PAC) has identified 

Moldova as one of six pilot countries. While through separate mechanisms the Bank and other development partners aim 

to support overall pursuit of GFCS at the national level, the project will provide technical assistance to strengthen the 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 10 of 16  

     

production and use of climate information as a tool for coordination and management within certain sectors: 

 

(i) Climate information services. The State Hydrometeorological Service (SHS) carries a national mandate to deliver 

information services specifically on weather, climate and water hazards. However considering complementary ongoing 

and planned support from the Bank and other development partners, the project will not directly invest in SHS. The 

project will provide technical assistance to support future climate investment, including: 

 

a. Supporting institutional reform processes (including vision, strategy, restructuring, etc) of Apele Moldovei (or any 

successor water resources management agency), informed by modelling of climate-related water resources challenges and 

investment needs, and analysis of constraints to irrigation development, for example land fragmentation and markets, rural 

finance, drought compensation, moral hazard and crop insurance. Costing approximately US$1 million, this will lay the 

basis for potential future irrigation (and storage) investments. (including potentially as a basis for discussion of future 

World Bank financing). 

 

b. Facility/challenge fund for additional analytical/modelling work on climate impacts, for example health effects, 

analysis of crop potentials, etc., estimated to cost US$1 million. 

 

(ii) Overall project administration. Includes coordination across implementing agencies and project monitoring systems, 

expected to cost approximately US$1.5 million. 

 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
While the project activities will be implemented country wide, the main focus of the sub-component 1.a and 1.b will be 
implemented in the most vulnerable Southern part of the country which is one of the most affected by climatic 
changes region. The proposed activities would not generate any significant environmental and social risks as no major 
civil works or large scale ecological reconstruction activities in the forests will be supported. Some adverse 
environmental impacts might occur during afforestation activities which might affect the biological diversity and 
existing natural habitats, as well as some environmental risks and issues related to construction of the regional 
Emergency Command Centers and of the Emergency Training Center (solid waste management; air and water 
pollution; labor safety). 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The project activities will be coordinated by an inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the State Minister. The 
Ministries of Environment (MoE), and of Agriculture and Water Resources, Moldsilva, State Hydro-meteorological 
Service, and Department of Emergency Situations will be part of the steering committee, and will be implementing the 
some components of the project. 
 
Fiduciary arrangements, incl. safeguards, will be managed by the Project Management Team (PMT) in MoE. The PMT 
supported implementation of the Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs), and is currently supporting implementation of 
the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project. These projects have financed, to a large extent, similar activities as 
the proposed project, in particular agricultural climate adaptation. The PMT staff has substantial experience in 
implementing environmental and social safeguards and the PMT EA capacity have been qualified as satisfactory. In the 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 11 of 16  

     

last AMs for the Disaster and Climate Risk Project the project environmental management is satisfactory. Civil works 
were in compliance with the EMP and EMP Checklists for hydro-meteorological stations and for Department for 
Emergency Situations Command Center. The PIU has integrated environmental clauses in the bidding and contract 
documents. The EMP environmental requirements are followed and there were no complaints from the HS and DESCP, 
or supervising Engineers. All construction and refurbishing activities are reported as being consistent with national 
environmental and construction requirements and permits. Under the pilot activities for the consolidation of the 
agricultural sector’s resilience to adverse weather effects the PIU has assessed from environmental point of view all 
selected grants and checked if they have relevant environmental permits and authorization, including approvals from 
environmental inspectorate.  It is expected the matching grant program of the Project will be implemented via Agency 
for Interventions and Payments in Agriculture (AIPA)  which has also experience in conducting environmental screening 
and assessment of the grants. Analysis of AIPA’s EA capacities and if needed, capacity building activities, will be done 
during the project design phase. 
 
For the project implementation the PMT will hire safeguards specialist responsible for both environmental and social 
safeguards; if needed, WB Environmental Specialist will provide adequate on the job training. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team       

 
Arcadii Capcelea, Mohamed Ghani Razaak 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project activities (production of forest 
reproductive material for climate resilience; 
ecological reconstruction of priority degraded forests; 
rehabilitation and establishment of shelter belts to 
protect fields and riparian buffers to protect water 
bodies; afforestation of degraded land; community-
based pasture management; matching grant facility 
which would support investments in drainage of 
waterlogged areas, in irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitation and modernization, in on-farm water-
harvesting structures and efficient small-scale 
irrigation, anti-hail net systems, agroforestry, soil and 
water conservation techniques; improving emergency 
prevention and preparedness training by constructing 
a training and/or two regional Emergency Command 
Centers; etc.) might generate a series of various 
environmental and social impacts related to the 
following: (a) biodiversity degradation; (b) increased 
pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil 
erosion; (c) health and environmental risks due to 
inappropriate pesticides handling; and (d) noise, dust, 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 12 of 16  

     

air and water pollution, health hazards and labor 
safety issues during the civil works; etc. The 
anticipated social impacts of such activities include 
issues around (a) labor and working conditions, (b) 
information disclosure and stakeholder engagement, 
(c) community health and safety, (d) land acquisition, 
physical and economic displacement, lost access to 
natural resources. All of identified adverse impacts 
are expected to be typical for afforestation, 
agricultural production and irrigation activities as well 
as for small scale construction/rehabilitation works, 
temporary by nature and site specific and can be 
easily mitigated by applying best agro-forestry and 
construction practices or relevant mitigation 
measures.  
To address these impacts the client will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework 
which will guide the project activities and matching 
grants EA once identified. The ESMF would be 
targeted at specifying the set of mitigation, 
monitoring measures, timeframes and institutional 
responsibility measures to be taken during the 
project activities and matching grants to eliminate 
adverse environmental and social impacts, offset, or 
reduce them to acceptable levels. The documents 
should cover the following: rules and procedures for 
environmental screening; guidance for conducting 
activities/matching grants EIA and/or preparing 
simple EMPs as well as the EMP Checklist; possible 
mitigation measures for different proposed activities 
and matching grants to be supported by the project; 
requirements for monitoring and supervision of 
implementing of EIA/EMPs requirements. The ESMF 
will also provide a brief assessment of the associated 
to the project recently rehabilitated under the US 
“Compact Program” large irrigation pumping stations 
and schemes, in particular in terms of their 
compliance with the WB OPs. The project will require 
a framework for public consultation and information 
disclosure identifying all relevant, affected and 
interested stakeholders and will develop inclusive 
and meaningful ways of their involvement in the 
project design and implementation. This Public 
Consultation and Information Disclosure Plan or 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan will contain a section 
planning for continuous engagement, outreach to 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 13 of 16  

     

communities and stakeholder and information 
disclosure with respect to the project timelines and 
implementation. The PCID or SEP will be designed to 
reach out for both male and female audiences and 
provide opportunities for them to voice their opinion, 
concerns or comments about the project and its 
implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

At this stage of project design it is not known if this 
OP will be triggered. The NHs might be triggered first 
of all in the case of implementing ecological 
reconstruction activities. If the project will support 
such activities then the ESMF will provide detailed 
guidance for EA of such activities and areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

While the project will not support any commercial 
wood harvesting this OP is triggered as the project 
will support afforestation activities along with the 
forest reconstruction activities in the degraded 
forests.  In order to make sure the project activities 
will not affect natural habitats and biodiversity 
conservation the ESMF will specify the rules and 
procedure for environmental screening and 
assessment of land plots given for afforestation or for 
creating forest shelterbelts as well as of the degraded 
forests selected for reconstruction activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

While the project will not finance purchasing and/or 
application of pesticides, it might support purchasing 
special equipment and would provide training on pest 
management in the forestry sector and thus the 
project triggers this OP. To address these issues the 
ESMF will include measures to raise awareness and 
educate foresters regarding safe pesticide handling 
and use of Integrated Pest Management to enhance 
sustainability and reduce human and environmental 
exposure to pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project will be implemented on agricultural lands 
and in forest areas and will not generate impacts on 
PCRs. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No N/A for Moldova 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is also 
triggered. Although it is expected all 
activities/subproject will be implemented on public 
lands, in some cases the proposed activities might 
affect private households or restrict access of the 
local population to the afforested lands or to 
pastures to be improved. To address the involuntary 
resettlement issues including impacts on livelihoods 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 14 of 16  

     

on protected lands, and   restriction to access to 
natural resources, the client will prepare separate 
Resettlement Policy Framework that also includes a 
Process Framework.  For that the client will conduct a 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a Gender 
Assessment that, based on what will be designed the 
RPF. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No N/A 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed upscaling irrigation through assisting 
groups of farmers to access existing large-scale 
pumped systems rehabilitated by MCA, and by 
providing access to small-scale irrigation in the 
hinterlands through investments in shared 
equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of 
existing and construction of new water harvesting 
ponds) will not change the volume of 
extraction/discharge water or quality of water of the 
Prut and Dniester Rivers (which are international 
rivers) and its tributaries, but rather will lead to more 
efficient irrigation and drainage. Based on that the 
project team will seek a waiver from VP on not 
required notification of riparian parties. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No N/A 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

Dec 12, 2016 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
By end of October, 2016, the client will hire a local Consultant who will draft of the ESMF. By mid -December, 2016 the 
draft ESMF will be reviewed and accepted by the MoE and WB Environmental Specialist, and then disclosed on the 
MoE website. The RPF or PF, the SIA framework, Gender Assessment and the SEP will be developed by mid-October 
parallel to the ESMF. These will be reviewed and accepted by the MoE and WB Social Specialist and disclosed on the 
MoE website. In the end of December, 2016 the EA, RPF or PF, Gender Assessment and SIA document will be consulted  
with all key stakeholders (MoE; MoA; Ministry of Interior; State Agency Moldsilva) and all interested parties and then 
finalized, disclosed in the country on the MoE website and submitted to the WB for its disclosure in the Infoshop. The 
SEP or PCID document will govern consultation and disclosure requirements of such project documentation and will be 
made available on the MoE website as well. 

 

  CONTACT POINT 
      



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 15 of 16  

     

 

World Bank 

Emilia Battaglini, Anatol Gobjila 

Lead Environmental Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Finance 

Elena Matveeva 

Head of Public Debt Department 

elena.matveeva@mf.gov.md 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Environment 

Inga Podoroghin 

State Secretary 

inga.podoroghin@mediu.gov.md 
  

Ministry of Environment 

Serafima  Tronza 

Head of Water Management Department 

tronza@mediu.gov.md 
 
 

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The InfoShop 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 458-4500 

Fax: (202) 522-1500 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 

 

 

  APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Emilia Battaglini, Anatol Gobjila 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 16 of 16  

     

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Nina Chee 02-Dec-2016 

Practice Manager/Manager: Valerie Hickey 06-Dec-2016 

Country Director: Satu Kristiina J. Kahkonen 01-Feb-2017 
   
 


















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 1 of 5  

     

 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Program Information Document  
 (PID) 

 
 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2018 | Report No: 125879 

 
 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:   | Report No: 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 2 of 5  

     

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Moldova P156963 
Moldova Economic 
Governance Development 
Policy Operation 

 

Region 
Estimated Board Date 
 

Practice Area (Lead)(s) Financing Instrument 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA June 19, 2018  
Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Moldova Ministry of Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

The proposed EGDPO supports ongoing reforms to enhance the transparency and sustainability of the public sector and 
to level the playing field for private sector development. They enjoy coordinated support from the EC, the IMF and the 
World Bank, including by targeted technical assistance.  

  
 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 30 million 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

  
Source: IDA 
 

 
Decision 
 

Following the Corporate Review, the decision was taken to proceed with appraisal and negotiations. 
   
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Moldova’s recent macro-economic performance has been characterized by consumption-led growth and low fiscal 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 3 of 5  

     

 

deficits. In 2016-17, GDP growth resumed reaching 4.5 percent on account of strong agricultural output and robust 
private consumption growth largely driven by remittances and public and private wage increases. At the same time, 
credit growth remains negative reflecting the limited pass-through of the monetary policy stance to commercial 
interest rates and tighter prudential standards in the banking sector.  The fiscal deficit is estimated to reach 0.8 
percent in 2017, lower than the deficit forecasted at budget stage and public debt remains sustainable under 
different stress-test scenarios. In 2018, growth is expected to remain robust and reach 3.8 percent but to moderate 
over the medium term. The inflation rate is expected to re-enter the target corridor due to base effects and lower 
regulated prices. Fiscal deficits are projected to remain under control.  
 
In a context of slowing growth over the medium term, addressing the structural impediments to efficient public and 
private sector governance is paramount for igniting new sources of growth. As a large share of the population is 
already living and working abroad, and the attachment of subsequent-generation migrants to Moldova declines along 
time, Moldova needs to search for new drivers of growth reliant on higher private sector investments and in this 
context, remove barriers to private sector access to and use of resources. Moreover, governance challenges undermine 
the efficiency of public resource use and constrain competition among businesses.  

 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

In line with the World Bank FY18-21 Country Partnership Framework and the Moldova National Development 
Strategy, the proposed Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports Moldova’s transition 
towards a more sustainable and inclusive growth model. It builds on the progress achieved under the previous DPO by 
supporting actions to enhance the transparency of the banking sector and recent analytical work, which identifies 
strengthening the rule of law and the accountability of economic institutions as one of the top three constraints that are 
holding back economic growth and prosperity in the country.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

This operation supports reforms to strengthen economic governance in Moldova linked to the management of fiscal 

risks (Pillar A) and private sector development (Pillar B).  

D. Program Description   
 

This stand-alone Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports reforms to reduced fiscal risks 

and level the playing field for private sector development. The authorities are committed to restore investors’ and 

citizen’s trust in the integrity of the public sector by developing transparent and stable economic institutions and 

improving equity in access and use of resources. Reforms under the first pillar focus on reducing fiscal risks by reforming 

the pensions system, strengthening tax collection form tobacco taxation, pre-empting potential conflicts of interest of 

high level officials, and improving the reliability of SOEs and municipal enterprises’ financial information.    Reforms under 

the second pillar aim at removing bottlenecks in obtaining licenses, authorizations, and certificates and in accessing key 

agriculture inputs (seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, and pesticides), and at improving the governance regime in the banking 

and energy sector.  

 



 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 4 of 5  

     

 

E. Implementation  
 

The Ministry of Finance will steer the administration of this operation, as the main body responsible for financial aid 

coordination and management. The Ministry of Finance has recently assumed this role and will be responsible for the 

supervision for the monitoring of progress in the policy areas supported by the operation.  

 
F.  Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

The operation is not expected to have adverse impacts along poverty, social, gender or environmental dimensions. 
Some of prior actions could have positive impacts on poverty and equity. The pension and tax related reforms promote 
social sustainability, reduce privileges that do not benefit large segments of population, especially poor, and incentivize 
healthier lifestyle. The pension reform and higher tobacco taxation contribute to the reduction of gender gaps in income 
and non-communicable diseases.  
 
G.  Risks and Mitigation 
 
Risks to the program implementation are moderate to substantial. Macro, sector strategies and technical design risks 
are considered substantial and are partially mitigated by the reforms supported by this operation, the recent record of 
Moldova’s prudent fiscal policy, the IMF program which serves as a macro-fiscal stability anchor, and the technical 
assistance (TA) provided by the World Bank Group (WBG) which will help continue the reform agenda. 

 . 
    
CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Elisa Gamberoni 

Title: Senior Economist 
e-mail: egamberoni@worldbank.org 

 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 

Contact: Octavian Armasu 
Title: Minister of Finance 
Email: octavian.armasu@mf.gov.md 
 
Implementing Agencies 
Ministry of Finance 

 

mailto:egamberoni@worldbank.org
mailto:octavian.armasu@mf.gov.md


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 5 of 5  

     

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Elisa Gamberoni 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Country Director: Satu Kahkonen  
     
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 
 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23780 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. Please 

delete this note when finalizing the document. 

 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 2 of 18  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Montenegro P164424 Montenegro Second 
Institutional Development 
and Agriculture 
Strengthening Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 17-Nov-2017 30-Jan-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 
 
Components 

Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program 
Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services 
Modernization of the Fisheries Sector 
Project Management 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   34.89  

Total Project Cost   34.89  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 3 of 18  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Montenegro, a small, upper middle-income country, gained its independence in 2006 and is making big strides 
towards negotiating its accession to the European Union (EU). With a population of only 0.6 million, and a 
Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$7,320, Montenegro is the smallest country in the Western 
Balkans. It started negotiations with the EU in June 2012 and strives to join by 2020 ahead of the other countries 
in the Western Balkans. Of the 35 negotiations chapters, three have been provisionally closed and twenty-four 
have been opened. Good progress towards EU alignment has been made in areas such as free movements of 
goods, agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, energy, employment 
and social policy, regional policy and preparation for structural instruments. In the latest Progress Report on 
Montenegro (November 2016), the European Commission (EC) notes that the country is at early stages of 
preparation regarding budgetary and financial provisions, environment and climate change, and more needs to 
be done to improve competitiveness, as well as economic and monetary policy. Strengthening the 
administrative capacity for ensuring the application of the acquis communautaire remains a substantial 
challenge for Montenegro. 

 

Montenegro has followed a steady path of economic growth, but not without challenges. The economic boom, 
from 2000 to 2008, was triggered by a large inflow of capital that stimulated aggregate demand, led to a steady 
increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, and a fall in the unemployment rate. During the boom, there 
was a steady decline in the percentage of households below the poverty line and an increase in the income of 
households in the bottom 40 percent, most of them in rural areas. After experiencing a double-dip recession due 
to the 2008 global financial and the 2012 Eurozone debt crises, Montenegro’s economy slowed down to 1.8 
percent in 2014 and recovered to 2.5 percent in 2016, continuing its recovery path (with 3.2 percent in 2017) 
due to investments in road infrastructure and robust tourism activity. However, the unemployment rate remains 
high at 17.3 percent in early 2017. Large fiscal deficit and growing fiscal debt have prompted the Government of 
Montenegro to adopt a set of fiscal consolidation measures aimed at reducing public spending.   

 

Montenegro’s overarching development goal is to achieve smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Montenegro’s 
development plan is outlined in three separate, but complimentary strategies: the EU Accession Program 2014-2018, 
the Montenegro Development Directions (MDD) 2015-2018, and the Montenegro Economic Reform Program (ERP) 
2016-2018. Montenegro’s EU Accession Program was adopted in December 2013 and represents the main strategic 
document regarding European integration. It focuses on measures required for completing alignment with the acquis 
communautaire. The MDD, aligned with the Europe 2020 strategy, was adopted by the Government in July 2015. The 
MDD identifies four driving sectors, namely tourism, energy, agriculture and rural development, and manufacturing, 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Please delete this note when 

finalizing the document. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 4 of 18  

 

towards achieving the objective of “smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.” The ERP complements these efforts by 
tightening fiscal spending and reducing public debt. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Agriculture is an important sector for the economic development of Montenegro. In this predominantly 
mountainous country, agricultural land represents 38 percent of total land area, two thirds of which is covered 
by pastures. Agriculture and food production play an important role in the economy, contributing 12 percent of 
GDP (with the primary sector contributing 10 percent, and agro-food processing and fisheries contributing 
around two percent). With agricultural exports increasing by around four percent annually during the last eight 
years, agricultural imports have been increasing much faster (around 16 percent annually) leading to the 
worsening of agricultural trade deficit from US$166 million in 2005 to quadrupling by 2014.  

 

Agriculture contributes to income and job creation, but much of it is not accounted for. Agriculture is the 
largest economic activity in rural Montenegro; close to 50,000 families (roughly a quarter of the country’s 
population), with an average holding of 4.5 hectares, derive their income partly or entirely from agriculture. 
Despite its small size, the agro-climate and landscape varies dramatically from the north to the south and coastal 
areas of Montenegro. Olive and citrus fruit production dominate in the coastal region; early vegetable 
production and vineyards - in the center and in proximity of the larger agglomerations of Nikšić and Podgorica; 
and, extensive livestock production - in the north. According to MONSTAT, in 2010 there were 2,347 people 
formally employed in agriculture. Yet according to the 2010 Agricultural Census, the equivalent of 46,473 Annual 
Work Units were employed in agriculture, suggesting that only around five percent of agricultural employment is 
formal.  

 

Montenegro agriculture is characterized by constraints similar to those that prevail in Southeast Europe. 
Among them: (i) inability of agricultural producers to adopt modern technologies due to limited access to 
finance; (ii) small average farm size and an incomplete land use planning; (iii) slow uptake in development of 
aggregators that could improve collecting, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iv) the effects of 
climate change, especially increased weather-related natural disasters such as droughts and floods that have a 
major negative impact on productivity, water supply and land erosion. 

 

With an extensive coastline, the fisheries sector of Montenegro has an enormous potential that has not yet 
been capitalized on. The fisheries sector has not yet developed to its full potential. According to recent stock 
assessments, marine living resources are currently under-exploited by the domestic fleet, which could safely 
increase in size. Today Montenegro is a net importer of fish products. In 2014, for example, 3,316 tons of 
fisheries products were imported into Montenegro, of which 2,000 tons of fresh, frozen and fileted products, 
whereas a mere 11 tons of fisheries products were exported. With current marine catch estimated at around 
900 tons a year, Montenegro has the potential to substantially increase its production to meet domestic 
demand (leading to an ultimate phase-out of imports), a large share of which will be absorbed by the growing 
tourism sector. The capacity of the fisheries sector, however, is currently constrained by outdated equipment, 
lack of adequate infrastructure (landing sites and dedicated access in existing ports) and an underdeveloped 
value chain.   

 

The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) has a cross-cutting mandate that covers not only 
agriculture, rural development, and the food system, but also encompasses water, forestry and fisheries. 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 5 of 18  

 

While the focus of the past 10 years has primarily been on agricultural production and to a lesser extent on food 
safety, the Ministry recognizes the need to strengthen the performance of other sub-sectors, i.e. food safety and 
fisheries, for which little policy orientation or support has been provided. The MARD has recently taken 
important steps to address this matter by adopting legislation that provides a new framework for food safety 
and establishes the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs (AFSVPA). Further, it 
has functionally separated the Directorate for Agriculture and Fisheries into two Directorates to focus on 
supporting each sub-sector individually.  

 

Agriculture is an important sector in the EU accession agenda of Montenegro. Montenegro has made 
significant progress in establishing the required institutions and systems, and has developed capacity to 
implement the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD). However, 
further work is required as the country has committed to align its national agricultural policy to the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is required to have all the 
necessary systems in place in order to manage and receive funding from the EU and to make payments to 
Montenegrin beneficiaries in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and 
Control System (IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of 
support funds, and for the harmonization of the national direct payment measures with those currently 
implemented in the EU. EU membership brings important benefits to the country both at the macro and micro 
levels. It has been found to increase GDP per capita by approximately 12 percent. Trade liberalization has 
increased the flow of goods and services and has put competitiveness at the forefront of market integration. In 
agriculture, EU membership unlocks significant assistance and direct payments to farmers under the EU’s CAP, 
yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other trade-related requirements to agricultural production. 
 

Montenegro is making good progress towards alignment to EU food safety legislation.  A number of rulebooks, 
decrees and bylaws have been adopted. A new AFSVPA has been established under the oversight of the MARD, 
which also incorporates inspection services that previously operated autonomously. Several advances have been 
made in veterinary policy. The Animal Identification and Registration system, which already included large and 
small ruminants, was extended to pigs, and it has been completed. The multiannual program for the eradication 
of rabies has continued and routine monitoring and testing of ruminants for transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs) are being introduced. The implementing legislation on food safety rules was adopted in 
various fields but enforcement remains a challenge mainly due to shortage of human and material resources. As 
the country moves towards EU accession, the MARD would need to continue improving its administrative 
capacity, in particular for inspection services and laboratories, as well as upgrading food safety establishments. 

 

Montenegro’s preparations for the fisheries sector are at an early stage, but important progress has been 
made. The country’s Fisheries Strategy of 2015-2020 provides an overall guidance for the development of the 
Montenegrin sector and its administration in line with the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), including steps 
required to fully align and harmonize the national fisheries policy with the EU acquis communautaire. Steps 
must be taken to inform fishermen, traders and processors about the requirements they will face prior to and 
upon accession of Montenegro to the EU. The strategy identifies some of the sub-sector’s key areas for potential 
growth, including improved resource exploitation and connecting production from capture fisheries to the 
tourism sector and processing, thus ultimately increasing the added value of fish products. To reach this 
potential, adequate support will be required to increase fisheries production – including number of boats, 
improvement of fisheries coastal infrastructure, and enhancement of the control and surveillance system to 
address illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing. It is important to note that after EU accession, 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 6 of 18  

 

production capacity will be capped because of overall EU policy for the preservation of marine living resources. 
As a new EU member, Montenegro’s vessel capacity will be frozen as to the date of entry, without possibility of 
future expansion of the fleet.  

 

Since the early stages of Montenegro’s EU accession process, the EC and the World Bank (WB) have closely 
coordinated their activities to support Montenegro’s authorities and the agricultural sector towards unlocking 
access to the IPARD. Funded by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
Project (MIDAS) was launched in July 2009

1
 and has made important contributions to compliance with the IPARD 

requirements. The country’s authorities have put considerable efforts into setting up the required legal and 
institutional framework to meet EU pre-accession requirements. To this end, the MIDAS project has contributed 
towards (i) the establishment and capacity building of the Directorate for Rural Development (future Managing 
Authority) and preparation of the IPARD 2014-2020 Program and of the Code of Good Agricultural Practices; (ii) 
the establishment of the Directorate for Payments (future Paying Agency), including setting up its infrastructure 
that meets accreditation’s requirements, and establishment of the Farm Registry and of the Reference Price 
Database; (iii) provision of grants to agriculture holdings to promote their development and modernization 
along with familiarization of both farmers and Montenegrin authorities with the IPARD rules and principles; and 
(iv) enhancing food safety through investments in the national reference laboratories (Veterinary Lab and 
Institute of Marine Biology), as well as building and equipping the first Border Inspection Post (BIP) in Bar and 
strengthening the sector’s legal and regulatory framework.  
 

Montenegro received the EU’s “Entrustment of budget implementation tasks for EU IPARD funds.” 
Specifically, the entrustment was received in October 2017 for Measure 1 (Investments in physical assets of 
agricultural holdings) and Measure 3 (Investments in physical assets concerning processing and marketing of 
agricultural and fishery products) of the IPARD II Program. To this end, Montenegro’s IPARD II Program for 2014-
2020 (approved by the EU and adopted by the Government of Montenegro in September 2015) is conceived as a 
multi-annual development program for rural areas and proposes seven measures to be co-financed by EU and 
implemented by the Government, for which the Sectoral Agreement between Montenegro and the EU has been 
signed and ratified.  

 

Montenegro has opened negotiations with the EU on Chapter 11 (Agriculture and Rural Development) in 
December 2016, while negotiations for Chapter 12 (Food Safety), and Chapter 13 (Fisheries) were opened in 
June 2016. The opening benchmarks for these chapters have all been met and negotiations positions adopted by 
the Montenegrin Government. MIDAS activities have actively contributed in supporting the country in reaching 
the EU pre-accession negotiation opening benchmarks for Chapters 11 and 12. In this context, the MARD has 
requested the Bank to continue its support to the Ministry with meeting the closing benchmarks of these two 
chapters and provide additional support towards meeting the closing benchmarks for Chapter 13. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 

                                                           
1
 The MIDAS is scheduled to close on March 30, 2019 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 7 of 18  

 

 
 
Key Results 
 
 
D. Project Description  
 

The project will include the following components: 
 

Component 1: Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program (EUR20 million). 

The component will: (i) increase and diversify income generation opportunities for productive units, and 

contribute to the creation of jobs, and (ii) support Montenegro for meeting Chapter 11 closing benchmarks. 

The grant program is expected to address most of the constraints faced by the country’s agricultural sector, 

including: (i) enabling access to finance to grant beneficiaries to adopt modern technologies; (ii) development 

of aggregators to improve collection, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iii) implementation of 

agro-environmental measures to improve resilience to climatic pressures. 

 

Sub-component 1.1: Increasing and diversifying income opportunities through grants for agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries. This sub-component will support the development of agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries through the provision of grants. The design of the grant program will follow the 

implementation experience gained through the MIDAS project, where “the learning by doing” approach has 

been successfully tested with the core principle of IPARD. Investments are pre-financed by the beneficiaries, 

with reimbursement received upon successful completion and on-spot verification of the investment, and 

according to the share of support to total cost of investment (normally between 50 and 65 percent of the total 

investment); four-eye principle both for administrative control and on-spot control, coordination with 

Technical Bodies as appointed for verification of compliance with relevant national legislation. 

 

The grant program will be targeted at: (i) piloting further IPARD-like measures, including farm diversification 
and on-farm processing, that have not been previously implemented in order to develop the capacity of both 
institutions and beneficiaries while stimulating economic growth in rural areas; (ii) implementing direct 
support for rural development measures, including agro-environment measures, that will support MARD’s 
policy objectives towards harmonization with the CAP; (iii) support to production and processing 
associations/collections centers (including for milk, fruit and vegetables, etc.); and (iv) fisheries grants to 
enhance the capacity of the sector in preparation for the implementation of the European Maritime Fisheries 
Fund. The grant program is expected to leverage private sector investment and beneficiaries’ contribution, as 
well complement public sector investment in the modernization of the fisheries sector under Component 3. 
Detailed criteria, procedures, and related safeguards requirements of the grant program will be described in 
the Grant Operational Manual (GOM), satisfactory to the Bank, which will be prepared during project 
implementation prior to each call. 
 

Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the MARD toward fulfilling EU accession requirements.  This sub-

component will provide investments to strengthen the DfP (future Paying Agency) management capacity 

through the development of the IACS components required for the management and control of payments to 

productive units, as well as the implementation of the European Agriculture Guarantee Fund, functionality of 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 8 of 18  

 

which constitute one of the closing benchmark of Chapter 11. The project will support the development of 

several modules necessary for the operational system of integrated controls, strengthen the regional offices 

for Advisory Services, and build the Paying Agency system at the regional level, which will be part of the final 

structure of a fully functional Paying Agency.  For logistical and accessibility purposes, the two services could 

be hosted in the same building but in different offices, however, the roles and responsibilities of the Advisory 

Services and Paying Agency will be well defined and fully separated from each other. To this end the project 

will finance refurbishing and equipping of existing offices, and purchasing the required hardware and software 

infrastructure. The project will also strengthen capacity of the DfRD, DfA, and DfP through provision of 

technical assistance (TA), training and study tours to assist with the policy design towards the EU CAP, and to 

assist with the design required to finalize the IACS and its various applications.  

 

Component 2: Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services (EUR3 million). This 

component will develop capacity for food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary services as part of the creation 

of an integrated food quality system which is consistent with EU requirements. Promoting safer agricultural 

products, including the prevention and control of animal and plant diseases are essential for improving the 

competitiveness of Montenegro’s agricultural production both domestically and abroad. It will also help 

producers to introduce cross-compliance requirements to receive IPARD funds. This component will support: 

(i) the establishment of an official, comprehensive control system for the safe disposal and/or processing of 

animal by-products (ABPs); (ii) strengthening of the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory; and 

(iii) strengthening of the capacity of the inspection services. The following set of activities will be financed 

under this component: 

 

Sub-component 2.1: Safe management of animal by-products (APBs). The project will support the 

establishment of a comprehensive system for the processing and/or disposal for ABPs which will be identified 

and documented in the National Strategy and Action Plan for the Management of ABPs scheduled to be 

adopted by the MARD in late-2017 or early-2018. Specifically, the project will provide TA for the design of a 

control system for the safe management of ABPs. The design will include a business plan for a disposal facility, 

detailed technical specifications and cost estimates for a housing facility. The project will also support the 

gradual operationalization of the official control system for ABPs along the entire chain (production, 

separation, storage, transport, and disposal and/or processing), including training of inspectors and business 

operators, establishing documented procedures and check lists for the approval of establishments and 

inspection thereof, aligning and completing the legal and regulatory framework in line with the current and 

relevant EU acquis and launching a public information and awareness campaign addressed to the associated 

food production/processing industry.  

 

Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory. The project will 

assist the NRL housed at the Bio-Technical Faculty of the University of Montenegro with construction of new 

laboratory facilities (vertically extending an existing site), procurement of laboratory equipment and fixed 

laboratory furniture to support official controls. The project will also provide targeted TA aiming to ensure 

efficient inter-agency collaboration between the AFSVPA and the NRL by means of a Memorandum of 

Understanding, and pave the way towards accreditation of priority tests and methods as per ISO standard 

17025. 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 9 of 18  

 

 

Sub-component 2.3: Support to inspection services. To enable the inspectors of the unified AFSVPA to 

implement effectively the enhanced official control regime arising from alignment of national legislation with 

EU legislation, and the risk-based annual official control and sampling plan, the project will provide new 

vehicles and equipment for collection, cold storage and transport of samples, IT equipment, protective 

clothing, official uniforms, and other items.  

 

Component 3: Modernization of the Fisheries Sector (EUR6 million).  This component will finance public 

sector investment aimed at achieving two objectives: (i) enhancing the productive capacity of the sector with 

investments in basic infrastructure and equipment that will provide fishermen regulated safe, and sanitary 

landing facilities and access to port, and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity in the sector to apply the 

CFP upon EU accession, as well as substantially strengthen administrative, inspection, and control capacity. 

This component will finance the following interventions: 

 

Sub-component 3.1: Development of a network of landing sites (both in ports and other locations) with 

enhanced access to auxiliary services. Sub-component. A national coastal urban planning strategy is currently 

being elaborated at various levels of government (both national and local), though it is not expected to be fully 

finalized before 2019. This planning process incorporates the designation of several locations for landing sites, 

including in the country’s six coastal cities, where accommodations can be designed for fishing activities in 

existing ports and in new landing sites to be developed. The port towns of Bar (in the far South of the 

country’s coastline), Herceg Novi (the far North of the country’s coastline) and a network of other sites along 

the coastline will be subject to infrastructure improvements and specific sites for construction and 

reconstruction activities will be identified by the Government. The project will finance TA for the preparation 

of designs and technical specifications required for equipment and infrastructure. The project will also finance 

civil works, including construction of facilities for landing, catch data collection, weighing and access to market 

for landed catches in sites that comply with World Bank norms. In addition, and where appropriate, 

improvements will be made in certain locations for access to water and fuel, and operational support (boat 

and gear maintenance).   

   

Sub-Component 3.2: Capacity Building for the Directorate for Fisheries, and support to Associations of 

Fishermen. The MARD Directorate for Fisheries already benefits from the various regional programs 

supporting the sustainable management of marine living resources. Scientific support is provided mainly by 

the Institute of Marine Biology in Kotor, while the Directorate itself is receiving support in the development of 

rules and regulations pertaining to the sector converging towards the full application of the CFP. The project 

will support training and equipment for fisheries inspectors to enable them to meet EU requirements.  

Significant TA support will be provided to Associations of Fishermen, which will be the direct beneficiaries of 

resources from the European Maritime Fisheries Fund (EMFF) designed mainly to cover the added expenses 

incurred by fishermen in application of CFP rules and regulations.  

 

Component 4: Project Management (EUR1 million). This component will cover the costs for project management 
related to staffing, consultancies, and equipment costs, as well as implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), monitoring and evaluation of all project activities in line with the Results Framework, 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 10 of 18  

 

adequate fiduciary (procurement and financial management), audits and accountability mechanisms for oversight, 
including a grievance redress mechanism.   
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The MARD will be the lead Implementing Agency and will have overall responsibility for project management 
and implementation. Following the project implementation structure established under the ongoing MIDAS 
Project, relevant Directorates and Administrations within the MARD will be responsible for the technical 
implementation (i.e. preparing terms of reference and technical specifications, preparing training programs, 
supervising consultants and advisors, participating in procurement evaluation committees, etc.) of project 
activities. Specifically, given the extensive experience on implementation of Bank-funded projects, the General 
Director of the Directorate for Payments (DfP) will be appointed as a Project Coordinator. The Director for 
Rural Development (DfRD) will be responsible for the implementation of Component 1; the Director for the 
AFSVPA will be responsible for the implementation of Component 2; and the General Director of the 
Directorate for Fisheries will oversee Component 3 of the project.  

 

An existing, experienced and well-performing Project Management Team (PMT) established to implement the 
MIDAS Project, will also manage MIDAS2. The PMT is currently housed in the DfP premises, and consists of the 
Project Coordinator (General Director of DfP, civil servant), Project Manager, Civil Engineer, IT specialist and 
Safeguards Specialist. Up to the closing date of the MIDAS Project, i.e. March 30, 2019, the proposed Project 
will continue to be supported by the current PMT staff. Thereafter, sufficient resources will be allocated to 
retain a Project Manager and other staff as required. The project implementation team will also continue to 
rely on a part-time environmental and social specialist, who will take active participation in the screening of 
the grants and direct payments as per the ESMF. The specialist’s tasks will include desk reviews, training and 
guidance of the applicants, and site visits to review compliance with both the World Bank safeguards policies 
and relevant Montenegrin laws. In addition, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist and other specialists in the 
field of fisheries and civil engineering will be recruited to support MIDAS2. Details of the above-mentioned 
arrangements will be provided in the Project Operational Manual (POM). 
 

A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established and maintained throughout the life of the Project to 
ensure overall coordination and strategic guidance functions. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Rural Development and will include the Project Coordinator (DfP General Director); General 
Directors of Directorate for Rural Development (DfRD), Directorate for Agriculture (DfA), and Directorate for 
Fisheries (DfF); Director of  the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs, Advisory 
Services, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Transport and Maritime Affairs, Morsko Dobro, Biotechnical 
Faculty/Phytosanitary Laboratory Director; and representatives of beneficiaries (civil society, local institutions, 
private sector).  

 

Fiduciary responsibilities, including procurement and financial management and disbursement, will be carried 
out by the existing central Technical Services Unit (TSU) under the Ministry of Finance. The TSU will be 
responsible for the preparation of quarterly unaudited financial reports and annual audited financial 
statements. Expenses incurred by the TSU will be financed out of the loan on a pro rata basis with other World 
Bank-financed projects in Montenegro. 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 11 of 18  

 

 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be implemented throughout Montenegro, including the activities targeting the fisheries 
under Component 3 in the coastal part of Montenegro. The activities on grants and direct payments will 
follow the well established screening procedure from the original MIDAS project, and will help screen out 
activities that may have additional safeguards implications. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Vera Dugandzic, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Esma Kreso, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities on direct payments and grants 
under Component 1 will finance a diverse series of 
activities aimed at improving the agricultural 
practices in country. However, some of these 
activities, as evident from the support provided 
under the original MIDAS project, could have 
environmental impacts and implications. This 
includes, but is not limited to, small scale 
construction of barns, farm facilities, manure 
management platforms, traditional katuni huts, etc. 
The environmental screening procedure has been 
implemented for the original project and will 
continue to be applicable to these activities; the 
procedure has been slightly revised to reflect the 
envisaged project activities including support to the 
fisheries sector, in the form of an ESMF.  
 Furthermore, the ESMF addresses the construction 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

Please delete this note when finalizing the document. 

 

 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 12 of 18  

 

and reconstruction activities under Component 3, 
aimed at improving the pier facilities for the 
fisheries.  There are no major environmental impacts 
anticipated at this stage except for the dust and 
noise, material sourcing, and waste management 
with regards to Components 1 and 3. For 
Component 2, the technical assistance provided will 
help establish a sound management system of the 
animal byproducts as a follow on to the strategic 
planning documents to be developed by the client 
towards the end of 2017. These activities will be 
supplemented by adequate due diligence 
documentation prepared based on the final 
management solution of ABPs.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The activities will be carried out on already 
established farms on agricultural land and there will 
be no activities involving natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
There are no activities involving forests foreseen 
under the project. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support increase and improvement 
in agricultural practices, and may indirectly lead to 
an increase in the pest management practices. The 
project will not support directly purchasing or 
supplying of pest management materials, but the 
project’s ESMF includes a precautionary section on 
PMP. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
There are no activities involving cultural resources 
foreseen under the project. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no activities involving indigenous peoples 
foreseen under the project. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The original project triggered the Bank’s Policy OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement as it was expected 
that the project would finance the construction of 
the Paying Agency building and that land may be 
required to be expropriated for that purpose. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) document was 
developed, approved and disclosed in November 
2008. However, the implementing Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development decided not to 
construct a new building but rather opted to use the 
existing state-owned building. To date, no land 
acquisition took place under the MIDAS and 
associated IPARD-like grants. As stated in the Grant 
Operational Manual (GOM), only activities that do 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 13 of 18  

 

not trigger the application of Bank’s OP 4.12 policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement are eligible for grant 
funding. The Grant scheme support program under 
the proposed project will follow the same eligibility 
criteria which clearly state that the activities which  
may result in displacement of any third party 
formally or informally occupying or using the land on 
which the activity is to be implemented will be 
excluded from financing. Only activities that are 
located on the farmer’s own land or on land for 
which the grant applicant has written consent from 
the owner to use the land will be eligible for funding. 
Additionally, no land acquisition will take place 
under the sub-component on development of the 
landing places (piers) and their auxiliary services in 
the ports of Bar and Herceg Novi as the civil works 
will be carried out in public maritime domain. In 
brief, project will not support any activities which 
might involve involuntary taking of land or physical 
or economic displacement of squatters, scavengers, 
or any other third party formally or informally 
occupying or using the land. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
There are no activities involving dams foreseen 
under the project. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The activities under Component 3 aimed at 
supporting and improving the docking facilities for 
fisheries may pose a risk to international waterways, 
i.e. the Adriatic Sea. However, due to the scope of 
works there is very little potential to impact the 
quantity and quality of water to riparians.In 
consultations with LEGEN it was determined that the 
activities are not of such scope or scale that would 
require triggering of this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental and social impacts that are foreseen for the activities financed under the project are not 
large scale, significant or irreversible. The activities financed under the project can be broadly grouped into three 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 14 of 18  

 

groups, per project components: the grants and direct payments scheme, the support to the fisheries sector through 
small scale infrastructure interventions and the technical assistance towards establishment of a management system 
of animal byproducts (ABPs). The grant scheme activities will be screened using an ESMF and a mechanism established 
under the original MIDAS 1 project. The procedure will screen out activities that correspond to a Category A or that 
trigger additional safeguards policies. For activities that correspond to a World Bank Category B adequate due 
diligence will be prepared. The ESMF also sets up the monitoring and follow up activities that the PMT will undertake. 
The activities supporting the fisheries component will be subject to a Checklist EMP for simple infrastructure works, 
since all of the works anticipated are of a limited scope and to be carried out within the existing marine areas 
designated for reception of the fisheries fleet. Support provided under the animal byproducts Technical Assistance, 
will be supplemented with the adequate environmental and social due dilligence documentation, that would be 
adapted to the final selection of the methods and treatment chosen for safe management of ABPs. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no indirect or long term impacts anticipated in the project area due to the project financed activities. All of 
the activities are limited in scope and localized to a given location. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
No alternatives have been considered. The ESMF will screen out activities based on the associated impact and 
activities corresponding to a Category A or triggering additional safeguards policies will not be financed. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Client has a well established PMT with a part time environmental and social specialist in place. The key staff have 
attended multiple World Bank environmental safeguards trainings and have a good track record along with the 
experience of implementing multiple rounds of grant calls and screening of all received applications. The PMT has 
strong ownership over the screening process and have used each subsequent call to additionally fine-tune the 
screening procedures, and to also conduct environmental awareness raising trainings for all applicants. The Client has 
prepared a revised ESMF coupled with the Checklist EMP for the fisheries component and a precautionary Integrated 
Pest Management Plan and has disclosed this document with the public consultations held on November 10, 2017 in 
Podgorica. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the project beneficiaries, that is the farmers and agricultural and fisheries workers, along 
with the neighbors and adjacent plots that could be impacted by the supported activities. Additionally, the 
stakeholders that may be involved include the different institutions supporting the development and operations of the 
agricultural sector in country, including government institutions, academia and  non-governmental institutions. The 
client has publically disclosed the ESMF with an announcement made on their website and through the local media for 
the public consultations that were held on November 10, 2017in Podgorica. In addition to the public consultations of 
the ESMF, each of the ESMPs that will be produced under the ESMF procedure will also be subject to public disclosure 
and consultations, as well as the Checklist EMPs for the fisheries infrastructure. Overall, the project has an established 
grieveance redress mechanism where each of the affected parties can communicate directly with the designated 
contact person through established email and telephone contacts. 
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 15 of 18  

 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

14-Nov-2017 14-Nov-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Montenegro 
  03-Nov-2017 

Comments 

The ESMF was dislosed on the website of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development - the MIDAS project. 
www.midas.co.me 

       
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 14-Nov-2017 14-Nov-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Montenegro 
 03-Nov-2017 
 

Comments 

The ESMF including the IPMP was dislosed on the website of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development - the 
MIDAS project. www.midas.co.me 

  
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 16 of 18  

 

Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
NA   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA          

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 



 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 17 of 18  

 

  World Bank 
 

Jeren Kabayeva 
Agricultural Spec.  

 

Svetlana Edmeades 
Senior Agriculture Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Finance 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

Blagota  Radulovic 

Director of Directorate for Payments 

blagota.radulovic@mpr.gov.me 
 
 

 

Milos Stunarovic 

Project Manager 

milos.sturanovic@t-com.me 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Jeren Kabayeva 
Svetlana Edmeades 

 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 

The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 

 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 18 of 18  

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Nina Chee 21-Nov-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Julian A. Lampietti 21-Nov-2017 

Country Director: Emanuel Salinas Munoz 22-Nov-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Please delete this note when 

finalizing the document. 

 

















































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 

SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS) 

Additional Financing 
. 

                                                                                                          Report No.:  PIDISDSA21555 

Date Prepared/Updated: 6-May-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 A. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Haiti Project ID: P163081 

  Parent Project ID : P126744 

 
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project - Additional financing (P163081) 

 
Parent Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project (GAFSP - IDA) (P126744) 

 Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 

 Estimated Appraisal Date: 02-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 14-Jun-2017 

 
Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 

Financing 

Borrower(s) Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

     Financing Source Amount 

 International Development Association (IDA) 0.00 

 IDA Grant from CRW 35.00 

 Financing Gap 0.00 

 Total Project Cost 35.00 

 Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment 

 Decision  

 Other Decision (as needed)  

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? (Will not be 

disclosed) 

No 

. 

 
 

 
. 

B. Introduction and Context 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 Country Context 

 

Haiti’s geography, people, and history provide it with many opportunities.  The third largest Caribbean 

nation by area and population (10.4 million), Haiti shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican 

Republic. In addition to an illustrious early history, as the first independent nation in the region and the 

first nation in the world to be led to independence by former slaves, Haiti benefits from proximity and 

access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 

historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and a pent-up demand for the 

private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. 

 

However, almost 60 percent of Haiti’s population, or 6.3 million people, remain poor, and 24 percent 

or 2.5 million, extremely poor, with poverty highest in rural areas.  The poorest regions, which are also 

the furthest from the capital, show extreme poverty rates exceeding 40 percent and very limited access 

to basic services. Like poverty, inequality is high with a Gini of 0.6 (highest in the Americas). 

 

Natural disasters have hindered the country’s ability to overcome these poverty levels. On January 12, 

2010 a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck Haiti, causing the death of 230,000, displacing 1.5 million 

people, and resulting in damages and losses equivalent to 120 percent of its GDP.  In the months 

following the earthquake, cholera spread throughout the country infecting 800,000 people and cusing 

9,500 deaths. Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the earthquake, Government, Partners and private 

actors together invested approximately US$3 billion in Official Development Assistance and much 

more from private flows. Over 1.2 million people returned to more permanent housing. Collapsed 

infrastructure and many affected neighborhoods have been rebuilt, education services have been re-

established and extended, and deaths from cholera driven down to below 1 percent of cases (though 

resurgences of the disease remain).  The 2015 Poverty Assessment undertaken jointly by the 

Government and the World Bank shows that the percentage of extremely poor Haitians (those who 

cannot fulfill their nutritional needs) fell from 31 percent to 24 percent between 2000 and 2012, mostly 

in urban areas and especially in the capital. 

 

On October 4, 2016, category 4 Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti, affecting over 2 million people, about 

20 percent of the country’s population. The Government of Haiti (GoH)’s Directorate of Civil 

Protection (DPC) reported  546 deaths, 128 missing, 439 injured, 175,500 people living in temporary 

shelters, and immediate humanitarian assistance needs for 1.4 million people (about 12.9 percent of 

the population).  The GoH has requested CRW support in light of the large scale of damages, losses 

and reconstruction needs, and the deep poverty of the affected region. The hurricane also caused the 

first round of Haiti’s long postponed Presidential elections to be rescheduled to November 20, 2016. 

Haitians elected Mr. Jovenel Moise, the candidate from former President Martelly’s party, in one 

round, with over 55 percent of the vote. The Electoral Council confirmed these results on January 3, 

2017. President Moise was sworn in on February 7, 2017. 

 

Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraint 
Hurricane Matthew made landfall on October 4 at 7a.m. on the south-west coast of Haiti.  The 

hurricane caused maximum wind speeds of 230/km/h and rainfall of over 600mm in less than 24 

hours, and a rise in sea levels of two to three meters in the departments of Grande-Anse, Nippes and 

Sud. This is the first hurricane of this magnitude to make landfall in Haiti in 52 years.  The hurricane’s 

high wind speeds, heavy rainfall, and devastating storm surge resulted in flooding, landslides and 

extensive destruction of critical infrastructure and livelihoods, including large sections of road 

networks and bridges, with some key roads and bridges washed away.  The southern departments of 

Grande-Anse, Nippes, and Sud were especially affected, where 80 percent, 66 percent, and 65 percent 

of people respectively are poor (under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day) and 36 percent, 

30 percent and 26 percent are extremely poor (under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per 



day).  Lesser damage was seen in coastal areas in other parts of the country. 

 

On October 4, 2016, Haiti’s interim President called for an immediate emergency response in the face 

of the national crisis and humanitarian emergency. The Government appealed to the international 

community to fund US$120 million in humanitarian assistance to provide relief to 750,000 severely 

affected people. The United Nations launched a flash appeal for that amount on October 10, 2016.  On 

October 13, 2016, the Minister of Finance requested support from the World Bank and the Inter-

American Development Bank (IDB) in undertaking a Rapid Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA).  A 

team immediately set to work. The Rapid Assessment results became available on October 26, 2016, 

showing a massive impact on the Southern regions.  The Bank also participated in the subsequently 

launched Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). 

 

Total damages and losses were initially estimated by the DaLA Rapid Assessment at US$1.9 billion, 

the equivalent of 22 percent of GDP, and later to the equivalent of US$32% by the PDNA, with 

impacts largely concentrated in areas with poverty rates higher than the national average (Grande-

Anse, Nippes, and Sud departments).  The agriculture and housing/urban sectors were the hardest hit. 

Up to 90 percent of crops and livestock were lost in coastal areas, including stable food crops, but also 

cash and tree crops such as coffee, cocoa and vetiver.  Thousands of structures were damaged and 75 

percent of structures in the heaviest hit communities in Grande-Anse were entirely destroyed. More 

than 100,000 houses were heavily damaged or destroyed, half of which were Grande-Anse. 

 

Given the magnitude of the disaster, the GoH requires significant support to respond”, and to enhance 

the country’s overall resilience to disasters.  In the wake of Hurricane Matthew, emergency funding 

was sought from the IDA17 Crisis Response Window (CRW) in the amount of US$100 million toward 

recovery and reconstruction. of which US$35 million for the Agriculture Sector.  will support the 

country’s recovery needs under the Project.  Given the urgency to respond to the disaster, the Project 

would be processed invoking the Condensed Procedures set out in para 12 of OP 10.00 (Projects in 

Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints). The Safeguards Action Plan 
setting forth the sequence for the preparation of the relevant safeguards instruments is annexed to the 

project paper.  

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Haiti remains extremely vulnerable to natural disaster with 96 percent of the population at risk. On 

October 4, 2016, Hurricane Matthew, a category IV hurricane, landed in Haiti and caused a large scale 

disaster affecting over 2.1 million people (almost 1/5 of the population) and leaving almost 1.4 million 

people in need of lifesaving assistance in the southern part of the country. Winds speeds up to 140 

mph and torrential rain for 48 hours (around 1,016 mm) triggered widespread flooding and numerous 

landslides and caused severe damage to all sectors - water, electricity, education, health, food security, 

and livelihoods - particularly in the Departments of Sud, Grande-Anse, and Nippes. It is estimated that 

Hurricane Matthew caused losses and damages equivalent to 22 percent of the Gross Domestic 

Product, killed 500 people and triggered humanitarian assistance for 1.4 million people (12.9 percent 

of the population). The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the agricultural sector is estimated at 

US$603.0 million, including US$213.0 million in losses and US$390.0 million in damages, making 

Hurricane Matthew one of the most devastating events of the past decades. 

 

Agriculture plays a significant role in the Haitian economy, contributing to more than 25 % of the 

country’s GDP. The sector employs about 57% percent of the active population, while providing 66% 

of employment in rural areas and 75% of employment to low-income rural households, thus 

representing the main source of income in rural areas. National agricultural production provides about 

50% of food availability, which is complemented by commercial imports (45%) and food aid. The 



departments struck by Hurricane Matthew had under cultivation 85% of the national production of 

maize and 37% of the national fruit production. These areas also accounted for about one third of the 

country’s stock of cattle, pigs and goats and poultry. 

 

In urgent need of assistance because of a natural disaster, the approval of this Additional Finance 

would allow to quickly mobilize the resources needed to provide much needed support to farmers in 

the areas affected by Hurricane Mathew. The task team has discussed alternatives to the proposed AF 

with the GOH and it was agreed that the proposed RESEPAG II AF is the most appropriate 

mechanism for a rapid mitigation response.  Indeed, the activities will primarily target areas already 

covered under the original project, the same profile of producers and tools to engage these producers, 

and use identical delivery mechanisms.  It will also be possible to use the current institutional 

arrangements and staff already in place. 
. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The PDOs are to strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development's 

(MARNDR) capacity to define and implement the National Agriculture Extension Strategy, to 

increase access of small farmers to agriculture extension services and training on animal and plant 

health in priority regions, and to provide financial assistance in the case of an agriculture sector 

emergency. 

 Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the 

agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; 

and (c) provide financial assistance in the case of an Agriculture Sector Emergency. 

 Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing 

 

The new proposed PDO is: to (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector; 

(b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; (c) improve 

livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew and (d) enable the Government to respond promptly 

and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 Key Results  

 
The proposed AF would allow to support 41,000 households affected by the hurricane. It would bring 

the total number of beneficiaries of the project (parent and AF) to 60,000, of which 40% of female.  
. 

  

 

D. Project Description 
 
Following the devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew, the project expects to receive US$35M 

Additional financing (AF) from the IDA Crisis Response Window to help restore productive assets 

lost, rehabilitate damaged or destroyed infrastructures, and support livelihoods to victims of Hurricane 

Matthew. The AF would (i) provide emergency assistance to allow more than 8,000 farmers to carry 

out winter 2016 and spring 2017 planting campaigns to secure food production; and to increase the 

number of beneficiaries of the pre-existing voucher schemes by 7000 (increasing from 8,000 to 15,000 

farmers) while fostering more resilient production systems; and (ii) introduce new activities to 

restore/rehabilitate irrigation systems through cash-for-work programs and larger infrastructure civil 



works allowing at least 3,500 hectares of agriculture land to recover access to irrigation and providing 

temporary jobs to at least 21,000 persons; and help restock part of the small animals lost by around 

6,000 poor households. 

 

In the Proposed AF, the emergency assistance and extension of the voucher scheme program activities 

would remain in the department of Sud, although more municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation 

works would be also conducted in the department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher 

schemes areas to ensure the adequate access to irrigation services of farmers benefiting from voucher 

schemes. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 

department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Changes to the original project as part of the level 1 restructuring include: (i) Revision of the Project 

Development Objective (PDO) wording to reflect activities in the affected areas and an increase in 

scope of the Emergency Response Contingency (ERC); (ii) Activation of the Involuntary Resettlement 

Policy (OP/BP 4.12) to anticipate the possibility of an involuntary resettlement in the affected areas; 

(iii) Upgrading of the Results Framework to reflect adjusted outcomes and targets, and emerging good 

practices in climate resilience; (iv) Extension of the original grant closing date of to align it with the 

closing date of the Additional Financing; and (v) a reallocation between disbursement categories. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of RESEPAG 

II has thus far not involved any resettlement of families or economic restrictions, rehabilitation of 

irrigation and water management infrastructure may result in involuntary resettlement. A Resettlement 

Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared in accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The completion of social safeguards instruments was deferred to the 

implementation stage in line with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 paragraph 12.  Consultation in 

the affected areas will include outreach to main stakeholders and the affected communities to the 

extent possible.  Once sites where project activities will be implemented are identified, Resettlement 

Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with resettlement impacts in accordance with the policy. Any 

compensation or livelihood restoration efforts that may be needed will be completed prior to 

commencement of the works. 

 

Closing Date 

 

The proposed AF would extend the current closing date of the original Grants from 30-June-2018 to 

31-Dec-2019. The Financing Agreement of the parent project would be amended accordingly.  This 

extension would allow for the completion of the activities under the Parent project so as to allow for 

emergency recovery and reconstruction activities as described under the components listed below and 

in more detail under the Project Paper. 

 

Component Name 

 

The project will maintain its structure around four components: Component 1: Agricultural support 

services; Component 2: Direct support to producers and associations; Component 3: Emergency 

Response Contingency Reserve; and Component 4: Institutional strengthening, monitoring and 

evaluation, project management and studies. 

 

The proposed AF will finance the scale up and the implementation of new field activities under 

Component 2 only, which will increase in cost by US$28.7M; Component 3 will receive an additional 

allocation of US$ 2.4M to compensate for expenses already incurred immediately after the Hurricane, 



and Component 4 will receive and additional allocation of US$ 3.9M to account for additional 

operational and monitoring costs. 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 1 Agricultural Support Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 1, GAFSP TF-11396 

US$ 10, US$ 0 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 2: Direct Support to Producers and Associations (Total: US$ 54.2, IDA-H7410 US$ 

25.5, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 28.7 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

The activities planned under the Parent project (voucher schemes and matching grants) will not be 

modified. The Additional financing will (i) scale up the provision of vouchers under this 

component;  it will broaden the current geographical scope for this activity (Centre and Sud) with 

the inclusion of new municipalities within the Department of Sud and it will use the same delivery 

mechanisms as the Parent project reaching an additional 7,000 beneficiaries; (ii) add two new sub-

components: (a) Animal Husbandry and (b) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-catchment 

protection. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 3: Emergency Response Contingency Reserve (Total: US$ 3.9, IDA-H7410 US$ 1.5, 

GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 2.4 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will change in title to “Emergency Response Contingency (ERC)”. Through this 

component uncommitted project funds, rather than an established upfront reserve amount, will be 

channeled to facilitate a timely response in case of an eligible emergency. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management and 

Studies Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 7.1, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 3.9 

IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change in its design. However, to take into account the increased technical 

and geographical scope, and the increased in financial resources, additional allocation are being 

considered for equipment, vehicles, staff and consultancies. 
 

 
E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 

known) 

 

Parent Project 

Component 1, 3 and 4 activities are conducted nationwide. Component 2 activities are implemented in 

specific areas located in the Sud and Centre department for the voucher schemes; and Sud, Nord and 

Nord-Est departments for the matching grant schemes. 

 

Additional Financing (AF) 

The Haitian government carried out a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) identifying the areas 

most affected by Hurricane Matthew, and prioritized the most pressing interventions to ensure food 

production in the season following the disaster. The emergency assistance program and extension of 

the voucher scheme program activities would remain in the Sud department, although more 

municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation rehabilitation works would be also conducted in the 

department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher scheme areas to ensure optimization of 

benefits. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 



department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Salient physical characteristics relevant to environmental and social safeguards under the RESEPAG 

II AF relate to high variability of landscapes, biodiversity and climatic zones, extreme weather, 

advanced deforestation, earthquake activity and climate change. Alternating topography of mountains 

and valleys create variability in rainfall varying from 550 mm on leeward slopes to 2,700 mm on 

northern and windward slopes. The heterogeneity of the territory is a determining factor for crop types, 

cropping season, land use and forest cover. 

 

Haiti is subject to extreme weather events such as droughts, hurricanes and tropical storms.  

Deforestation and steep slopes have intensified these risks. Loss of forest to charcoal and timber 

production and to agriculture since colonial days has reduced forest cover from 75% to 1.5%. 

Deforestation has contributed to high runoff, erosion, landslides, flooding, dust, loss of agricultural 

productivity, reduced rainfall, siltation of waterways and degradation of coral reefs and mangroves. An 

estimated 36 million tons of topsoil are lost in Haiti annually. 

 

Haiti is seismically active as it sits astride two shallow fault lines; it is vulnerable to earthquakes, 

especially in built-up areas. 

 

Although degraded, Haiti’s natural environment still contains areas with notable concentrations of 

globally or regionally threatened species, including numerous endemic ones. These Key Biodiversity 

Areas (KBAs) occur throughout Haiti. 

 

With predicted climate change, temperatures are projected to increase and rainfall is projected to 

decrease, which is likely to intensify droughts in the center of the country. Sea level is projected to rise 

between 0.13 and 0.56 m by 2090, which would threaten coastal zones. Future increases in number 

and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes are likely, with associated increases in highly erosive 

rainfall, floods and storm surge levels. 

 

The project expands access to agricultural extension services and promotes environmentally friendly 

investments and practices in agriculture. The project aims to have a positive impact on agriculture, 

resource use and surrounding landscapes. It does not support any activities that have large-scale, 

significant or irreversible adverse impacts on the environment. The project provides agricultural 

extension services to existing agricultural lands, and will discourage the clearance of new lands.. 
. 

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 Asli Gurkan( GSU04 ) 
 

 Felipe Jacome( GSU04 ) 
 

 
Nicolas Kotschoubey( GEN04 ) 

 
 

II. IMPLEMENTATION 

The proposed AF will be implemented under the same institutional arrangements of the parent 

project. The closing date of the proposed additional grant would be December 31, 2019 to 

ensure that all additional planned activities would be satisfactorily completed in accordance 

with the revised and updated implementation plan. The date of the original grant would also be 

extended to December 31, 2019. 
 

. 



III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 

4.01 
Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 

the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 

Environmental impacts under the Parent 

Project have been low, and safeguards 

performance has been satisfactory. The project 

was designed to avoid the financing of 

activities with significant environmental 

impact and promote environmental good 

practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  In the control of agricultural 

pests, the project has focused on integrated 

pest management. 

 

In summary, impacts observed include 

inadequate sanitation in sub-projects (poor 

design of latrines and septic tanks) in several 

sub-projects, as well as limited clearing of 

existing land of trees and shrubs for market 

gardening, as expected in an agricultural 

project. Poor sanitary practices in food 

production (e.g., dairy production) also posed 

potential risks, although no incidences of 

contamination has been recorded. 

 

Several positive activities were financed under 

the project, including use of biological control 

methods against the mealybug, a parasite of 

pea, bean and groundnut; planting of trees as 

part of productive landscapes (for cover as 

well as for fruit production); and planting of 

mangroves to compensate losses resulting 

from expansion of salt ponds. 

 

E&S impacts were adequately managed using 

the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (ESMF) and Integrated Pest 

Management Plan (IPMP) prepared for 

RESEPAG II. No new, significant impacts are 

expected under the AF. 

 

The MARNDR will make minor updates and 

modifications to the ESMF and IPMP, to 

identify and manage the potential adverse 



impacts under the AF, which include:  

(i) animal husbandry, mostly small scale, 

resilience-oriented, mixed agriculture-

livestock systems, with very limited inputs, to 

around 6,000 households: includes training, 

production of forage, preparation of 

enclosures (for goat keeping), provision of 

beehives and protective equipment (for bee-

keeping). Impacts would be limited and 

include production of waste (animal waste), 

cutting of vegetation (for feed), overgrazing, 

and damage to riparian habitat. Mitigation will 

include effective waste management, control 

of water discharges, prevention of animals’ 

access to surface water bodies and prevention 

of free-grazing by raising animals in closed 

systems and provision of feed via forage tree 

planting and harvesting; and 

(ii) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-

catchment protection: cash for work for small-

scale rehabilitation works (off-farm 

infrastructures); and civil works on river 

intakes, rivers embankments, sections of 

canals and drains, protection of infrastructure 

(mainly bridges and access roads). Impacts are 

likely to include health and safety of workers, 

construction waste (cement, metal and timber 

scraps, etc.), noise, dust, water quality 

(turbidity). Mitigation will include generic 

workplace design good practice, providing 

adequate protection equipment to workers, 

adequate waste management systems, etc.  

 

The project was rated category B because 

potential adverse impacts on the environment 

were moderate and easily identified, mitigated 

and managed. The project will remain 

Category B. 

 

Social risks and impacts: On the social side, 

no major safeguards risks are expected. 

Potential risks may include delays in 

compensation related to land acquisition or 

lack of appropriate consultations on relevant 

project information. The project will avoid or 
minimize land acquisition based on lessons 

learned. The RPF will include measures to 

deal with such potential delays in payments 

should land acquisition be necessary.  The 

communication activities will particularly 



target matching grants and voucher schemes 

activities, which may be open to speculation 

of corruption and unfairness unless the project 

team clearly explains the rules and procedures 

for distributing project benefits.  Risks linked 

to labor influx are expected to be limited. 

They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 

labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers 

coming from outside will be hosted through 

their stay in the host community and ensuring 

that contracts are consistent with ESMF and 

RPF provisions. The revised ESMF will 

include an annex with a social assessment 

targeted to new locations and sub-projects to 

be covered under the AF. 

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 Because the project focuses on capacity 

building and provides agricultural extension 

services to existing agricultural lands, it does 

not support the clearance of new lands and 

such activities are not eligible for direct 

support. No agriculture activities that require 

the clearing of forested land or that damage 

freshwater habitat are supported. 

Nevertheless, because of the potential for 

indirect impacts on natural habitats, 

particularly if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or KBAs, 

this safeguard policy has been triggered.  

 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added in the revised ESMF. 

 Because of the project’s potential to indirectly 

influence the management of natural forests, 

particularly in silvo-pastoral landscapes, this 

safeguard is triggered. A section in the ESMF 

requires the development of a Forest 

Management Plan (FMP), should any project 

activities affect such forest landscape.  

 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project supports investments related to 
agricultural extension services. These 

investments include the procurement, 

handling, storage and use of pesticides for plot 



demonstration and emergency interventions of 

insect pest outbreaks. Only approved 

pesticides under national or international law 

(including World Health Organization – 

WHO) will be supported under project 

financing. A list of pesticides that fall under 

these categories or are otherwise ineligible for 

support are included in the IPMP. 

 

In line with the approach taken under 

RESEPAG II, activities under the AF will 

avoid the intensive use of pesticides and 

instead will support an approach that includes 

IPMP: (a) avoiding the use or promotion of 

pesticides in WHO toxic categories I (Ia and 

Ib) or II (except under strict supervision of a 

trained and certified “Pest management 

Specialist”); (b) reduce reliance on synthetic 

chemical pesticides; (c) promote the use of 

biological or environmental pest control 

methods based on prevention, surveillance and 

monitoring; (d) favoring the use of multiple 

strategies (e.g. crop rotation, cultural 

practices, host plant resistance, biological 

control methods, chemical control); (e) pest 

control that increases natural enemies of 

parasites; (f) applying products only when 

infestation levels are critical; (g) avoiding the 

use of herbicides and pesticides near water 

sources and their contamination with pesticide 

residues when cleaning the equipment used; 

and (h) training producers, technicians, and 

farm workers to responsibly manage pesticide 

products, equipment, and containers to avoid 

their own contamination or that of livestock 

food or produce. 

 

Under the AF, the project will continue to 

implement the IPMP developed under the 

guidance of the ESMF, including screening 

criteria to exclude pesticides that are 

prohibited under the Bank’s policies. A 

specific plan is included in the IPMP to 

provide for screening, no-objection and 

monitoring during the procurement of 

pesticides. The IPMP also includes guidelines 

on the relevant aspects of integrated pest 

management that are part of the extension and 

training services provided under the project. 

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No This policy will not be triggered since the new 



4.11 activities (irrigation) will not have additional 
impact on physical cultural resources. 

 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No The policy is not triggered because there are 

no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 

IPs of OP 4.10. 

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes This policy was not triggered in the original 
project as no involuntary displacement of 

people or land acquisition was foreseen. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement 

(OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of 

RESEPAG II has thus far not involved any 

resettlement of families or economic 

restrictions, rehabilitation of irrigation and 

water management infrastructure may result in 

involuntary resettlement. 

 

A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 

be prepared, consulted and disclosed at project 

implementation stage in accordance with 

OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The deferral of 

the completion of safeguards instruments to 

the implementation stage was granted in line 

with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 

paragraph 12. This will ensure adequate time 

to prepare, consult, and disseminate the RPF 

and other safeguard-related documents 

following the Safeguards Action Plan annexed 

to the Project Paper. 

 

Consultation in the affected areas will include 

outreach to main stakeholders and the affected 

communities to the extent possible.  Once 

sites where the project activities will be 

implemented are known, Resettlement Action 

Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement 

Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with 

resettlement impacts in accordance with the 

policy.  Any compensation or livelihood 

restoration efforts that may be needed will be 

completed prior to commencement of the 

works. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No This policy will not be triggered since no 
dams, nor will irrigation systems dependent on 

dams, per the WB definition, be restored or 

rebuilt. 



 

Projects on International Waterways 

OP/BP 7.50 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place on international 

waterways, per the WB definition. 

 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 

7.60 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place in disputed areas, per the 

WB definition. 
. 

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 

Safeguards Implementation under the Original Project 

 

Component 1, SPS activities: impacts from handling and use of testing material, disposal of 

animal carcasses, disposal of syringes from vaccination campaigns and occupational health 

and safety concerns were adequately managed.  

Component 2, Support to Producers: the project targets improved, environmentally friendly, 

climate smart agriculture. The voucher program which has not started field-based activities 

had no impact. Impacts from inadequate sanitation in sub-projects under matching grants 

(e.g., poor design of latrines, septic tanks), cutting trees and shrubs for land clearing for 

market gardening, poor sanitary practices in food production (e.g., milk production), were low 

and properly managed. In addition, an integrated pest management plan waste management 

plan was prepared to manage agrochemicals. 

 

Components 3 and 4 had no recorded adverse impacts. 

 

The Social safeguards ratings under the Parent project have been consistently satisfactory. OP 

4.12 was not triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any 

other major social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, an 

involuntary resettlement screening form has been used to properly detect and exclude any 

investments with OP 4.12 related impacts.  Under RESEPAG I, a social assessment was 

carried out based on extensive consultations with both Ministry of Agriculture (MARNDR) 

staff and community members in the pilot areas as well as a stakeholder analysis. The results 

of this assessment have served as the basis for the design of RESEPAG II. Under the AF, the 

ESMF update will include an annex with a social assessment targeted to new localities and 

new activities covered by the AF. MARNDR has started  to consult with people that would be 

potentially affected by the future AF activities.  

 

A gender review has been carried out during RESEPAG I. Consultations with women during 

the project preparation phase ensured women’s inclusion at the policy and program levels. A 

resultant just-in-time grants series “Fostering Economic Empowerment for Women 

Agricultural Producers in Haiti” is working to integrate gender, particularly women’s issues, 

within the Ministry of Agriculture. A collaboration between the gender specialist and the 



Ministry of Women Condition allowed to consider gender inclusion during the design of 

RESEPAG II. The Ministry of Agriculture has also hired a gender specialist to ensure that 

gender is being respected in the different parts of the project implementation. The Ministry of 

Women Condition has been a key stakeholder in the implementation of the matching grant 

component allowing the project to reach almost 50% of women participation. Under the 

Additional Financing the inclusion of women will remain important to at least 40% with some 

of the activities reaching 80% notably with the livestock packages. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards,  the project team has a good presence in 

the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. The project team has been 

holding consultations about the project activities and preparing minutes of these consultations.  

There is no social safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the environmental 

specialist have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 

requirements and have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related impacts. Under 

the AF, a second safeguards specialist will be hired, to be in charge of monitoring social risks 

and impacts. The person hired by the PIU will have documented social expertise, particularly 

given the fact that resettlement action plans may have to be implemented under the project. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, most of the planned activities would restore or improve pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and therefore are not expected to create any significant 

additional adverse environmental or social impact. However, (i) animal husbandry and (ii) the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures 

may imply some minor environmental and social impacts related to: (i) additional waste 

(animal waste), vegetation harvesting, overgrazing, damage to riparian habitat, etc. Because 

the production systems in Haiti to be supported by the AF are of very small scale, point 

source pollution of wastewater, ammonia, odor, nuisances, etc., typically associated with 

intensive production systems, are not expected to be encountered; and (ii) construction, 

especially around water bodies (streams, canals) may impact health and safety, and result in 

waste production, noise, reduced water quality (turbidity), increase level of dust, or result in 

loss of vegetation cover, etc.). These potential negative impacts are however expected to be 

moderate, localized,  and can be mitigated through (i) for animal husbandry system promoting 

enclosure of goats, training and technical assistance that goes with the livestock will be the 

principal vehicle to effective management of waste, wastewater, preventing animals’ access to 

surface water bodies, production of forage trees for feed,  etc.; (ii) for irrigation rehabilitation, 

mitigation will be through the application of good construction and management practices and 

with close supervision of contractor performance by field engineers and in close consultation 

with local communities. The potential impacts and mitigation measures will be identified and  

included in  the ESMPs (and RAPs when relevant) for each subproject. 

 

The AF triggers the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) as works along riverbanks and 

irrigation systems may require a minimal degree of land acquisition and cause economic 

impacts, such as impact on fruit trees or damaged crops. These works will not be large-scale, 

significant or have irreversible adverse impacts on the population. Because of the deferral of 

preparation of the safeguards instruments, the project will prepare, consult and disclose a 



Resettlement Policy Framework at project implementation stage. 

 

Lessons learned on social safeguards from RESEPAG II: 

 

Lesson 1:  It is important to have a dedicated social specialist as part of the PIU to track and 

document social issues and impacts. Under the AF, there will be a second safeguards 

specialist hired to focus on social safeguards and social issues at large. 

Lesson 2:  A well-functioning Grievance Redress mechanism is needed to keep track of 

beneficiaries’ concerns and provide timely response. Under the parent project, there is a 

hotline established under the Ministry of Agriculture. 10 complaints were received, mostly 

coming from agricultural producers whose proposals were not accepted. Under the AF, the 

hotline will be coupled with a communication strategy focusing some specific social risks. 

(Eg.to explain to the farmers the eligibility criteria, targeting strategy and the voucher system 

that the project is implementing). The Ministry of Agriculture will designate one focal point 

from the Ministry in each Department to act as liaison for managing safeguards-related issues 

and address grievances. The Focal Points would resolve issues, and escalate them to the staff 

in Port-au-Prince as needed. Meetings will be held every two months between staff in capital 

city and the regional Focal Points to exchange information. 

Lesson 3:  Even in projects that have not triggered OP 4.12, the involuntary resettlement 

screening form is a useful tool as part of ESMF to detect potential resettlement risks upfront. 

Under the AF, this practice will continue as part of first environmental screening and a RAP 

will be prepared when potential impacts are detected. No activities will be able to start before 

the RAP is effectively implemented and the project affected people have received their 

compensation. The safeguards specialists under AF will receive a refresher training on OP 

4.12 as well as how to screen out social impacts beyond resettlement. 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 

The project has potential indirect impacts on natural habitats if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs). Also, the project has 

the potential to indirectly influence the management of natural forests, particularly in mixed 

land use landscapes (forestry and grazing). 

 

However, the project is designed to avoid the financing of activities with significant 

environmental impact and promote environmental good practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  The ESMF has provisions to prepare a Forest Management Plan (FMP) should 

any project activities affect such forest landscape. 

 

In the control of agricultural pests, the project has focused on integrated pest management: 

use of approved pesticides only; reduce reliance on synthetic pesticides; promote biological 

pest control; utilize multiple strategies (crop rotation, resistant varieties, and biological 

control); natural predators of parasites; critical use of products; protect water sources; and 

training operators. 

 

Furthermore, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to the Environmental Cell in 

MARNDR will enhance the ability of the Ministry to optimize environmental outcomes in the 



project area. 

 

No potential indirect or long term social impacts are expected. Resettlement, land acquisition 

and loss of economic livelihood are unlikely. The project will avoid or minimize land 

acquisition based on the lessons learned regarding delays and complications with land titles. 

RPF will include measures to deal with such potential delays in payments should land 

acquisition be necessary.   

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 

The project design is broad and includes many components. It takes into consideration the 

role played by the agricultural sector in employment (57% percent of the active population; 

66% of rural employment; and 75% of employment to low-income rural households); the 

variability of the topography and climate; environmental degradation; and social vulnerability. 

Project design considered the current alternative, which avoids funding activities with a 

significant environmental impact, commercial crops, monoculture and export-oriented crops, 

but promotes good environmental practices such as reforestation and soil conservation at the 

micro-producer level. 

 

Most of the planned activities under the AF are not expected to create any significant adverse 

environmental or social impact, as they will be restoring or improving pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and will put a particular emphasis on the quality and 

resilience of these structures and systems. As the proposed project would support the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures, 

including river embankments, this may imply some minor temporary environmental and 

social impacts. These civil works are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be 

placed on minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies allowing 

to clearly identify areas of interventions, avoiding if possible to modify any previous canal 

routes, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and 

construction techniques etc. Clearing canals and areas of interventions may produce some 

solid wastes that could present disposal issues. Adequate management of waste and debris 

would be embedded in the Terms of reference and contractual obligations for the contractors.  

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

Parent Project 

 

The Borrower has prepared all the required safeguard instruments (ESMF and IPMP). The 

ESMF is the instrument used to identify when additional Environmental and Social 

Management Plans (ESMPs) are necessary and includes a procedure to screen out projects 

that will (i) negatively impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of 

natural forests, or (iii) an IPMP that will address an increase in the use of, or the storage of, 

application or handling of, pesticides in categories I and II of the WHO Recommended 

Classification of Pesticides. The project design emphasizes the adoption of environmentally-

friendly technologies and others that favor increased productivity over simple land expansion. 

 

The MARNDR is experienced in implementing donor-funded projects (including World 



Bank, the IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen their 

capacity, the MARNDR with the support of the RESEPAG II project has created an 

Environmental Cell within the Ministry to manage environmental risks within the agricultural 

sector more broadly. The project is supporting the development and operationalization of this 

Cell. The preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will continue to be 

provided by this Environmental Cell during implementation. 

 

To assist the Environmental Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as 

well as a training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a 

constituency for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The Bank 

(external consultant) will closely monitor environmental compliance to identify opportunities 

to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse impacts. 

 

The environmental and social capacity of the RESEPAG II project team has been largely 

adequate; it consists of an environmental specialist/agronomist; an economist/social specialist; 

and a social/gender specialist, who work on safeguards issues on a part-time basis.  

RESEPAG II staff is acquainted with the Bank´s policies after attending several safeguards 

workshops organized in country. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, the ESMF, and its attached IPMP, will be updated to reflect the new 

components added to the project; reference will be made to the World Bank Group ESHS 

guidelines.   

 

Under the AF, given that OP 4.12 is being triggered to address potential involuntary 

resettlement, the project concluded that the capacity of the PIU will need to be enhanced and 

that an additional specialist would be required to complement the current team. The Task 

Team recommended that the MARNDR/RESEPAG II hire a full-time, entry-level socio-

environmental specialist to complement the team, to be in charge of monitoring 

environmental and social risks and impacts, and receive training by the team on an ongoing 

basis. Given the urgency of the emergency works the environmental specialist at the PIU will 

be trained to screen works for potential involuntary resettlement. The Bank will assist the 

MARNDR in preparing the TORs and in selecting the socio-environmental specialist. 

 

The Project will also hire the services of a second Socio-Environmental Specialist in the 

coming months to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure the compliance 

of involuntary resettlement safeguards, as well as a social assessment annex to the ESMF. 

  

Social safeguards rating under the Parent project has been satisfactory. OP 4.12 was not 

triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any other major 

social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, a rubric in the ESMF 

screening form covering involuntary resettlement has been used to properly detect and 

exclude any investments with OP 4.12 related impacts. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards, the project team has a good presence in 



the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. There is no social 

safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the current environmental specialist 

have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 requirements and 

have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related potential risks. Activities likely 

to cause involuntary resettlement were excluded. 

 

In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank 

team will support the PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The Bank 

Task Team will provide an additional safeguards training for relevant PIU staff before the 

beginning of AF activities. A second training will be provided 6 to 10 months into the 

implementation of the AF. 

 

The AF will reinforce the existing Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) established by the 

Parent Project. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 

address project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that 

they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints 

to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 

Service (GRS). 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 

The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood in Haiti is 

estimated to be around 5 million. The main stakeholders are the segment of this population 

who live and work in the regions supported by this project. Among this population, the project 

will pay special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women 

undertake a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive 

organizations, they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision-making, 

control over resources, and access to economic benefits. Other stakeholders include the 

Ministry of Agriculture central and regional staff, local government officials, extension 

service providers, both public and private, as well as the general public who will benefit from 

improved agricultural output (in quantity and quality), as well as from the reduced risk of 

disease transmission through improved plant and animal health safety. 

 

The Project team will conduct consultations in beneficiary communities affected by Hurricane 

Matthew areas to inform beneficiaries of project activities, opportunities to participate, 

potential adverse short-term impacts, and the grievance redress mechanism available to them. 

These consultations will be key in engaging the population in the emergency response 

programs, reconstruction works and cash-for-work activities. Specifically, the content of 

voucher programs will be consulted and validated with the beneficiaries; the beneficiaries of 

livestock replacement will be identified through community participatory engagement; 

irrigation infrastructure will be identified through community mapping; and cash-for-work 

schemes will be established through participatory processes. People affected by involuntary 

resettlement will be consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with 

OP4.12. 
. 

 
B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy 

is triggered) 



 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 

EA to the Executive Directors 
 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHEnvCtry  

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 07-Sept-2017 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Sept-2017 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHResCtry  

Haiti 14-Sept-2017 

Comments: 
 

 

PHIndCtry  

Haiti  

Comments: 
 

 Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete 

 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHPestCtry 

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 

respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 

Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 

 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:: 

  
. 

 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 

finalized by the project decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding 

safeguard policy is triggered) 
PHCompliance 

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 

Does the project require a stand-alone EA 

(including EMP) report? 
Yes [] No x NA [] 



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit 

or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve 

the EA report? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the 

EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 

Would the project result in any significant 

conversion or degradation of critical natural 

habitats? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If the project would result in significant 

conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) 

natural habitats, does the project include 

mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

 

PHCompliance 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 

Does the EA adequately address the pest 

management issues? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and 

approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  

Are PMP requirements included in project 

design?If yes, does the project team include a 

Pest Management Specialist? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 

framework/process framework (as appropriate) 

been prepared? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 

safeguards or Practice Manager review the 

plan? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
Yes [] No x TBD [] 

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of 

assets or access to assets that leads to loss of 

income sources or other means of livelihoods) 

Yes x No [] TBD [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 

Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and 

institutional issues and constraints been carried 

out? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

Does the project design include satisfactory 

measures to overcome these constraints? 
Yes [] No [] NA x 



Does the project finance commercial 

harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions 

for certification system? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

Have relevant safeguard policies documents 

been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-

country in a public place in a form and language 

that are understandable and accessible to 

project-affected groups and local NGOs? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

All Safeguard Policies 

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear 

institutional responsibilities been prepared for 

the implementation of measures related to 

safeguard policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures 

been included in the project cost? 
Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of 

the project include the monitoring of safeguard 

impacts and measures related to safeguard 

policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements 

been agreed with the borrower and the same 

been adequately reflected in the project legal 

documents? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

 

 

V. Contact point 

World Bank 

 

PHWB 

Contact:Norman Bentley Piccioni 

Title:Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

. 

. 

 Borrower/Client/Recipient 

 

PHBorr 

Name:Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Contact:Jude Alix Patrick Salomon 

Title:Ministre de L'Economie et de Finances 

Email:hermann.augustin@agriculture.gouv.ht 
 

. 

. 

. 

 Implementing Agencies 

 

PHIMP 

Name:Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

Contact:Jules Cesaire YAGANZA 

Title:Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit 

Email:legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr 
 



. 

. 

. 

VI. For more information contact: 
. 

 The World Bank 

 1818 H Street, NW 

 Washington, D.C. 20433 

 Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects 

 

















































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 26, 2017 

Report No.: 120537  
 

Operation Name Benin - First Fiscal Reform and Growth Operation 

Region AFRICA 

Country Benin 

Sector Central government administration (40%); General energy sector 
(30%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%) 

Operation ID P160700 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) Government of Benin 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Date PID Prepared September 26, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 11, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval November 28, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 
1. Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of 
approximately US$820 in 2016. Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate of at about 50 
percent ($1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 PPP) in 2015.  With an average per capita GDP growth rate of 
1.3 percent (2005-2015) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, 
highlighting the need to ensure a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-
headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-headed households.  
 
2. Benin’s economic growth has been satisfactory over the past decade (averaging about 4 percent) 
but the country’s economic performance has been hampered by low competitiveness and high 
informality.  Following the temporary slowdown experienced in 2015, economy activity rebounded 
driven by the recovery of private consumption. Economic performance was supported by increased 
cotton production, strong activity at the Port of Cotonou, and rising telecommunications and transport 
sector activity. Despite the satisfactory growth rates, economic performance in Benin is hampered by a 
weak business enabling environment. The high cost and unpredictable supply of electricity is a key 
constraint for private sector development. Agriculture’s export is concentrated in the cotton sector, and 
agriculture suffers from supply chain deficiencies, including in the provision and distribution of inputs as 
well as on the marketing side. Approximately 90 percent of the labor force is engaged in the informal 
sector – agriculture, informal commerce and other services activities. 
 
3. The first pillar of the Fiscal Reform and Growth series on fiscal consolidation is justified given the 
Government’s effort to create fiscal space and improve the efficiency of public spending. In the run-up 
to 2016 Presidential elections, increases in the wage bill and out-of-budget expenses led to significant 
increases in public debt (up by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (up from 2.1 percent of 
GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015). The Government contained expenditures in 2016 to face the drop of 
tax revenues and managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6 percent of 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



GDP in 2016.  The DPO series will support the authorities’ effort to create fiscal space by improving 
revenue collection and managing more efficiently public expenditure, with an emphasis on wages and 
transfers.  In addition to the DPOs, the Government program is supported by an ECF program with the 
IMF approved by the IMF Board on April 7, 2017, providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that will 
support the implementation of the reforms. The first review of the Program, carried out in September 
2017, confirmed that the authorities are committed to responsible fiscal management. 

 
4. The second pillar aims at promoting agricultural productivity and strengthening the power sector 
which is a Government’s priority to create productive formal jobs and support inclusive growth. 
Agriculture employs over 50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector 
foreign exchange earner. The country has a large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate 
water resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in agriculture remains largely unexploited as 
the governance structure and relatively low food-safety standards had a negative impact on the sector’s 
competitiveness. Also, the inconsistent supply of electricity is frequently noted as a leading constraint to 
private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors. 
Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector and promote private sector participation is 
essential to increase electricity production capacity in a sustainable way. Focusing on these important 
real sectors will help improve productivity, create higher paying jobs and livelihoods, and enhance the 
country’s effort to reach the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. 
 

 Proposed Objective(s) 
 
5. The overarching goal of the proposed FRGC series is to boost real economic growth, reduce poverty 
and increase opportunities for the poorest in the population. The program development objectives of 
this FRGC series are to: a) support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal management; and b) 
promote economic growth by increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity.  
 

 Preliminary Description 
 
6. The first pillar of the DPO series will focus on supporting macroeconomic stability by strengthening 
fiscal management. Not only is adequacy of the macroeconomic and fiscal framework a prerequisite for 
sustainable economic growth but budgetary and debt sustainability is necessary to the delivery of 
effective public services that maximize the impact of available revenues on beneficiaries, including the 
poorest segments of the populations. In addition, increasing fiscal space will help relax fiscal constraints 
to accommodate the financing of needed infrastructure projects.  
 
7. The second pillar will seek to promote economic growth by increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural sector and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. 
This series focuses on measures aimed at increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector by 
supporting a policy, regulatory, and institutional framework that strengthens agriculture value chains 
and enhances diversification, promotes higher quality standards for agricultural products and supports 
greater access to credit in the primary sector. Moreover, the measures supported by the operation 
strengthen the financial viability of the power sector that is necessary to attract private sector 
participation and, thus, increase electricity production capacity, including in renewables, and access to 
electricity in a sustainable way. 

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 



 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
8. The FRGC series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction. Measures to increase 
revenue and to strengthen public expenditure efficiency are expected to ensure ongoing fiscal space for 
the delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive 
to economic growth and private sector employment creation.  
 
9. The supported measures aimed at increasing agricultural productivity and diversification are 
important in achieving the Government’s stated poverty reduction and equitable growth goals. 
Results from the Poverty Assessment indicate that while agricultural growth has contributed strongly to 
overall growth, the impact on poverty reduction has been limited. Diversifying production into more 
valuable crops, focusing more resources on export-oriented crops, and raising productivity should boost 
incomes among the large share of the population, especially the poor population, involved in 
agriculture. 
 
10. Initial results from the 2014 Poverty Assessment note the strong link between unemployment, 
underemployment and poverty. Gender-specific results and recommendations from the assessment 
have informed the policy dialogue with the Government. Gender disparities are especially pronounced 
in the credit market, where improving access to credit has had an important impact on women’s 
economic empowerment. Support for reforms designed to improve credit to agriculture sector and, 
enhance private-sector competitiveness and build a more diversified and resilient economy will have 
positive effects on employment creation and poverty reduction. 
 
11. Supported electricity sector reforms, should they meet their objective of encouraging increased 
access to electricity and more cost-effective provision of electricity, should have a direct and positive 
impact on the poor. Increased and more reliable access at affordable prices should also have a 
significant impact on firm creation, firm growth and resultant employment opportunities, particularly in 
the higher productivity formal sector. 
 
12. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) has been carried out to assess the potential impact 
of electricity pricing reforms in Benin. The PSIA concluded that improving the financial situation of the 
SBEE and thus reducing the gap between SBEE’s service unit cost and revenues per kWh are 
prerequisites for the expansion of SBEE operations throughout the country and greater access for poor 
households to electricity. The PSIA study also concluded that the current social policy of subsidizing the 
tariff for the poor is not effective and suggested some possible options to strengthen the policy 
including adopting a tariff policy based on usage and eliminating fixed costs for small customers. 
 
Environment Aspects  
 
13. The policies supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the 
country’s natural assets. All the actions supported throughout the first operation are policy-oriented; 
they do not support direct investment in environmentally impactful investments or involve policy 
actions with significant environmental consequences.  The measures supporting domestic resource 
mobilization and efficient management of public expenditure pose no risk to the environment. 
Measures designed to strengthen economic competitiveness are also largely environmentally neutral.  
 



14. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector will support increased access to electricity 
and is expected to have a positive environmental impact. Households in Benin, particularly rural 
households, are highly dependent on biomass for their daily energy requirements. The reform program 
supported under the energy sector is likely to have positive environmental impacts and would help in 
the reduction of greenhouse gases occasioned by the predominance of fuel biomass (fuelwood, charcoal 
and plant wastes). The prior action of strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to 
produce climate change mitigation co-benefit, since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is 
likely to promote the development of new energy efficient production capacities.  In the agricultural 
sector, measures intended to diversify agriculture away from a reliance on cotton could have a 
potentially positive environmental effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and 
increasingly diversified. 
 
15. Over the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming 
environmental sustainability in projects. EIA is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all 
developmental projects.  Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to 
implement any development project. It has been set up in the Law N° 98-30 relating to the 
environmental framework and in the Decree N° 2001-235 relating to the environmental assessment 
procedures. The national environmental protection agency (ABE) has the capacity to implement, 
monitor, and report on mitigating measures and/or environmental and social management plans; and 
have been working in direct collaborations with the environmental and social specialists of the Bank 
funded projects. 
 
 
 

 Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 
Borrower/Recipient  
IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 40.00 
 

 Contact point 
 
World Bank  
Contact: Andrea Coppola 
Title: Senior Economist 
Tel: (202) 473-7681 
Email: acoppola@worldbank.org 
 
Borrower 
Contact: Hermann Takou 
Title: Director CSPEF 
Tel: 229 21 30 87 85   
Email: hermann_orou@yahoo.fr 
 



 For more information contact: 
 
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone:  (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 
 


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA21270

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Benin Project ID: P160029
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P115886

Project Name: Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Additional Financing (P160029)
Parent Project 
Name:

Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (P115886)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

07-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

08-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): MInstry of Economy and Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Minist#re de L Agriculture de L Elevage de la P#che (MAEP)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 45.00
Total Project Cost 45.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 11

Country Context
Benin is a low-income country of about ten million people (2013 population census) with a per 
capita income of US$820 in 2014.  The economy is driven by agriculture and services, 
particularly import/export activities through the Port of Cotonou. Agriculture accounts for 25 
percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 47 percent of the country's employment. Cotton is 
the primary export commodity. The informal sector, including subsistence agriculture, contributes 
up to 56 percent of GDP and engages over 90 percent of the labor force. Informal re-export to 
Nigeria contribute Â¼ of the government revenue (a part of that activity goes through formal 
channels for it to be able to generate so much of the government revenue). The country was able 
to maintain macroeconomic stability, which laid the foundation for accelerating growth. Real 
GDP grew by 4.6 percent in 2012; 6.9 percent in 2013; 6.5 percent in 2014; is estimated at 5.0 
percent in 2015; and is projected at 4.5 percent in 2016; which is higher than the previous 5-year 
average of 3.7 percent. Steady gross domestic product (GDP) growth of about 5 percent during 
the period (2012-2015) was partially offset by rapid population growth averaging 3.5 percent per 
year, which led to a modest and unequal increase in household consumption.  As a result, poverty 
levels grew from 36.2 percent in 2011 to 40.1 percent in 2015 . Growth was particularly modest 
in agriculture, which employs almost half the labor force. The economy remains poorly 
diversified and vulnerable to external shocks. This vulnerability underscores the need to promote 
economic diversification (including exports) as recommended in the 2013 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for Benin. Poverty reduction has been enshrined in successive poverty reduction 
strategies, but results have proven erratic and difficult to sustain. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates, and while female-headed households have typically experienced 
lower poverty levels, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity, are 
underrepresented in politics and in other decision making positions, and are more susceptible to 
falling into poverty (Table 1). 
 
The disconnect between economic growth and poverty reduction during the last five years has 
been reinforced by the fact that higher growth stemmed mainly from more capital-intensive 
sectors like banking, telecommunications and the port. In contrast, agriculture, which employs 
half of the labor force, only grew at 4 percent per annum, with its growth derived from more land 
and more labor, but with modest increase in productivity. In addition, population growth has 
limited per capita growth and its impact on poverty reduction. Furthermore, Nigeria➢❨ s 
economic slowdown and policy changes have led to decreased opportunities for informal trade, 
both in the gas sector, where gas flows informally from Nigeria to Benin, and in the broader 
consumer goods sector, where rice, chicken, edible oil, used cars, used clothing etc., flow from 
Benin to Nigeria. For instance, the suppression of subsidies in Nigeria➢❨ s oil sector affected 
negatively the informal Beninese gas trade in areas adjacent to Benin➢❨ s border with Nigeria 
(Adjarra), where poverty increased from 34.8 percent in 2011 to 50.4 percent in 2015.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The agricultural sector in Benin is subject to the vagaries of climate and price fluctuations. 
Increase in productivity for major crops, including cotton has remained modest over time. Overall 
agricultural growth is around 4 percent, which is often offset by the relatively high population 
growth (3.5 percent). Yet, agriculture will remain one of the main source of growth and 
employment for the near future in the country. This will require higher and faster growth.  The 
past performance of 4% was insufficient to drive meaningful poverty reduction, due to the very 
high population growth. The agricultural production systems rely on an extension of cropped area 
and family labor, with no or limited use of improved inputs, production methods, and farm 



Page 3 of 11

equipment. Access to financing is limited outside the cotton system. The country➢❨ s agricultural 
trade performance is generally weak, with a persistently negative agricultural trade balance. 
Agricultural exports are concentrated on three groups of products: cotton, fruits (pineapple), and 
nuts and oilseed (cashew, soy and cottonseed). To meet the needs for a growing urban population, 
Benin continues to import a large share of horticultural products from neighboring countries (such 
as Burkina Faso and Nigeria), rice from Asia, wheat, frozen meat and milk from Europe, and 
frozen poultry products from Brazil. The sector faces the triple challenges of diversifying exports 
(consolidating cotton exports and increasing export volume for pineapple and cashew nut), 
increasing food production, and sustainably increasing farm and post-harvest productivity. These 
challenges must be addressed by taking into account the structural vulnerability of the 
country➢❨ s agricultural production system to floods and occasional droughts.  
 
Improving productivity and strengthening diversification are on the top of the agenda of the 
agricultural and overall development strategy in Benin. The agriculture sector strategy in Benin is 
defined within the broader framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development 
Program (CAADP) by which the country commits to achieve a 6 percent growth in agriculture 
and to allocate at least 10 percent of the national budget to agriculture as recommended in the 
Maputo declaration . The country➢❨ s long-term development strategy (Benin 2025 - Alafia) 
establishes the long-term vision of the country and gives clear directions in relation to the 
promotion of agricultural value chains. The vision is that the country must move towards a greater 
diversification of agricultural production in order to become a major exporter of agricultural 
products by 2025. The achievement of this vision would require a sound public and private 
financing of agriculture and financial sector reforms that would support the promotion and 
implementation of specialized financing instruments for accelerated productivity growth and 
sustainable diversification in the agriculture sector.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The Project Development Objective of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project 
(PADA) is to restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in the 
Recipient's territory.

Key Results 
The key performance indicators will remain unchanged, although targets will need to be adjusted 
where necessary and new indicators will be introduced to account for the new activities and 
changes in corporate indicators. These new indicators include: (i) Number of farmers reached 
with assets or services  of whom 40 percent are women; (ii) Farmers adopting improved 
agricultural technology; (iii) Number of micro projects transformed into SMEs. The end date for 
all targets will also be extended to February 28,2021, in line with the proposed revised Closing 
Date of the original project. .

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will be used to support the government of Benin in 
consolidating and scaling-up the achievements of the initial project, and to strengthen the project 
focus on income generating activities for poor households as well as improving their nutritional 
status.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
Component 1. Adoption of Improved Technologies
Comments (optional)
Like for the initial project, the objective of this component is to improve productivity and quality 
standards along the promoted value chains.  The component will continue supporting adoption of 
improved technologies for the development of the food security (aquaculture, rice, poultry, sheep 
and goat,) and export-oriented value chains (cashew and pineapple) to boost productivity and 
improve producers➢❨  incomes.

Component Name
Component 2 Development/rehabilitation of Production and Market Infrastructures
Comments (optional)
This component focuses: on (i) promoting small-scale irrigation systems for pineapple and 
cashew plantations to improve productivity; (ii) further supporting small-scale irrigation of rice 
production to maintain and expand productivity gains; and (iii) supporting the construction of 
market infrastructure (warehouses, drying areas, cold chambers, etc.) to reduce post-harvest losses 
and facilitate access to markets

Component Name
Component 3. Value Chain Coordination and Access to Finance for Private Initiatives
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) value chain coordination and (ii) facilitation of 
access to finance in support of private initiatives.

Component Name
Component 4. Sector Program Coordination and Project Management
Comments (optional)
This component has two sub-components: (i) capacity building of value chain coordination 
institutions, including strengthening the capacities of civil society and producers➢❨  
organizations as well as of MAEP in coordinating the implementation of the new agriculture 
sector program, and (ii) supporting Project management and monitoring and evaluation.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is nationwide and will be implemented in the 12 Departements (Atacora, Donga, 
Atlantique, Littoral,  Borgou, Alibori, Mono, Couffo, Oueme, Plateaux, Zou, Collines).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
There will be no major change to the implementation arrangements. The Project Coordination Unit 



Page 5 of 11

(PCU) is currently composed of staff who have been recruited based on the skills needed for the 
various positions. Given the nature of the scaling up and new activities, the PCU will include an 
additional animal production specialist. In addition, given the strategic orientation of the Programme 
Cadre-ProCAD  that hosts the PCU, some additional staff will be recruited with cost sharing between 
PADA and WAAPP: (i) an operations officer; (ii) a finance controller; (iii) a computer and 
information management specialist; (v) a logistics management specialist; (iv) an accountant; and (v) 
two administrative assistants.  
 
Financial Management (FM). The proposed AF will build on the existing institutional and fiduciary 
arrangements of the Project Coordination Unit of PADA under oversight of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. The overall performance of the PADA in financial management is Satisfactory. Staffing 
is adequate but needs to be strengthened with a Financial Controller and proper books of accounts 
and supporting documents have been kept in respect of all expenditures. The PCU is familiar with 
the Bank FM requirements and has demonstrated solid technical and fiduciary capacities to manage 
Bank-financed Projects. The audit for the year ended December 31, 2015 for the PADA was 
submitted on time, and was unqualified. The interim un-audited financial reports (IFR) are prepared 
every quarter and regularly submitted to the Bank on time.  
 
The overall FM risk of the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project including the 
proposed additional financing is rated Moderate. It is considered that the financial management 
satisfies the Bank➢❨ s minimum requirements under OP/BP 10.00, and therefore is adequate to 
provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely financial management information on the 
status of the project required by the Bank.  
 
Procurement. The New Procurement Framework (including Procurement Regulations for Borrowers) 
that apply to projects with PCN held after July 1st, 2016 will normally apply. Given the fact that 
waiver has been obtained from CPO to apply the old procurement Guidelines, procurement 
arrangements of the original project will remain largely the same under the proposed Additional 
Financing in accordance with: (a) the World Bank➢❨ s ➢❨ Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, 
Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants➢❨  dated 
January 2011; revised July 2014, and (b) ➢❨ Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants 
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers➢❨  dated January 2011, 
revised July 2014.  Although procurement on PADA has been quite challenging, the PCU has 
conducted procurement activities for the original project in a satisfactory manner.  
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards. The AF triggers: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; 
OP4.09 on Pest Management; OP/PB4.11 On Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement. The original project was rated as environmental assessment Category 
➢❨ B➢❨  so as the proposed AF. The environmental and social impacts of the Project are expected to 
be moderate, site specific, and manageable. The Project is expected to have a positive environmental 
impact through its support for agricultural technologies that promote the better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, 
and other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works. The parent 
project➢❨ s safeguards documents (Environmental and Social Management Framework-ESMF, Pest 
Management Plan-PMP and Resettlement Policy Framework-RPF) have been adapted and updated to 
include activities planned under the AF. Thereafter, all the three safeguard instruments have been 
consulted upon and disclosed in-country on February 03, 2017 and at the Infoshop on February 03, 



Page 6 of 11

2017. The latest implementation support mission (December, 2016) rated the safeguard compliance 
Satisfactory, based on review of progress reports and project site visits. The Project Management 
Unit has an extensive experience in Bank➢❨ s safeguards policies and a dedicated team has been 
appointed to follow up on environmental and social issues; especially the implementation of the 
safeguards instruments. In addition, the national body in charge of environmental and social 
management plans (ESMPs) implementation monitoring (ABE Agence Beninoise pour 
l➢❨ Environnement) will ensure the compliance with national legislation while Bank➢❨ s safeguards 
specialists guide and provide guidance to the PIU through regular supervision missions.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The ongoing Additional Financing intends to finance small 
equipment to ensure proper use of irrigation facilities (sub-
component 2-1). More specifically, the project under sub-
component 2-2, will also fund the construction and 
rehabilitation of critical market and storage infrastructures: (i) 
cold chamber for pineapple packaging and storage before 
export; (ii) construction of centers of bulking up in pineapple 
production areas and distribution centers of pineapple to 
expand domestic marketing of pineapple; (iii) construction of 
25 warehouses to support the bulk marketing of cashew nuts; 
(iv) construction and equipment of 10 cashew apple juice 
processing units to support income-generating activities for 
women based on good results of the initial phase; (v) 
construction of 100 threshing and drying areas for rice to 
improve quality and marketability of the final product; and (vi) 
construction and equipment of fresh fish distribution centers. 
These several civil works will potentially impact 
environmental and social components. However, the exact 
locations of these investments were not determined with 
certainty an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been developed, reviewed, consulted upon and 
disclosed within the Benin on February 03,2017 and at the 
World Bank➢❨ s Website on February 03, 2017

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no potential impact 
on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is not expected to have any impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes The Additional Financing of PADA aims also at increasing the 
agricultural productivity. By this way, it is expected that 
farmers use fertilizers to improve soil fertility and pesticides to 
fight against pests and predators. To handle in a proper manner 
the potential use of these chemical products, the borrower has 
prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP). After its preparation, 
PMP has been reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon and 
disclosed within Benin on February 03, 2017 and on the 
Bank➢❨ s website on February 03, 2017.



Page 7 of 11

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes The civil works associated with activities will unquestionably 
involve excavations within the framework of the construction 
of new infrastructures with the probability to discover cultural 
resources. However, no specific safeguard instrument is 
required. The ESMFthat has been prepared includes a chapter 
in order to provide guidance in case of such discoveries.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no indigenous people as defined by the Bank within 
the Benin

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes The project could involve land take. To be in full compliance 
with the policy, the borrower has prepared a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that has  also been reviewed, 
consulted upon, disclosed in-country on February XXX, 2017 
and at the World Bank➢❨ s Website February XXX, 2017.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance any dam construction.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No The project will not finance any activities with impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not finance any activities in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation 
of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social 
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific.  Hence, they will 
be manageable at an acceptable level. 
 
The project remains EA category B and triggers four safeguards policies namely OP/PB 4.01; 
OP4.09;OP/PB4.11 and OP/PB 4.12.  Safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have all 
been updated and will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the 
Additional Financing phase.  
 
During the parent project➢❨ s implementation, Overall safeguard compliance (OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment; OP4.09 on Pest Management and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement) is rated Moderately Satisfactory.  All safeguard documents have been prepared and 
disclosed in accordance with national legislation and Bank policies.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee long-term 
impacts associated to this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 



Page 8 of 11

impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are diversified, 
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). That 
safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities 
whose location, number, and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and 
social issues.  It includes procedures for screening and mitigating impacts from construction and 
operation of the irrigation schemes, and includes the following: (a) checklists of potential 
environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for participatory screening of 
proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) procedures for 
assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d) 
institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) 
typical environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the 
course of project implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation 
measures; and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning and 
monitoring of project activities. 
 
To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by the 
implementation of activities and other sub-projects, the client has developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  That safeguard instrument clarifies the principles, organizational 
arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to investments/sub-projects to be prepared during 
project implementation. Investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as 
necessary, in line with the RPF and submitted to the Bank for approval.  
 
The PMP encourages the use of organic fertilizers and biological technics to fight against 
agriculture predators. In addition to that, It sets up guidance and guidelines with the aim to protect 
population health and environment integrity in promoting best practices in the case of use of 
chemical products. 
 
All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability 
and compliance with Benin➢❨ s regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank 
environmental and social safeguard policies. 
 
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the 
tools developed under the original project.  ESIA including ESMPs will be prepared as needed for 
the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF.  For works with negligible impacts 
environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will apply. 
 
The PIU includes currently an environmental specialist who is responsible for safeguards 
implementation. Moving forward, under this AF, the same staff will continue to oversee the 
implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the national level. 
Moreover, the PIU staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any safeguard 
issues with the assistance of the ABE(Agence Beninoise de l➢❨ Environnement) involved since 
the beginning of the parent project in ESMPs implementation monitoring. Lastly, the Bank➢❨ s 
implementing support missions will also continue to include environmental and social safeguard 
specialists.



Page 9 of 11

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by the AF are constituted by farmers, breeders, fishermen, NGOs, and 
ministries in charge of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, Forestry, Environment and land 
management. During the safeguard instruments preparation, these various stakeholder groups have 
been consulted. During the updating of the safeguards documentation, new series of consultations 
were held where all of these stakeholders have been consulted and their recommendations, 
comments and suggestions taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The latest 
consultation in the process of safeguard instruments preparation was the workshop held in 
Bohicon from December 13 to 16, 2016 at Hotel Fifatin.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 23-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Feb-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Benin 03-Feb-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



Page 10 of 11

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural 
property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to 
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of 
livelihoods) 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 11 of 11

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Erick Herman Abiassi
Title: Senior Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: MInstry of Economy and Finance
Contact: Servais ADJOVI
Title: Directeur de Cabiinet
Email: sadjovi@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies
Name: Minist#re de L Agriculture de L Elevage de la P#che (MAEP)
Contact: Aguemon Dossa
Title: Directeur de la Programmation et de la Prospective
Email: adossa@yahoo.fr

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Erick Herman Abiassi
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA) Date: 08-Feb-2017
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR) Date: 08-Feb-2017

Country Director: Name: Pierre Frank Laporte (CD) Date: 08-Feb-2017

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

  
Mar 07, 2017 Page 1 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC19562 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017 

    

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties. I ts contents 
may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page i 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

      
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

Project ID Lending Instrument Environmental Assessment 

Category 

Team Leaders 

P158364 Investment Project 

Financing 

B - Partial Assessment Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel 

Ghany 

Approval Date Bank / IFC Collaboration   

14-Nov-2017 No   

Practice 

Manager/Manager 

Senior Global Practice 

Director 

Country Director Regional Vice President 

Meike van Ginneken Guang Zhe Chen Qimiao Fan Annette Dixon 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 
The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations in the 

irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA 

 

[ ✔ ] 

Counterpart 

Funding 

[    ] IBRD [ ✔ ] IDA Credit 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] IDA Grant 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] Trust 

Funds 

[    ] Parallel 

Financing 

 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page ii 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

For Loans/Credits/Others (US$M) 

 

 

Total Project Cost :   65.00 

Financing Gap :    0.00 

Total Bank Financing :   65.00 

Of Which Bank Financing 

(IBRD/IDA): 
  60.00 

 

Financing Source Amount 

Borrower    4.00 

International Development Association 

(IDA) 
  60.00 

Local Farmer Organizations    1.00 

Total   65.00 

 
 

Borrower : Nepal 

Contact :  Title :  

Telephone No :  Email :  

 

 

Implementing 

Agency : 

Department of Irrigation 

Contact : Rajendra  Prasad Adhikari Title : Director General, Department of Irrigation 

Telephone No : 091561236 Email : rjkip@hotmail.com 

 

 
 

INSTITUTIONAL DATA 

 
Practice Area (Lead) 

 

Water 

 
 

Contributing Practice Areas 

 

Agriculture 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page iii 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 

This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 

 
OPS Fina ncia l Interme diate Tabl e  

Private Capital Mobilized   Public Private Partnership   

Yes   No   

 
Gender Tag 

 

Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 

 

a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified 

through SCD and CPF 

 

Yes 

 

b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment 

 

Yes 

 

c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 

 

Yes 

 
 

SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 

 
Risk Category Rating 

1. Political and Governance  High  

2. Macroeconomic  Moderate  



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page iv 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

3. Sector Strategies and Policies  Moderate 

4. Technical Design of Project or Program  Moderate 

5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  Substantial 

6. Fiduciary  Substantial 

7. Environment and Social  Substantial 

8. Stakeholders  Substantial 

9. Other   

10. Overall  Substantial 

 
 

PREPARATION SCHEDULE 

 
Preparation Schedule 

Milestone  Original Revised Actual 

AIS Sign off    Dec 06, 2015 

Concept Review Meeting  Apr 20, 2016 Mar 22, 2017 Mar 22, 2017 

Begin Appraisal  Jul 17, 2017 Sep 25, 2017  

Approval  Nov 14, 2017 Nov 14, 2017  

 
Expenditures 

 

Source of Funds Preparation Expenses to Date (USD) 

Bank Executed Trust Funds    

 
Team 

 
Bank Staff 

Name Role Specialization Unit 

Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Team Leader(ADM  Irrigation & WRM GWA06 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page v 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

Ghany Responsible) 

Shambhu Prasad Uprety 

Procurement 

Specialist(ADM 

Responsible) 

 Procurement GGO06 

Yogesh Bom Malla 
Financial Management 

Specialist 
 Financial management GGO24 

Drona Raj Ghimire Environmental Specialist  Environment safeguards GEN06 

Hiromi Yamaguchi Team Member  Processing consultant GFA03 

Joop Stoutjesdijk Team Member  Irrigation Engineering GWA02 

Jun Zeng Safeguards Specialist  Social Development & Safeguards GSU06 

Junko Funahashi Counsel  Legal LEGES 

Purna Bahadur Chhetri Team Member  Co-TTL, Agriculture GFA12 

Rekha Shreesh Safeguards Specialist  Social Safeguards GSURR 

Satish Kumar Shivakumar Team Member  Finance Officer WFALA 

Tara Shrestha Team Member  Assistance SACNP 

Zakia B. Chummun Team Member  Operations GWA06 

 
Extended Team 

Name Title Organization  Location 

    
 
 
 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 6 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Nepal is an under-developed country located in the Himalayan region, with harsh mountain 
topography except for its southern part consisting of a narrow strip of flat land called the Terai region.  The 
economy is largely agrarian-based, with low labor productivity.  The shares of agriculture, services and 
industry in GDP are around 32, 50 and 18 percent, respectively.  The per-capita GDP/yr is around US$700 
(FY16) with 24% of the population below the poverty line.   Nepal experienced its slowest growth in 14 years 
in FY2016.   Real GDP growth, which slowed to 2.7 percent in FY2015 because of a devastating earthquake, 
was further dragged down to 0.6 percent in FY2016 due to the sluggish post-earthquake reconstruction 
activities and the disruption in cross-border trade. 
 
2. The weak economic growth of the past two years has setback the steady reduction in poverty. 
Poverty headcount rate is estimated at 11.8 percent in FY2015, down from 15 percent in FY2010, but is 
projected to increase slightly to 11.9 percent in FY2016, measured at the $1.90 a day line. A contributing 
factor has been the higher inflation. Based on a simulation exercise, other things being equal, a 2 
percentage points increase in overall inflation would raise poverty headcount rate by 0.8 percentage point 
(measured at $1.90), pushing approximately 225,000 people back into poverty. 

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture, despite being the mainstay of the rural economy, suffers low productivity in the crop sector  
 
3. Agriculture is the mainstay of the rural economy and a source of income for the majority of Nepali 
with 66 percent of the population engaged in agriculture (small farmers constitute 80 percent of the rural 
population), a 32 percent contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Central Bureau of Statistics, 
FY16), and 50 percent contribution to exports earning.  
 

4. Despite this importance of the agricultural sector, the level of income from agriculture is low by the 
regional and international standards, particularly for the major cereal crops (lower than their potential yield 
by at least 50 percent).   Thus, agriculture in Nepal has not made substantial contribution to improving the 
living standards during the past decades.   
 
5. Nepal’s rural population comprises mainly smallholder farmers and about 80 percent of the rural 
population aged fifteen and above is engaged in agriculture.  The unavailability of sustainable livelihood 
opportunities in the rural areas has led to a large-scale exodus of the population to the cities and more 
recently to the Gulf region.  The absence of able-bodied farm labor, continuation of traditional irrigation 
practice, and limited exposure to modern agriculture practices, have led to reduced farm production.  
Existing farmers are generally unable to benefit from existing modern technologies and inputs. 
 
6. The pressing priority is thus to improve agricultural productivity and foster diversification towards 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 7 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

high-value products to secure food security for a growing population and to improve rural incomes. 
 
Public investment in improving irrigation is becoming paramount for transforming the agriculture sector  
 
7. The frail mountain terrain limits the agricultural potential area to 2.641 million hectares (ha), of which 
1.77 million ha has irrigation potential.  Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) 
traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a 
range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with full or partial support from the government; (3) 
government-developed tube-well irrigation schemes; and (4) individually-owned and operated tube wells 
and pumps, mostly utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug wells.  
 
8. At present, the total irrigated area stands at 1.39 million ha of which only 42% has year-round 
irrigation.  There is limited new land that can be brought under farming as most of the economically-suitable 
lands for agriculture have already been exploited, mainly because of the substantial increase in Nepal’s 
population in the past century, with the exception of some potential horizontal expansion in newly-irrigated 
lands of around 0.35 million ha through investing in inter-basin transfers (see government policy below). 
Thus the largest potential for increasing production is by providing better agricultural inputs and assuring 
irrigation to the already-existing cultivated land, namely, a “vertical expansion”.  Modern agricultural 
practices require crop diversification, high-yielding varieties, improved fertilization, and reliable year-round 
irrigation.    
 
9. Of the aforementioned improvements, improving irrigation is critical to agriculture both during the 
monsoon season to overcome the periods of dry spells as well as during the dry season when rainfall is 
negligible.  Agriculture is becoming even more vulnerable to water due to the erratic monsoon rain.  Even 
when recently precipitation during the monsoon has reached 90 to 110 percent of its long-term average 
after two years of low rainfall, farmers get unreliable rainfall with both droughts and intense rainfall/floods 
often occurring in same season.  Thus, transforming the agriculture sector requires upgrading the irrigation 
systems to regulate the irrigation supply.  Only by mobilizing public funding to invest in effective irrigation 
systems, farmers could then focus on the complementary inter-farm/farm-level investments such as 
improving agricultural techniques and inputs and cropping intensity, thus leading to transforming farming to 
more profitable levels. 
 
Government Irrigation Policy and Irrigation Development Program.   
 
10. The Government of Nepal (GoN) has thus recognized the lack of intensive cropping, inadequate 
supply and use of basic agricultural inputs such as fertilizer and improved seeds, and problems with 
deteriorated and inefficient irrigation systems.  
 
11. The Agriculture Perspective Plan (APP) assigns the first priority to accelerating agricultural growth 
through concentrated investment in irrigation. Also one of the key management goals of the APP is to 
expand farmer ownership and operation of irrigation schemes as irrigation is vital to the national 
agricultural production and economic transformation.   



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 8 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

Basic Tenets of Irrigation Policy 2013

 
12. The Department of Irrigation (DoI) is the lead agency in Nepal tasked with developing and improving 
irrigation infrastructure.  The primary effort of DoI has been to design and implement irrigation 
infrastructure to provide irrigation to potential new areas and also to intervene in existing schemes to 
improve their irrigation efficiency and sustainability. 
 
13. The GoN’s strategy for irrigation development and management is reflected in the Water Resources 
Strategy (2002), National Water Plan (2005), Irrigation Development Vision and Action Plan (2006), and 
recently, the Irrigation Policy (2013

1
, Figure below).   The main vision described in these documents is to 

integrate agriculture and irrigation development in order to realize the full benefits from investment in 
irrigation and provide sustainable services to the agriculture sector through well-operating irrigation 
facilities, based on local resources mobilization through a partnership of the users and the government. 
There is an emphasis on: (i) provision of year-round irrigation services to increase the productivity of 
irrigated agriculture and extending the cropping seasons; (ii) the need for a service-oriented management 
approach as a means for providing more reliable and flexible water services to farmers; and (iii) the 
progressive shifting of operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to water users to enhance efficiency, equity, 
and sustainability.   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14. As GoN internalized the concept of year-round irrigation through its Nepal Water Resource Strategy 
(2002) and National Water Plan (2005), the DoI aimed to provide year-round irrigation to vast potential 
areas to boost crop production, leading to food self-sufficiency, employment generation and poverty 

                                            
1
 Entitled the “Irrigation Policy for 2070” in reference to the Bikram Sambat (BS 2070) which corresponds to 2013 AD. The policy was approved on July 13, 2013. 

 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 9 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

reduction.  There are four themes under this DoI goal:  
a) Rehabilitation of existing FMISs;   

b) Design and construction of new irrigation schemes (including the ongoing MoRJKIP and its proposed 
phase 2);   

c) Improve the agency-managed large-scale irrigation projects and handover their management to 
beneficiary farmers (the so called, Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT)), either fully or below the main-
canal level; and  

d) Expand the irrigation area horizontally through investing in “inter-basin water transfers”. 

15. The Tables below reflect some of the DoI target indicators for the next five years, in incremental areas 
and crop yields.    

Table 1:  DOI target for the incremental irrigated area by 2022 
 

Activity Unit Status to date 
Target increment 

after 5 years  

Increment in irrigated area by surface irrigation  Ha 775,000 45,335 

Increment in irrigated area by groundwater Ha 409,013 206,470 

Increment in irrigated area by non-conventional  irrigation 
methods (e.g. solar pumping)  

Ha 5,865 21,100 

Rehabilitation of Farmer Managed Irrigation System (FMIS) Ha 202,299 71,500 

Required financial Resources (in Billion NRs.) 
  

147 

 
Table 2:  Examples for the DOI’s target increase in crop production  (ton/ha) 

 

Before Intervention After Intervention 

Irrigated area Hectare Production 
(ton/ha) 

Irrigated area Hectar
e 

Production (ton/ha) 

Rehabilitation 
of FMIS 

67,000 Paddy 2.2, Wheat 
1.7, Maize 1.76, 
Potato 7.8 

Rehabilitated 
area 

67,000  Paddy 3.6, Wheat 2.7, 
Maize 2.8, Potato 13.0 

IMT projects 102,590 Paddy 2.9, Wheat 
2, Maize 2.1, 
Potato 10 

Management 
Transferred to 
WUAs 

102,59
0  

Paddy 4.7, Wheat 3, 
Maize 4.2, Potato 18.1 

Yields as reported by the Bank-supported Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project (IWRMP, 
August 2016), which supports activities under both the FMIS and IMT categories.   

 
New irrigation schemes   
 
16. The DoI is entrusted with the planning, design and implementation of medium to large-size irrigation 
projects mostly in the hills and Terai region. The Rani-Jamara-Kulariaya Irrigation Project (IP), Mahakali III, 
Babai IP, Sikta IP, Bagmati IP are examples of such large-size undertakings.  The development/modernization 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 10 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

of medium to small schemes (below 300 ha in hills and below 2,000 ha in Terai) are implemented by the 
Medium Irrigation Project (MIP) and the Non-Conventional Irrigation Technology Project (NITP).  At present, 
the MIP has about 250 new irrigation projects in the pipeline with a combined cultivable command area 
(CCA) of approximately 37,000 ha and the NITP has in the pipeline about 732 small new projects especially 
in the hills/mountains with combined CCA of about 8,450 ha.  The DoI intends to continue the development 
of feasible new irrigation schemes in the future.  In addition, the DoI has started the use of solar energy to 
pump blue water to adjoining river terraces for irrigation.  This activity has already been initiated along the 
Bheri corridor and is under consideration for the Babai river, and the DoI intends to expand its use to all 
feasible areas.    
 
17. The Rani Jamara Kularia scheme (the ongoing Bank-financed Phase 1 and the proposed Phase 2) is 
amongst the largest schemes in the entire country under the category of new schemes, and it benefits one 
of the poorest areas in the Tarai in south west of the Karnali river basin.    

 
Farmer Organizations and Participatory Irrigation Management (or “Joint Participatory Management”, JPM) 
18. Nepal has a long tradition of farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMISs) in the hills, mountains, and 
the Terai.  The FMISs cover about 70 percent of the 1.2 million ha of land with some form of irrigation 
infrastructure in the country. The hill FMISs are generally small in size compared to the FMISs in the medium 
to large irrigation systems in the Terai.  A strong sense of ownership and hierarchical management system 
exists in the FMISs.  They often exist in some form of Water Users Associations/Groups (WUA/WUG), tasked 
with operation and maintenance (O&M) of the schemes, most of which is done through labor contribution.    
 
19. However, improving irrigation services in the existing FMIS schemes requires a combination of 
“hardware” and “software” solutions.  The former involves rehabilitating and modernizing existing irrigation 
and drainage infrastructure to improve reliability of supply and expand the system of secondary and tertiary 
canals.   The latter requires the development of more efficient mechanisms for managing the irrigation 
systems down to the field level, through a clear delineation of responsibilities between the government and 
the WUAs in charge of delivering irrigation services to farmers.  There is also a need to pool funding through 
government and users contributions for O&M and asset replacement over time. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The proposed project is consistent with the Nepal Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2014–18 to 
support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Nepal. The proposed project is aligned with the Pilar 2 of CPS 
– Increasing Inclusive Growth and Opportunities for Shared Prosperity. The proposed project aims to improve 
agriculture and water productivities through modernizing or rehabilitating the lower-order irrigation 
infrastructure, strengthening WUA, and implementing a comprehensive agricultural improvement program (CPS 
Outcome 2.1).  
 
21.  In line with the CPF, the Bank has been engaged in the irrigation and WRM sector through two lending 
projects, namely: (1) Irrigation and WRM Project, which is a collaboration of the Agriculture and Water Global 
Practices (IWRMP, IDA US$114m, closing in June 2018, targets 26,808 hectares); and (2) Modernization of Rani-



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 11 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

Jamara-Kulariya Irrigation Scheme-Phase 1 (MoRJKIP, IDA US$40m, due to close in September 2017, targets 
14,300 hectares).    The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPS, conducted in October 2016, has 
indicated that by FY2018 the IWRMP and MoRJKP would increase the area under improved irrigation services by 
a total of 50,000 hectares, and would improve the end-users satisfaction with the performance of the WUAs 
from around 5% to 40%. 
 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
22.  The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations 
in the irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 
PDO indicators:  

 
1. Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in hectares. 

2. Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in number, with the 
number of females as a supplemental indicator.   

 
D. Concept Description 

 

23.    The proposed operation will focus on modernization of the lower-order irrigation system (sub-branches, 
tertiary canals and water courses) so that irrigation water can reach farmer fields with the optimal flows, 
continuation of the WUA/WUG support program, implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement 
program, and support to the river-basin planning process. 
 
24.    The proposed operation is a second phase of the ongoing IDA-supported MoRJKIP.  The ongoing project 
focuses on modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (intakes, feeder and branch canals, 
including related flood protection), enhancing the capacity of WUAs to operate and maintain the improved/new 
irrigation infrastructure, and preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program.  The MoRJKIP is 
on track toward meeting the PDO.    
 
24.       The proposed phase 2 is very essential in complementing the ongoing phase 1, because of two inter-
related necessities:  
 
1. First, below the main/conveyance system introduced by phase 1, without phase 2 the irrigation distribution 

and application efficiencies would continue to be low compared to the global/regional norms.  Farmers apply 
as much as 2-3 litre/second/ha (the irrigation “hydro-module”) compared to an optimal level of around 1 
litre/second/hectare.  The lack of bulk inter-seasonal water storage needs to be compensated by completing 
the modernization of the system down to the farm level, in order to optimize canal storage and irrigation 
scheduling, thus optimize the root-zone moisture across the crop-growth stages. 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 12 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

 
2. Second, the WUAs function is not supposed to stop at the main-system level.  There is a need to utilize the 

immense potential for JPM in the Rani-Jamara-Kulariya community, building on the creation and 
empowerment of WUAs attained under the phase 1, so that the WUAs can also have a major role in the 
O&M of the irrigation subsystem down to the farm level.   
  

20. The envisaged project components are as follows:    
 
Component 1, Scheme Modernization (US$58 million, mainly civil works): will support the construction and 
modernization of the lower-order irrigation infrastructure, including the sub-branch canals, tertiary canals, and 
water courses. The activities will include design and execution of irrigation and drainage subsystems below the 
Branch Canals and down to the Field Outlet levels, including not only the irrigation subsystems but also related 
river-training and flood-protection works, collector and tertiary drains, and control structures. 
 

Component 2, Agricultural Production Support and Strengthening Water Users Associations/Groups 
(WUAs/WUGs) (US$6 million): will support: (i) strengthening WUAs/WUGs to assume responsibility for 
management, operation, and maintenance of the modernized system; and (ii) carrying out a series of 
agriculture-based activities in the project area to internalize the gains made in phase 1 and to increase and 
sustain agricultural production through the promotion of water-smart improved farming practices, crop 
diversification, post-harvest support, farmer training through demonstrations and farmer field schools, and 
other adaptive processes. Thus the second phase will adopt value-chain-based approach to support 
agricultural activities.   
 
Component 3, Project Management (US$1 million, including goods, technical assistance and capacity 
building): will support activities to ensure effective project management, including fiduciary and safeguards 
management and monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 13 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
Located in the Kailali District of the Far Western Development Region, the proposed project will cover eight Village Deve 

lopment Committees (VDC) and Tikapur Municipality. Tikapur Municipality is the main market center in the project area. 
The existing Rani Jamara and Kulariya Irrigation scheme consists of three independent traditional irrigation systems 
constructed, operated and managed by the indigenous Tharu community.  The ethnic composition of the project area 
includes Tharus as the dominant group (48 percent) followed by Chhetri (17 percent), Dalit (15 percent), Brahmin (10 
percent) and others (7 percent).  There are three water users associations and one central committee (federation) that 
has representations of the three WUAs. 
The proposed project is in the Terai (plain) area of Nepal. There are community and state forests in and around the 

project area. Nearest protected area is the Bardiya National Park, which is located across the source river Karnali, in the 
east of the project area. The target area is the 14,300 ha of the Rani, Jamara and Kulariya command area.  Under the 
ongoing phase 1 which focused on the river/ main system level, the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) has been triggered 
because the Karnali River has protected and endangered aquatic species, including the Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh Mugger, 
and Gharial Crocodile.    Also, the Karnali River corridor (forests) is a wildlife movement route for especially elephant, 
tiger, and rhino.  As some of the phase 1 works have been aligned along the fringes of forest areas, the OP/BP 4.36 on 
Forests was triggered and issues were addressed as part of the Environmental Management Plan.  An Environmental 
Assessment (EA) of the Phase 2 will be commissioned to identify, assess and recommend measures for avoidance, 
minimization, and mitigation of potential adverse environmental impacts as well as to enhance positive impacts related to 
component 1 and component 2 of the project.   
 
The scheme abstracts water from the Karnali River, a major left-bank tributary of the Ganges River. The Karnali River has 

its source in China and flows through Western Nepal into India (where it is called Ghaghara River before it joins the 
Ganges). The Karnali River is thus an international waterway for purposes of OP 7.50.  Due to uncontrolled diversion of 
the Karnali River water into the main canals there is typically excessive water entry, while there is no control of the water. 
The scheme in its current state has very low water use efficiency and large water losses through seepage and water 
logging.  The proposed phase 2 will complement phase 1 in helping to reduce water abstraction from the Karnali River, by 
over 40 percent of the current water abstraction.  There upon, an exception to the notification requirement under OP 
7.50 has been received from South Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011. A Strategic Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA) of the proposed River Basin Management Plan (RBM) will be carried out during implementation. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The DoI is currently implementing MoRJKIP - Phase 1.  During the preparation of the ongoing MoRJKIP – phase 1, Social 

Assessment (SA) and Environmental Assessment (EA) were carried out, based on which DoI prepared Social Impact 
Management Framework (SIMF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to manage social and environmental 
safeguard issues.  The SIMF prepared under Phase 1 includes a policy framework for land acquisition and resettlement, 
along with Vulnerable Community Development Framework, Gender and Social Inclusion Framework to ensure that the 
benefits from the project reaches the indigenous people, vulnerable people, women and other disadvantaged groups.  A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the feeder canal was prepared and implemented.  Under Phase 1, private land was 
not affected but a few private structures were affected.  An Indigenous and Vulnerable Community Development Plan 
(IVCDP) was also prepared.  To manage social and environmental safeguard activities, a Senior Sociologist and 
Environmental Specialist have been appointed under Phase 1, yet he started work in a late stage of the project.  The DoI 
have acquired familiarity and experience with Bank’s social and environmental safeguard requirements through the 
ongoing MoRJKIP- Phase 1.  The recent safeguard rating under Phase 1 is moderately satisfactory. Besides the safeguard 

specialist recruited under the project, a Local Environmental Monitoring Committee (LEMC) was formed. LEMC 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 14 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

consisted of representatives from environmental stakeholders in the area such as Bardia National Park, community forest 
users group, district forest and NGO, played positive roles in monitoring and providing advices / guidance with regard to 

environmental management. However, late recruitment of environmental specialists and turnover of the specialist was 
one of the weak points. The absence of specialist service/ support during initial stage and later as well has affected the 
timely support, monitoring, reporting, and implementing the mitigation activities as well as timely coordination with local 

stakeholders, and regularity of the LEMC meetings and awareness activities.   
 
The proposed project, Phase 2, will build on these existing frameworks and their implementation experience to comply 

with the safeguard policies.  The command area is defined, main canal and branch canal have been modernized in the 
Phase I.  An EA will be conducted for the new proposed system and EMP will be drafted accordingly to address 
environmental issues. The proposed project will intervene in the sub-system and inter-farm areas which are closer to 
privately-owned assets and livelihood. However, technical design of the project is yet to be performed, thus the specific 
nature and scale of the social impacts would be known later amid the pre-appraisal stage. Hence, social management 
framework is proposed. Gaps identified and lessons learnt during the implementation of RJKIP Phase I will be considered 
while revising the existing Social Management Framework.  
 
  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Drona Raj Ghimire, Jun Zeng, Rekha Shreesh 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Same as phase 1. As the project scope under 
Component 1 and Component 2 includes physical 
construction activities, and agricultural production 
support, potential adverse impacts on the natural 
environment and human health and safety are likely. 
Command area is defined and main and branch canals 
are existing (modernized in Phase I).  Hence, EA and 
EMP will be prepared for the modernization and 
agricultural production activities. EA and EMP, inter 
alia, will cover issues related to labour and labour 
camps, and EHS issues (following World Bank Groups’ 
EHS Guidelines).   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. Karnali and Mohana Rivers are known to have 
important aquatic species (Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh 
Mugger, and Gharial crocodile). Occasional movement 
of wildlife has been reported in the adjoining forests. 
During project preparation, impacts on natural habitat 
and biodiversity will be assessed and appropriate 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 15 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

mitigations as part of EA and EMP, (or if necessary, 
Stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan) will be 
prepared.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. There are community forests adjoining the 
project command area. Some sections of the main/ 
feeder canal constructed in the Phase I was located in 
the community forests.  In the Phase II, sub-branch 
canals, tertiary canals, inter-farm water courses are 
the main construction works.  These structure are 
away from the forest areas.  Hence, there is less 
chance of adverse impacts on forest. However, during 
preparation of the project, each activity will be 
reviewed to see if the project has potential to cause 
loss or degradation (the health and quality) of forest. 
EA will assess potential impacts and propose 
mitigations, if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

 
Emphasis of Phase II, under Component 2, is to 

increase and sustain agricultural production by 
carrying out a series of agriculture-based 
activities, adopting value-chain-based approach. 
This may lead to introduction of pesticides or 
increased use of pesticides. During project 
preparation, this will be reviewed thoroughly and 
the EA / EMP will have measures, such as 
Integrated Pest Management, to mitigate adverse 
impacts (or if necessary, separate Pest 
Management Plan will be prepared).    

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 
This was not triggered in the Phase 1.  The ESIA will 
confirm if the project will affect PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The RJKIP project will be implemented in an area with 
Indigenous ethnic minorities. Tharus, indigenous to 
the area, are in a majority (48 percent) followed by 
other indigenous groups from the hill. The project 
areas are also comprised of other vulnerable groups 
such as Dalits, women-headed households.   
SIMF will comprise a Vulnerable Community 
Development Framework (VCDF) and Gender and 
Social Inclusion Framework to guide planning 
approaches on indigenous peoples (and vulnerable 
groups) and interventions under the project. SA and 
VCDP will be prepared for project locations known by 
appraisal while VCDF will be the guiding document for 
the remaining works.  



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 16 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Major issues of land acquisition are unlikely.  However, 
the upgrading works may require small plots of land 
and have impacts on structures requiring relocation.  
Policy framework for land acquisition and 
resettlement will be included as a part of SIMF will 
provide a legal framework on involuntary 
resettlement. If project locations are known by 
appraisal, SA and RAP will be prepared. In other 
remaining works, where project location is not fixed, 
policy framework will be the guiding document in 
preparation of RAP. RAP will include among others 
entitlement matrix, communication strategy and GRM. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Same as phase 1. Project does not include 
construction of dam, neither depends on existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Was triggered with phase 1 as it focused on works on 
the river and main system.  In phase 2, works on the 
sub-system and inter-farm level are not expected to 
cause any appreciable transboundary water impact.  
The system modernization is expected to reduce water 
abstraction (the hydro-module is currently as high as 3 
liter/sec/hectare) thus will not impact the water 
flowing downstream.  Through a similar rationale 
under phase 1 an exception to the notification 
requirement under OP 7.50 was received from South 
Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011.  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There is no disputed area.  

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 11, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
September 2017 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 

Sr Water Resources Spec. 
 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page 17 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Nepal 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Department of Irrigation 

Rajendra  Prasad Adhikari 

Director General, Department of Irrigation 

rjkip@hotmail.com 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Maged Mahmoud Hamed  

Practice Manager/Manager: Meike van Ginneken  

Country Director: Qimiao Fan  
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 1 of 17  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Oct-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC19875 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 2 of 17  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P160418  Digital Solutions for 
Sustainable 
Development 
(P160418) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Oct 02, 2017 Feb 12, 2018 Transport & ICT 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Cote d'Ivoire Ministry of Digital Economy 
and Post 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 3 of 17  

     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Côte d’Ivoire is a lower-middle-income economy with a widening urban/rural gap that hinders the 
achievement of shared prosperity and poverty elimination – With a population of 22.7m, the Gross National 
Income per capita (Atlas method) was US$ 1,420 in 2015, which is 13% lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) 
regional average (US$ 1,637). Around 54% of its population lives in urban areas, and the population and the 
economy are highly concentrated around the economic capital Abidjan. Rural population in Cote d’Ivoire has 
increasingly suffered from poverty during the last 25 years

1
. Rural poverty has significantly increased since the 

end of the 1980s, and the rural/urban gap has widened. 57% of the rural population is below the national 
poverty line, whereas this rate is 21 percentage points lower for the urban population (36%) and the Northern 
regions are the most afflicted. The widening gap between the North and South of the country help explain why 
Côte d’Ivoire still stands at the 172

nd
 place in the world in the most recent global UNDP-HDI ranking (2016). The 

rural population suffered and still suffers from political crises, deterioration of governance and social services, 
and unstable revenues. At least three main challenges explain the increase in rural poverty over the past 25 
years: (a) political crises; (b) deterioration of governance and social services; and (c) unstable revenues. 

2. The country suffered from a period of civil war from 2002-2004, and a post-election crisis and armed conflict 
from late 2010 to April 2011, that disrupted the economic, social and political cohesion of the country – Côte 
d’Ivoire enjoyed decades of strong economic growth, but the country underwent a series of violent political 
and economic crises during 1999 to 2011 that led to a significant deterioration of living standards. The dismal 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rates during this period reflect the impact of the crises: on average -1.2% 
during 1999-2003 compared to 3.9% for SSA, 2.0% during 2003-2010 compared to 5.2% for SSA, and -4.4% for 
2011. However, since mid-2011, the country has made significant progress in consolidating political stability 
and post-crisis economic recovery has proceeded at a rapid and sustained speed. Sound macroeconomic 
management combined with public and private investments have underpinned improved economic growth: 
GDP growth rate is on average 9.5% during 2011-2015 (4.3% for SSA). 

3. The rural population has suffered from deterioration of governance and cuts in expenditures in social 
services as well as poor infrastructure – Since the political crises of the year 2000s, the rural population has 
suffered from a combined deterioration in: (i) the governance structure;

2
 and (ii) cuts in health and education 

expenditure under structural adjustment programs that aimed at reestablishing macroeconomic stability.
3
 The 

infrastructure gap between the more affluent urban areas and the poor rural areas is compelling: 33% of the 
urban population has access to improved sanitation facilities compared to 10% of the rural population; 88% of 
the urban population has access to electricity compared to 29% of the rural population.

4
 For ICT, 16% of 

households in urban areas has access to the internet compared to only 2% in rural areas.
5
 

4. Unstable revenues and poor productivity of the rural economy, especially for agriculture, hinders poverty 
reduction – The agriculture sector is an important driver of Côte d’Ivoire’s economy, accounting for 22% of GDP 
and more than 75% of exports. Three out of four working adults living in rural areas are employed by the 

                                            
1
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (pp.ix-x); IFAD, Rural poverty in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire. 

2
 “Good governance encompasses, inter alia, concrete measures against corruption, an improved public administration, and – as emphasized by 

stakeholders – enhanced access to justice, and more transparent and predictable relations between government and the private sector.” (World 
Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015, p.xvii). 

3
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.x). 

4
 World Bank, World Development Indicators (most recent year is 2015 for sanitations facilities – cf. Table 3.12 – and 2012 for electricity). 

5
 Gallup Survey, 2015. 

http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/country/home/tags/cote_divoire
http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/3.12


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 4 of 17  

     

agriculture sector
6
. Despite its critical importance to the economy, the sector has had only a modest impact on 

income growth and poverty reduction in rural areas. The agriculture sector – and especially primary products – 
are highly sensitive to fluctuations in international prices which in turn have an adverse and volatile impact on 
revenues for rural households. 

5. To tackle these challenges, the country has implemented reforms that have significantly contributed to an 
overall improvement in governance and the business environment, making the country more attractive to 
private investment – The country has been a relatively weak performer on the World Bank Ease of Doing 
Business Index DBI (global rank at 142

nd
 out of 189 countries in 2016

7
). Nevertheless, the business environment 

has improved significantly during the last five years – from 177
th

 in 2013 to 142
nd

 in 2016 based on DBI – 
making Cote d’Ivoire one of the ten fastest reforming countries two years in a row (2014 and 2015). The World 
Economic Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index also capture this improvement, whereby Côte d’Ivoire 
rose from 131

st
 in 2012 to 91

st
 in 2015. The authorities will remain focused on improving crucial infrastructure, 

particularly in the energy and transport sectors, but increasing attention will turn to investment in 
communications infrastructure, as well as the education and healthcare system. They will continue to look 
abroad to finance much of the sizeable infrastructure investment that is underway. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

B.1 Rural economy and rural agriculture sectoral 

6. The rural economy is dominated by the agriculture sector, which is mostly made of: (i) export-oriented cash 
crops; and (ii) food crops and animal and fish production for domestic consumption – The cash crops subsector 
is made of cocoa, coffee, rubber, oil palm, cotton, and cashews. Cote d'Ivoire is the world's largest producer 
and exporter of cocoa beans and a significant producer and exporter of coffee and palm oil. Cash crops benefit 
from the bulk of agricultural investment and usually involve more sophisticated production techniques. Cash 
crops suffer from limited value chain integration among farmers, intermediaries and processors, which 
prevents the country from increasing downstream transformation of its food production. Cash crop agriculture 
is potentially lucrative, but it also entails considerable risk, as volatile international commodity markets 
determine export prices. The food crop subsector is made of plantains, yams, cassava, maize, rice, and 
livestock. It is characterized by traditional practices and receives little support from either the public or private 
sectors (except for rice and maize). The relatively strong performance of the food crop subsector is critical to 
food security in Côte d’Ivoire and has enabled the country to become self-sufficient in most key staple crops 
(except for wheat, rice and dairy). This subsector is often neglected in agricultural research and sector 
development strategies, and thus food production tends to be small-scale, traditional, and mostly informal. 
Nevertheless, prices of food crops are less impacted by international price volatility, and compared to cash 
crops often represent greater economic security but tend to offer more limited returns. 

7. The traditional food crops are mostly produced in the poorer Northern regions, whereas the cash crops are 
produced in the richer Southern regions – Adding to the North/South social and economic disparities, the 
country falls into two distinct agricultural regions: the dry savannah in the North and the forest region in the 
South. Rural poverty has traditionally been significantly higher in the North – where the potential for 
agriculture has not yet been realized – whereas the South benefits from higher and more reliable rainfall and 
better soils and produces most of the export crops. However, both the North and South suffer from low 

                                            
6
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.xiii); at a national level (urban and rural population), half of the 

population is employed by the Agriculture sector. 
7
 World Bank, Ease of Doing Business in Côte d'Ivoire, 2016. 

http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/c%C3%B4te-divoire/


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 5 of 17  

     

agricultural productivity, high cost of inputs, considerable post-harvest losses, inadequate use of modern 
farming techniques, lack of modernization and mechanization, all contributing to a decline in agricultural 
production.

8
 

8. Rural economy, and especially rural agriculture, suffers from five gaps crippling economic productivity and 
related to: (i) Enabling environment; (ii) Access to land; (iii) Access to finance; (iv) Skills and technology; (v) 
Physical capital – Poor performance in agriculture undermines shared prosperity and poverty elimination, with 
five major gaps hindering the development of the rural agriculture sector:

9
 

a. Gap #1: Lack of accurate data and enabling environment gap – The agriculture sector lacks good and 
accurate data; for example, the latest available National Agricultural Census is now 16 years old (2001). The 
lack of accurate data hinders the elaboration and implementation of sound policies and strategies, and 
prevents the design and conduct of impact evaluation research.

10
 The agriculture sector also suffers from an 

inadequate national and foreign investment framework, and the sector is still severely disadvantaged by a 
distortive policy framework (taxes on export commodities), coupled with a strong urban bias in 
development spending. 

b. Gap #2: Access to land gap – Lack of access to land is a major cause of rural poverty in SSA, and Cote 
d’Ivoire is no exception. Small-scale producers of food crops have access to about half the amount of land 
available to large-scale producers of export crops and they suffer from low productivity because of the 
small size of their lands.

11
 The 1998 Law on Rural Land required farmers to register their land within ten 

years, but very few farmers had the knowledge, means, and skills to do so. A new Law in August 2013 
extended the deadline by ten years, and as of 2014 only 0.09% of the total agriculture land is registered (i.e. 
20k out of 23m hectares). Food insecurity risk is twice higher for farmers not owning property than for land 
owners

12
 and lack of land certificates is worse for women farmers who face additional gender-related 

constraints, including legal or social norms that prevent them from inheriting or simply owning land. 

c. Gap #3 – Access to finance gap – Cote d’Ivoire is one of the least developed countries in the region for rural 
development finance, and there is a lack of financing services for the agriculture sector. Access to credit by 
small farmers is acutely limited due to the virtual absence of financing structures such as rural microfinance 
institutions and rural banks. Moreover, private banks are reluctant to provide loans to rural small-scale 
farmers as they see them as cumulating too many risks: low levels of capitalization, unstable revenue flows, 
lack of formal credit history, difficulty in evaluating small farmers’ repayment capacity, lack of collateral 
such as titled land, the influence of exogenous factors such as weather conditions, and the limited legal 
avenues for enforcing contracts. Where credit is available, interest rates are often too high compared to the 
average rate of return of farmers’ investments. This translates into a low bank account ownership rate and 
a low percentage of adults having the possibility to benefit from a mortgage. The financing obstacle faced 

                                            
8
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.54). 

9
 ECOWAS-UEMOA-CILSS, Alliance Globale pour l’Initiative Résilience AGIR, Rapport des Priorités Resilience Pays (PRP) Côte d’Ivoire, 2014 ; World 

Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (p.55-66). 
10

 Without much sector impact analysis, the sector has been subjected to ineffective policies including high indirect and direct taxes on export 
commodities which have prevented small farmers from earning more revenues: the 2015 World Bank SCD calculated that a 10 percent decrease 
in the export tax would boost net revenue by 22 percent, which in turn would improve the living conditions of roughly 4 million Ivoirians.  

11
 IFAD, Rural poverty in the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, accessed in January 2016; World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 
2015, (p.55): “Agriculture in Cote d’Ivoire is dominated by smallholder farmers, the majority of whom use traditional practices and rely on family 
labor. Data from the most recent Agricultural Census (2001) estimated that there are 8.3 million farmers nationwide, of whom 49 percent are 
women. The average cultivated area for each household is about 3.89 hectares, but 80 percent of households cultivate less than 2 hectares.” (). 

12
 ECOWAS-UEMOA-CILSS, Alliance Globale pour l’Initiative Résilience AGIR, Rapport des Priorités Resilience Pays (PRP) Côte d’Ivoire, 2014. 

http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/country/home/tags/cote_divoire


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 6 of 17  

     

by the agriculture sector in Cote d’Ivoire is thus similar to the rest of SSA: only about 1% of commercial 
lending in SSA goes to agriculture, mostly to large-scale farmers.

13
 

d. Gap #4 – Skills and technology gap – In 2011, 62% of teenagers in the Northwest region were unschooled 
compared to the national average of 42%, and only 8% of young people aged 15-24 completed their 
secondary education compared to the national average of 27%.

14
 The combination of low level of education 

and other gaps highlighted above (such as access to finance) leads to a low usage of technology and 
agriculture inputs – such as equipment and fertilizers. Several market failures characterize inputs markets, 
including: inconsistent rules and standards requirements, unrealistic standards, and lack of equipment and 
capacity at the rural level to ensure compliance. Moreover, the cost of technology and agriculture inputs for 
smallholders tend to be too high due to several factors

15
: (i) weak bargaining power of smallholders; (ii) 

poor transportation and energy infrastructure; (iii) lack of market information; (iv) lack of knowledge of 
farmers concerning the use of inputs; and (v) limited access to finance.  

e. Gap #5 – Physical capital gap – While several crops such as cashew (anacarde), maize and tomatoes are 
produced in the Northern regions,  principal markets  destinations are located in the Southern regions, 
including the port of Abidjan for exports and urban domestic markets which sometimes offer greater 
opportunities to smallholders than export markets

16
.: This implies that an efficient transportation network 

must be available throughout the whole territory to link production areas to: (i) the port of Abidjan 
international output market; and (ii) the domestic consumption areas spread around the country. Hence, 
having reliable infrastructures – such as road networks, storage facilities, electricity, and 
telecommunications – is essential to the efficiency of the agriculture sector. However, Cote d’Ivoire’s rural 
infrastructure needs additional investments to be rehabilitated and extended. Currently, as much as 90% of 
the paved network in Cote d’Ivoire is between 15 to 40 years old, while routes coatings are generally 
designed and built for a lifetime of 15 years

17
; as a consequence, about 40 percent of the road network is 

not or only partially useable.
18

 In addition to the lack of reliable roads, the lack of efficient public 
transportation services also hinders the economic development of rural agriculture: smallholders often use 
public transportation such as passenger buses to take their products to distant markets, and this 
inadequate transportation mode leads to bruising and damage to the products, thus reducing its quality 
and market value. The electricity network is no better as all departments of the Northern half of the 
country had coverage rates below the national average in 2011. Among them, five departments had less 
than 15% of their localities connected to electricity

19
. The lack of reliable electricity is an impediment to 

well-functioning rural markets as limited access to storage facilities and unreliable electricity supply result in 
post-harvest losses. Most farmers often rely on open-air storage and need to sell quickly their products – 
sometimes at a significantly low price – before it rots. 

9. Several public and private institutions drive the agriculture sector, generating a fragmented knowledge and 
negatively affecting the efficiency of the government’s action on the sector; the sector would thus strongly 
benefit from a stronger coordination for data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination – The 

                                            
13

 UNCTAD, Commodities & Development Report, 2015 (p.21). 
14

 African Development Bank, Cote d’Ivoire Economic Outlook, 2015 (p.14). 
15

 UNCTAD, Commodities & Development Report, 2015 (p.19). 
16

 In Cote d’Ivoire transactions in local urban markets for staple foods represented about $1.1 billion compared with revenue of $0.63 billion from 
exports in 2009 (cf. UNCTAD, Commodities & Development Report, 2015, p.22). 

17
 African Development Bank, Cote d’Ivoire Economic Outlook, 2015 (p.14). 

18
 World Bank, Côte d’Ivoire SCD – From Crisis to Sustained Growth, 2015 (pp.58-59). 

19
 African Development Bank, Cote d’Ivoire Economic Outlook, 2015 (p.14). 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 7 of 17  

     

agriculture sector is jointly supervised by the Ministère de l’Agriculture et du Développement Rural (MINADER) 
and the Ministère des Ressources Animales et Halieutiques (MIRAH), with the strong implication of the 
Ministère des Eaux et Forêts (MINEFF) and the Ministère de l’Environnement et du Développement Durable 
(MINEDD). The MINADER and MIRAH both have their own internal statistics and planning department: the 
Direction Générale de la Planification, du Contrôle des Projets et des Statistiques (DGPPS, at MINADER) and the 
Direction de la Planification, des Statistiques et des Programmes (DPSP, at MIRAH). The MINADER and MIRAH 
also supervise – with other ministries – several public institutions in charge of agriculture and rural 
development, including the Agence Nationale d’Appui au Développement Rural (ANADER), the Centre National 
de Recherche Agronomique (CNRA), the Fonds Interprofessionnel pour la Recherche et le Conseil Agricole 
(FIRCA), the Office National de Développement de la filière Riz (ONDR), and the Office d’Aide à la 
Commercialisation des Produits Vivriers (OPCV). Several branches of agriculture also have their own 
organizations, including the Chambres d’Agriculture de Côte d’Ivoire, the Association Nationale des 
Organisations Professionnelles Agricoles de Côte d’Ivoire (ANOPACI), the Conseil Café Cacao (CCC), the 
Association des Professionnels de Caoutchouc Naturel de Côte d’Ivoire (APROMAC), etc. The sector would thus 
greatly benefit from a stronger coordination in data and knowledge gathering, sharing, and dissemination. 

10. To address the main gaps to fast and sustainable development of the agricultural sector, the Government has 
developed several strategies, including the National Agricultural Investment Program (NAIP) and the e-
Agriculture Strategy – The NAIP is the agricultural pillar of the country’s National Development Plan (NDP). The 
first NAIP (NAIP #1) was a US$4 billion program over the 2010-2015 period, aimed at promoting a diversified 
mix of strategic cash and food crops for growth and food security. It was organized around six programs: (i) 
crops productivity and competitiveness; (ii) development of agricultural supply chains; (iii) sector governance; 
(iv) capacity building; (v) sustainable management of fisheries; and (vi) rehabilitation of forest and wood 
industry. The government launch the update of the PNIA in October 2016 (PNIA #2) and the final release is 
expected in May 2017. The Government has also developed a comprehensive national e-Agriculture strategy in 
2012, and updated it in 2014. This strategy has the aim of modernizing the country’s agricultural sector and 
enhancing its productivity with an increase in the country’s export of cocoa, coffee and other produce, and a 
decrease in food imports. The strategy requires suitable access to information services and data centers as part 
of an ICT package aiming to make real-time market information systems available via mobile phones and 
tablets. Finally, other sectoral strategies include: (i) the Loi d’orientation agricole (Loi n° 2015-537 du 20 juillet 
2015); the Stratégie Nationale de Développement de la filière Riz 2012-2020 (SNDR); the Plan Stratégique de 
Développement de l’Elevage, de la Pêche et de l’Aquaculture (PSDEPA 2014-2020); the Stratégie Nationale de 
Développement de la Mécanisation Agricole (SNDMA); and the Programme National de Sécurisation du Foncier 
Rural (PNSFR). 

 
B.2 Digital economy sectoral and institutional context 

11. The ICT institutions and the enabling environment have drastically improved during the last five years thanks 
to the creation and revamping of key institutions and the introduction of new legal and regulatory 
frameworks – Overall, the ICT enabling environment has drastically improved during the last five years. Each 
year, the World Economic Forum (WEF) performs a global ranking of the ICT sector in each country by 
measuring the Network Readiness Index (NRI). One sub-index of the NRI is the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ 
reflecting both the ‘Political and regulatory environment’ and the ‘Business and innovation environment’. In 
2012, Côte d’Ivoire ranked as one of the worst country in the world regarding the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’, 
being at the 130

th
 place (out of 142 countries). In less than 5 years, Côte d’Ivoire has risen at the 72

nd
 place (out 

of 139 countries) in 2016 for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’ (on the overall Network Readiness Index, Côte 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 8 of 17  

     

d’Ivoire has risen from 122
nd

 to 106
th

 during 2012-2016): no other country monitored by the WEF has enjoyed 
such a drastic rank increase during the 2012-2016 period for the ‘ICT Environment sub-index’. 

12.  The major improvement of the international ranking of the ICT sector in Côte d’Ivoire is partly explained by 
several reforms lead by the five main institutions that drive and supervise the ICT sector – The Ministère de 
l’Economie Numérique et de la Poste (MENuP) is the Ministry in charge of the ICT and digital economy in Côte 
d’Ivoire, and the MENuP has revamped the telecom law in 2012.

20
 The legislation is now aligned with regional 

recommendations and covers major areas such as convergence, universal service, license and authorizations, 
relevant markets and market power, and consumer protection.

21
 The National Regulatory Authority (NRA) is 

the Autorité de Régulation des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (ARTCI),
22

 a fully-equipped NRA dealing 
with licensing, consumer protection, wholesale market regulation, and telecom spectrum management. The 
three main additional institutions are: (i) the Agence Nationale du Service Universel des Télécommunications 
(ANSUT) that ensures the implementation of universal service programs on behalf of the state and manage 
investment operations funded by the state in the field of ICT; the Agence Ivoirienne de Gestion des Fréquences 
radioélectriques (AIGF) focused on radio frequency management; and (iii) the Société Nationale de 
Développement Informatique (SNDI), a state-owned company under the supervision of the Prime Minister, in 
charge of Information Technology and Information System projects for the Government.

23
 

13. Although the ICT sector, and especially the mobile sector, is performing well in Côte d’Ivoire, it has mostly 
benefited the affluent urban and educated population – The ICT sector in Cote d’Ivoire has consistently 
expanded during the last few years; it generated a total revenue of 982.5 billion FCFA in 2013 (US$ 1.6 billion), 
contributed to 8% of the country’s GDP, and provided around 5,400 direct jobs and 100,000 indirect jobs.

24
 The 

recent performance of mobile service (voice and SMS) in Côte d’Ivoire has been buoyant, driven by a healthy 
competition among the three main mobile operators (Orange, MTN, and Moov). The mobile connection 
penetration (number of total SIM divided by total population) reached 113% at the end of 2015, compared to 
88% for West Africa region and 77% for Sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 1). Despite these robust mobile service 
performances an important share of the population is still offline. As of 2014, only 4% of interviewed 
individuals stated that they have an internet access at home compared to an average of 12% for SSA (Gallup 
survey). The World Bank indicator ‘Internet users’ (percentage of the population that have used the internet – 
from any location and with any type of device – during the last 12 months) show that only 21% of the 
population of Cote d’Ivoire has accessed internet at least once during the previous 12 months in 2015, 
compared to an average of 22% for SSA and 29% for lower-middle-income countries (Figure 2). Moreover, the 
use of internet – mostly through mobile broadband, as fixed broadband connectivity is marginal – is 
concentrated in the most affluent, educated and urban population centers. 15% of the Cote d’Ivoire urban 
population uses internet on a weekly basis, but this rate drops to only 3% for the rural Cote d’Ivoire population 

                                            
20

 Until 2012 the main legislation covering the telecommunication sector was the Law No. 95-526 of 7 July 1995 (Code des Télécommunications); as 
this legislation was outdated, it was fully revamped by the Ordonnance n° 2012-293 of 21 march 2012. 

21
 Moreover, the Government has introduced a tax break for the ICT sector in August 2015 with a VAT exoneration and reduced custom duties for 
ICT and electronic equipment, and this measure should last until the end of 2018 (cf. Abidjan.net, Les prix des ordinateurs, tablettes, téléphones 
portables vont baisser en Côte d’Ivoire, November 2015). 

22
 The ARTCI was created in 2013 by merging two institutions, the previous Agence des Télécommunications de Cote d’Ivoire (ATCI) – in charge inter 
alia of telecom spectrum management, licensing, and wholesale pricing – and the Conseil des Télécommunications de Côte d’Ivoire (CTCI) – in 
charge inter alia of monitoring the market competition dynamics, ensuring the compliance with the license obligations, and solving litigations. 

23
 In 2011, the Government adopted the e-GOUV scheme, which consists of two major axes – e-Administration and e-Services. The SNDI is working 
to implement ICT solutions in all government activities, including finance, health care, and education, with the goal of providing, by the year 
2020, all government services available online in developed countries (cf. IDAL, ICT Ivory Coast market, 2015, p.6). 

24
 Cf. Journal du Net, Les TIC en Côte d’Ivoire, December 2014 ; BizTech Africa, Ivory Coast moves to close digital divide, February 2015. 

http://news.abidjan.net/h/574080.html
http://news.abidjan.net/h/574080.html
https://investinlebanon.gov.lb/Content/uploads/ICT_Ivory_Coast_Market_2015.pdf
http://www.journaldunet.com/ebusiness/expert/59377/les-tic-en-cote-d-ivoire---un-levier-de-developpement-pour-un-pays-en-pleine-reconstruction.shtml
http://www.biztechafrica.com/article/ivory-coast-moves-close-digital-divide/9770/


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 9 of 17  

     

(Figure 3). In a similar fashion, only 1% of those having achieved at most primary education level use internet 
on a weekly basis compared to 19% for those having reached at least a secondary education level (Figure 4). 

Figure 1: Evolution of mobile penetration (combined 2G and 3G, % 
population, 2010-2015) 

 

Figure 2: % of internet users (with averages for income grouping of 
countries, 2006-2015) 

 
Data Source: GSMA Intelligence, World Bank Development Indicators. 

Figure 3: % of weekly internet use amongst rural vs. urban 
population (2014) 

 

Figure 4: % of weekly internet use amongst different education level 
(2014) 

 
Data Source: Gallup, Africa Online – Media Use in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015. 

14. On the supply side, there are significant mobile coverage gaps for rural areas – The regulator ARTCI has 
identified that 48% of the 8,518 localities (localités) in Côte d’Ivoire were not covered by any mobile service; 
the uncovered localities represent 23% of the total population. Mobile operators have confirmed that they 
reached their profitability frontier and that extending their coverage would not be sufficiently profitable at this 
stage due to: (i) the lower population density in rural areas which increases the Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) per 
subscriber; and (ii) the lower purchasing power of subscribers which drives down the Average Revenue Per 
User (ARPU). Mobile broadband coverage with 3G is even worse, with coverage maps showing vast swaths 
without any coverage (. To counter this market failure, the ANSUT is currently deploying a national 7,000 km 
long fibre backbone to cover rural areas, and ARTCI is elaborating a “white zone” program to increase rural 
coverage. However, this will be insufficient to achieve mobile broadband coverage for all as the number of 
mobile sites should be at least tripled: each operator has deployed between 1,600 and 2,000 mobile sites in 
Côte d’Ivoire, a relatively low number compared to European countries that achieved acceptable level of 
coverage and services (in Romania, a country that is 30% smaller in area and with a similar population size, the 
regulator calculated that 6,000 sites were required to cover 99% of the population). 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 10 of 17  

     

 

Figure 5: 2G coverage by département (% pop., 2016) 

 

Figure 6: 3G coverage by département (% pop., 2016) 

 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, based on ARTCI data and base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

15. The proposed project is designed to contribute to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 
poverty and boosting shared prosperity – The project will help the country achieve the twin objectives through 
promoting agricultural growth which is inclusive of smallholder farmers. The proposed project is consistent 
with the Bank’s CPF (FY16-FY19), and especially with ‘Focus Area One: Accelerating sustainable private sector‐
led growth’ which comprises four objectives that the project will directly or indirectly support. 

16. The e-agriculture project will directly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) agriculture and (ii) 
infrastructure – (i) The project will contribute to ‘Objective #1: Improve Productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness 
Value Chains’. Unpredictable weather patterns, unreliable pricing information and crop failure due to diseases 
are a few of the issues that digital services could tackle in Côte d’Ivoire. The project will directly support the 
objective of improving productivity by promoting digital solutions that will: (a) empower smallholder farmers to 
access information and markets, leading to increase in productivity and sales, and reduction in post-harvest 
loss; and (b) enable public institutions to collect and gather agricultural and rural statistics to drive public policy 
and strategy. (ii) The project will also contribute to ‘Objective #2: Strengthen Economic Infrastructure’. By 
extending ICT connectivity in rural areas, the project will directly enhance digital infrastructure and provide 
workarounds to inadequate logistics services. This will positively impact rural agriculture and economy by 
enabling easier access to consumer markets at competitive costs. 

https://data.humdata.org/dataset/cote-d-ivoire-administrative-boundaries


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 11 of 17  

     

17. The project will also indirectly contribute to two objectives of the CPF regarding (i) business environment and 
(ii) access to land – (i) ‘Objective #3: Improve Business Regulatory Framework and Access to Finance’ will be 
supported by extending the reach of ICT connectivity and facilitating the digitization of economic transactions. 
The spreading of ICT will support both: (a) the increase in mobile banking usage; and (b) the promotion of 
private sector growth with the ability for smallholders to get a credit with traditional banks thanks to a track 
record on which their financial performance can be assessed. (ii) ‘Objective #4: Formalize and Enhance 
Regulatory Access to Land for Business and Agriculture’ will also be supported thanks to the development of ICT 
platforms providing cheap and reliable tools to register land and deliver land certificates. Enhancing the 
registering process of land is fundamental to improve land security and support informed land transactions for 
both smallholders and private investors, and are a prerequisite for shared growth.  

18. The proposed project will leverage ongoing Bank operations in Côte d’Ivoire – The Bank has also been 
supporting the country’s agricultural strategy implementation through the sub-regional West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Program (WAAPP), which is being implemented in 13 countries of the Economic Community of 
West African States (ECOWAS). The development objective of the Program is to generate and accelerate the 
adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries’ top agricultural commodity priority areas that 
are aligned with the sub-region’s top agricultural commodity priorities, as outlined in the Economic Community 
of West Africa Agriculture Program (ECOWAP). Other development partners such as the International Fund for 
Agriculture Development (IFAD), FAO, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and others have been 
implementing similar projects in support of the sector strategy. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 
To improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and leverage electronic platforms to improve farm 
productivity and access to markets. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

19. The key results expected from the proposed project are: 

a. Coverage of ICT services is significantly increased in targeted areas, and ICT usage (voice, SMS, and internet 
access) is significantly increased in targeted areas for local public and administrative institutions, 
businesses, and population – including vulnerable population (women); 

b. Digital solutions for rural development are made available, with electronic platforms being operational and 
used by: (i) public administrative services in charge of monitoring and informing rural development policies; 
and (ii) end users such as smallholders. 

c. As a result of increased use of digital solutions, smallholders in targeted area benefit from an increase in: (i) 
yields of selected crops (volume of production per ha or per smallholder); (ii) volume of sales of selected 
crops; and (iii) the reduction in postharvest losses by selected producer organizations supported by the 
project. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 12 of 17  

     

20. The Project will assess the number of ‘beneficiaries’ with a breakdown between both individuals (disaggregated 
by gender) and establishments (disaggregated by central public administrations, local government and public 
administrations, and local businesses). The project will use the following PDO indicators: 

a. Number of beneficiaries accessing mobile communication services (voice and SMS); 

b. Number of beneficiaries accessing the internet; 

c. Share of production of target crops marketed by selected smallholders supported by the project; 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

21. To achieve the Project Development Objectives, the proposed project follows an integrated transformational 
solutions approach with three components: 

a. Component #1 ICT Infrastructure – Extending the coverage of ICT services in rural areas, and thereby 
improving the number of individuals, public administrations, and businesses that will be able to access both 
mobile services (voice and SMS) and the internet to improve productivity; 

b. Component #2 Digital services for rural development – Stimulating the development of digital services for 
rural development (with an emphasis on e-Agriculture), improving public service delivery in rural areas, and 
encouraging development of local content, applications, and services, through the setting up of electronic 
platforms and the creation of business incubators; 

c. Component #3 Project implementation – Project management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. 

22. Component 1 ICT Infrastructure – Component 1 will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing coverage of 
ICT services. The coverage increase will be done through a subsidy to investment in connectivity. Depending on 
the targeted region and community, the PPP model will be adjusted. Among the public subsidy options, and 
based on ad hoc economic analysis, the project will subsidize: (i) the rollout of a Radio Access Network (RAN) 
mobile infrastructure focused on passive elements (i.e., towers and energy solutions). The towers will be 
sufficiently dimensioned to ensure that all mobile operators in Côte d’Ivoire can use the passive RAN to install 
their own active elements (i.e. base stations and transmitters) to improve coverage of their network and 
provide voice, SMS, and data services to the offline population; and (ii) the rollout of backhaul segments. The 
fiber optic links will be deployed either through OPGW when available, or buried along roads to points closer to 
the targeted communities. The private operators will then deploy the last mile (e.g. RAN). Because this 
component implies the subsidy of an ICT infrastructure, the identification of target areas (where the passive 
RAN will be deployed) and project design (how they will be deployed) will comply with a set of criteria in line 
with international best practices to maximize “value for money” and support the overarching twin goals of 
shared prosperity and poverty elimination (cf. below Section B). 

23. Regions identified as priority for Component 1 through the selection criteria – Three districts have been 
identified by the client as priority for component 1: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) and the 
Bounkani Region (District of Bouna). These three district are particularly affected by low connectivity and 
productivity issues (see Figure 5 & Figure 6 above). 

24. Component 2 Digital services for rural development – Component 2 will contribute to achieving the PDO with 
two sub-components: 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 13 of 17  

     

a. Sub-component 2.1 – Help improve the performance of the rural development public institutions in Côte 
d’Ivoire in gathering relevant, detailed, and recent data to monitor the rural economy and assist in shaping 
public policy; 

Sub-component 2.2 –Provide digital solutions to smallholders for selected crops that will increase crop 
yields, increase volumes of sales, reduce post-harvest loss, and improve market linkages. To that effect, a 
comprehensive program of activities will be implemented under this component that will be geared at: (i) 
improving the outreach and quality of crop extension and advisory services by strengthening the skills of 
public extension workers, promoting ICT in agricultural extension services, and supporting farmer-to-
farmer extension; (ii) developing farmers’ skills to scale-up the dissemination of Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAPs); and (iii) fostering the emergence of a digital innovation ecosystem aimed at providing local content, 
applications, and services for rural development through the creation and leveraging of e-Government 
platforms. The project will specifically aim at incubators and local labs training young women in 
coding/programming, as well as entrepreneurship in general. 

25. Regions and value-chains identified as priority for Component 2 through the selection criteria – Value-chains 
identified by the Ministry of Agriculture as priorities (with an emphasize on staple food) for this component 
are: (a) maze, manioc, rice; (b) plantain, yam (igname); and (c) poultry. Taking into account the regions where 
these value-chains are predominant, the component will target the following districts and regions: regions 
already included in Component 1 – District of Denguélé, District des Savanes, and the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna) – plus the District of Sassandra-Marahoué, and the District of Gôh-Djiboua. These crops fall to a large 
extent under the informal agriculture sector. Producers and farmers for these crops are predominantly women.  

Figure 7: Regions identified as a priority for Component 1 & Component 2 

 
Map source: ICT Unit, base maps from United Nations OHCA-CI and CNTIG. 

 

26. Component #3 Project implementation – This Component will support the setting up of a dedicated Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) and will also cover training, office equipment, operating costs, audits and 

https://data.humdata.org/dataset/cote-d-ivoire-administrative-boundaries


 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 14 of 17  

     

communications as well as Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), environmental and social studies, their 
implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation. 

 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
In terms of infrastructure, the project will target exclusively the three Districts of the northern part of the country: 

District of Denguélé, District of Savanes, and District of Bouna. As part of component 1, the project will finance the 
construction of towers (passive infrastructure) and/or bury fiber optic links. In the case of fiber optic , the fiber will be 
buried along roads or railways, or installed on the ground cable of power lines. Therefore, the fiber optic infrastructure 
will be installed along existing infrastructure, with negligible impact on the environment and the population. Regarding 
the towers, some towers may be installed on private properties depending on the site and expected coverage. However, 
it is again expected that the installation of towers will have negligible impact on the environment, and minimal impact on 
the neighboring communities. Analysis will be carried out on a case by case basis. For the second component project will 
be implemented in the following areas: (i) District of Denguélé; (ii) District des Savanes; (iii) the Bounkani Region (District 
of Bouna); (iv) District of Sassandra-Marahoué; (v) and the District of Gôh-Djiboua 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank 

safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Sanitation, Environment, and 
Sustainable Development (MINSEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring 
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of 
Environment (ANDE, Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the 
country. The unit is well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. Based on the preliminary borrower assessment, the 
Agency (ANDE) has sustained resources to carry out the oversight of the safeguards performance during implementation. 
With regard to the PIU, capacity building efforts to support project implementation will be done by implementing 
recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared for the project. The project will also receive 
guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the Project team. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Abdoul Wahabi Seini, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Fatoumata Diallo, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes The project will fund the construction of towers, ICT 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 15 of 17  

     

infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic. 
These constructions may entail potential adverse 
impacts on the environmental components. However, 
as the exact locations of those activities are unknown 
to date, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be developed, reviewed, 
consulted upon and disclosed both within Cote 
d’Ivoire and at the World Bank’s Website prior to the 
Decision meeting. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project activities will not be implemented in areas 
hosting natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not support activities related to forest 
exploitation or management or might have potential 
adverse impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The project does not involve pest management 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as the construction of towers, ICT 
infrastructures and the deployment of fiber optic will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to discover Physical cultural resources. However, the 
triggering of this policy does not entail the preparation 
of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a specific 
chapter will be included in the ESMF to provide 
guidance in case physical cultural resources will be 
discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The Project location does not cover Indigenous 
Peoples as defined by the World bank 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

These planned interventions are not expected to lead 
to significant land acquisition or significant restriction 
of access to sources of livelihood. However, the 
implementation of the pools or antenna my lead to 
lands acquisition. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12  as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of envisioned physical 
investments are not known, The  Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be 
prepared by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by 
the team and disclosed in-country and at Bank 
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a 
guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition 
and loss of economic activities issues, as well as 
compensation measures to minimize negative impacts 
on Project Affected People (PAPs). 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 16 of 17  

     

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams, not rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a disputed area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 02, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: i) an Environmental and 

Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). All these safeguard documents 
will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and at the World 
Bank’s Website prior to the Decision Meeting. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Marc Jean Yves Lixi, Jean-Philippe Tre 

Senior Operations Officer 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Cote d'Ivoire 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Digital Economy and Post 

Henri Danon 

COORDONNATEUR PROGRAMME E-AGRICULTURE 

henri.danon@egouv.ci 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development (P160418) 

 
 

  
Mar 31, 2017 Page 17 of 17  

     

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Marc Jean Yves Lixi, Jean-Philippe Tre 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 06-Oct-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Boutheina Guermazi 15-Oct-2017 

Country Director: Pierre Frank Laporte 24-Oct-2017 
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 13

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20175

Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Congo, Democratic Republic 
of

Project ID: P159037

Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P092724

Project Name: DRC Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery AF (P159037)
Parent Project 
Name:

DRC - Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support (P092724)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

23-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): DRC Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

PARRSA PIU

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 75.00
Total Project Cost 75.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Decision Meeting granted a conditional authorization to proceed with 
appraisal subject to resolution of the outstanding safeguard issues and RVP 
approval of the exception waiver.

Is this a 
Repeater 

No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 13

project?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Between 2010 and 2014, the overall economy grew at 7.7 percent and the extractive industry 
grew at 25 percent , making the DRC one of Africa's fastest growing economies. Extractive 
industry exports account for about 95 percent of DRC➢❨ s exports.  While mining revenues have 
contributed to strong macroeconomic growth and poverty reduction, high export concentration 
exposes the country to exogenous shocks and instability .  The recent trends of falling world 
commodity prices, lower export revenues, and the associated slow-down in DRC➢❨ s mining 
sector have contributed to a tight fiscal environment. In this context, the government has placed 
significant priority to economic diversification and has identified the Agriculture sector, 
DRC➢❨ s second biggest sector- as a key sector for expanding its export base and buffering the 
economy against oil price shocks. 
 
Despite high rates of macroeconomic growth, poverty and malnutrition remains widespread in 
DRC.  The national poverty rate is 64 percent, with poverty rates only slightly higher in rural 
areas (65 percent) relative to urban areas (62 percent). Almost one quarter of children are 
underweight. In rural areas, deficiencies in food storage and market access create seasonal food 
shortages. In urban areas, import tariffs (commonly 10 percent) and low domestic production, 
thus requiring sizable food imports, result in food prices that are amongst the highest in Africa.  
About six million people are classified as food insecure in the country. 
 
Climate change will exacerbate droughts, floods, and other extreme weather events. Although the 
Congo basin seems to be less exposed than dryer parts of Africa, Congolese farmers are 
particularly poor and isolated, therefore vulnerable to climate impacts and other external shocks. 
 
In addition, DRC is undergoing a process of decentralization. Last year, the number of provinces 
officially grew from 11 to 26. Equateur Province, where PARRSA is located, has been sub-
divided into five new Provinces, three of them falling under the project area (Sud Ubangi, Nord 
Ubangi, and Mongala). Within the decentralization process, the provincial services of the 
ministries are being revitalized to better serve the rural population. However, some new provinces 
lack the structures and fiscal resources to function independently. Consequently there is a need for 
new investments, including agriculture investments, to make these new provinces more fiscally 
secure. 
 
Socio-Political System. Following the African Union led dialogue, the 2016 elections were 
postponed and a second more inclusive dialogue led by the Conference Episcopale Nationale du 
Congo (CENCO) is still underway but has already achieved an agreement for a new government 
of national unity and a commitment from the President to not run for a third term. Presidential 
elections are expected to be held in December 2017, but this date has been viewed as not credible. 
The majority of the provinces are under-resourced (human and financial) and ill equipped. As a 
result, the majority of the provinces have increased taxes in order to cover their operational costs. 
Democratic process in the DRC faces a myriad of challenges, including a legacy of exploitation 
and conflict, lack of physical and communications infrastructure, extreme poverty and continuing 
pockets of insecurity.  
 



Page 3 of 13

Governance system, conflict and institutional fragility. The factors blocking an economic 
development in the country include: (a) a crisis resulting from contested 2011 election results; (b) 
weak governance; and (c) the weakness of state institutions in implementing appropriate policies. 
As a result, the agricultural sector is operating in an environment of fragile socio-political context, 
low quality human capacity with an outdated skills base, an unattractive business environment, 
rent based economy with low agricultural productivity, dilapidated infrastructure and under 
developed service markets (agricultural inputs, logistics services, financial services). 
 
Enabling environment and tax burden. The macroeconomic indicators for the country have 
remained relatively stable with annual inflation stable at 1.6 percent over the past 5 years. Real 
interest rates have remained at about 17 percent. This is illustrative of a business enabling 
environment which is characterized by: (i) high import taxes; (ii) high sales taxes; (iii) unofficial 
taxes levied across road, rail, river and air transport; (iii) high port handling fees; (iii) unreliable 
electricity supply; (iv) corruption; (v) ➢❨ red tape➢❨  bureaucratic procedures that make it more 
costly to close a transaction or sell a product; and (vi) very high logistical hurdles and costs. In 
addition, the agricultural sector has outdated laws and regulations on seed, land, food quality and 
control. Because of poor transport infrastructure, it is much harder to reach markets and the net 
effect is reduced competitiveness of domestically produced products in local, national and 
regional markets. Under-developed input markets and fragmented value chains further reduce the 
competitiveness of locally produced commodities, but itpresents opportunities for private 
investors.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture currently accounts for about 20 percent of GDP and employs some 70-75 percent of 
the economically active population. Related agro-industries employ another 10 percent of the 
population. Jobs in agriculture tend to be informal, with low value added per worker (US$227/
year ), often providing only for subsistence. Agriculture and other sectors are hampered by the 
fact that DRC is recovering from more than 15 years of civil war, which has created serious 
infrastructure and institutional vacuums. The country faces systematic challenges in its business 
environment and enabling services such as rural connectivity, power infrastructure, and extension 
systems. Public spending is constrained by weak budgetary processes, inefficiencies, and poor 
coordination. 
 
The Government➢❨ s objective is to reduce rural poverty by 2020 by restoring and modernizing 
agricultural production systems, improving nutrition and food security, and mobilizing significant 
public and private sector investments. In recent years, agriculture has become a top priority for 
DRC Government as evidenced by the allocation of 8 percent of total budget in 2016 (up from 3 
percent) in line with the Africa Heads of State Maputo Declaration. The 2013 Programme 
National d➢❨ Investissements Agricoles (PNIA), with a total estimated cost of US$5.7 billion 
over seven years, builds upon five pillars: (i) fostering value chains and agribusiness; (ii) 
achieving food security; (iii) enhancing research, extension, and training; (iv) improving sector 
governance, gender participation and institutional capacity; and (v) adapting to climate change. In 
2014, the Government launched the agro industrial park strategy to boost agribusiness and 
agroindustry, and attract private investments in the sector. 
 
The proposed AF project is aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for DRC as it 
aims at contributing significantly to the Government➢❨ s efforts to alleviate extreme poverty and 
malnutrition (MDG1). It is also fully aligned with the fourth outcome of the CAS FY13-16, 



Page 4 of 13

addressing fragility through ➢❨ increased agriculture productivity and production and access to 
markets➢❨ . It is also consistent with major strategic initiatives for DRC, the Great Lakes region, 
and sub-Saharan Africa, including the second pillar (vulnerability and resilience) of the World 
Bank➢❨ s Africa Strategy and Africa Climate Business Plan. By supporting the development of 
agricultural value chains with strong economic potential, the proposed AF project is in line with 
the national strategy of DRC and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
(CAADP). 
 
Several policy documents govern the agriculture sector, including the National Agriculture 
Investment Plan (NAIP), the Agricultural Code, a new proposal for Integrated Rural Development 
Centers, and the Agro-industrial Action Plan. In practice, ownership of these policies at the 
provincial level ➢❨  and even occasionally at the central level ➢❨  is low.  There is weak 
coordination and harmonization across the different policies and implementing agencies, and 
human, technical, and financial capacity to implement agricultural strategies is poor. 
 
DRC➢❨ s green revolution will require a technological leapfrog combined with progress on 
cross-cutting infrastructure, institutional and business climate issues in order to facilitate private 
investment and access to markets. From an operational perspective, DRC➢❨ s green revolution 
would pursue a two-track approach: (i) enabling traditional small-scale farmers to transition from 
subsistence farming to small holder commercial farming ; and (ii) promoting private investment 
in commercial agriculture using modern technologies geared toward mechanized farming and 
agro-processing for domestic and regional markets. 
 
DRC➢❨ s agro-industrial action plan (2015) proposes to privatize several government-owned 
farms, establish agro-industrial parks across all provinces, and has identified 60 abandoned   
farms for development. A focus on large commercial farms has the advantage of tackling many 
constraints simultaneously to promote faster growth in a challenging environment, albeit in a 
limited geographical area. Concentrating resources and political will in specific commercial zones 
can also serve to demonstrate the benefits of specific policy interventions, so that these could be 
scaled up.  Furthermore, incorporating smallholders into agro-industrial revitalization schemes 
will be critical for promoting peace, stability, and inclusive growth.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and improve 
marketing of crops, and animal products by smallholder farmers in targeted areas.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
To increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products crops 
and animal products in targeted areas.

Key Results 

D.  Project Description

The proposed Additional Financing will provide additional resources to reinforce the basic 
production capacity (staple crops and livestock) of smallholder farmers in three provinces to 



Page 5 of 13

ensure food and nutrition security, relaunch the perennial crops production and embark on 
commercial farming by selling surplus production on local markets. The AF will support the re-
emergence of a sustainable mixed farming system which is prevalent in the project areas. It will 
also revamp the extension and advisory services in the project areas giving a more prominent role 
to government institutions and involving the private sector. The AF will also assist the 
Government in setting up a sustainable feeder roads maintenance program and strengthening 
agriculture research and development. The AF will introduce information and communication 
technologies at different levels of the activities to enable mobile banking, remote sensing and 
other innovations to the beneficiaries. It will also expand a demand driven matching grant facility 
and combine it with free technical assistance so different actors can fully participate in the project 
activities. Finally the proposed AF also aims to promote climate adaptation (new technologies and 
management practices) and build community resilience (micro projects storage facilities, 
warehouses, processing centers, nurseries etc.). A partnership with the Central African Forest 
Initiative (CAFI) Fund is to be confirmed. The potential CAFI financing in the amount of US
$3.64 million as a grant would help enhance the environment benefits of the subprojects and 
increase the project efforts to reduce or mitigate deforestation and forest degradation.

Component Name
Component 1: Improving agricultural and animal production
Comments (optional)
Component 1 will consolidate and further develop the activities undertaken under the parent 
project which sought to increase the capacity of smallholder farmers in targeted areas to produce 
staple crops and small stock including chicken. The scope will be broadened to include the two 
additional territories and perennial crops like coffee and cocoa. The AF will support the private 
sector or small private enterprises interested in investing in commercial crops.  Cross-cutting 
issues such as nutrition, gender, climate smart agriculture, and employment will be fully 
embedded into the AF activities..

Component Name
Component 2: Improving marketing infrastructure
Comments (optional)
Component 2 aims to continue with the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads and 
construction of key local markets and storage facilities across the three provinces with a focus on 
building capacity at local and provincial levels to ensure that all infrastructure investments are 
maintained and sustainable.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development, and project management
Comments (optional)
Component 3 will support the government efforts to: (i) re-engineer the national agriculture 
extension and advisory services so it is responsive and inclusive (non-governmental 
organizations, private sector and producer organizations as advisory service providers); (ii) 
strengthen the planning, coordination and monitoring and evaluation capacity at national and 
provincial levels (statistics and georeferenced data system); and (iii) strengthen the agricultural 
research and development for efficiency and effectiveness gains in their service delivery and 
conduct a skills needs assessment in the areas of agribusiness and agronomy; (iv) introduce 



Page 6 of 13

landscape management planning at local and provincial levels to support climate adaptation and 
community resilience; and (v) manage the project.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The Additional Financing will be implemented in South Ubangi, North Ubangi, Mongala and 
Kinshasa.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Antoine V. Lema (GSU05)
Claude Lina Lobo (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSU01)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The same structure that governed the implementation of the parent project will remain, with a 
National Project Implementation Coordination Unit in Kinshasa and three Project Implementation 
units at provincial level, one per each newly created province. The delegated management contractor 
will be responsible for implementing the infrastructure component with an extension of UNOPS 
contract. For each province, a provincial coordination monitoring committee will be established to 
oversee the project's planning process and implementation.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Project activities will generate impacts on environment, 
especially the ones relating to the rehabilitation and 
maintenance of feeder roads and construction of key local 
markets. In addition to this, the ongoing operation intends to 
fund sub-projects such as storage facilities, warehouses, 
processing centers, nurseries, etc. These activities will 
unquestionably induce adverse impacts on environmental 
components. However, adverse impacts are expected to be 
moderate, site specific and easily manageable. Besides, the 
exact locations of these investments are unknown to date. 
Consequently, an Environmental and social Assessment 
Framework (ESMF) which is the proper safeguard instrument 
in such a case has been prepared, reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in DRC on January 13, 2017 and at the 
Infoshop on January 17, 2017.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy is triggered in the preventive way because of the 
potential of the project to cause loss or degradation of natural 
habitats, whether directly or indirectly. This policy is also 
triggered to draw attention when activities may be undertaken 



Page 7 of 13

near Natural habitats, with the possibility to impact them. The 
ESMF was prepared in line with the OP/BP4.01 includes a 
section handling this matter.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The policy on Forests is triggered preventively as the project 
will be implemented in forested areas with the possibility of 
impact on the natural or plantation forests, and/or can bring 
some changes in management or protection of these forests. 
This is to avoid any significant conversion (loss) or 
degradation. This concern was taken in account in the ESMF.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Activities in the component 1 aims to improve agricultural and 
animal production where the main focus will be on improved 
access to fertilizers, pesticides, veterinary drugs and access to 
high quality and affordable agro-veterinary services. 
Consequently an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
about the safe use of agricultural pesticides and a promotion of 
the use of biological or environmental control methods was 
developed as a separate document. This safeguard tool has 
been reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed within DRC and 
at the Infoshop respectively on January 13 and January 17, 
2017.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

Yes In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the precautions 
have been taken to protect and safeguard physical cultural 
resources, a section addressing these concerns was included in 
the ESMF.  This is because activities related to the 
rehabilitation and the maintenance of feeder roads and other 
infrastructure works will induce excavations with potential 
discoveries of physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes As the project is focusing mainly on rural areas, and as there 
are Indigenous People in the project area, the Indigenous 
People Policy Framework (IPPF) of the parent project has been 
updated. Once the project site is clearly identified, the project 
will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes This policy is triggered because of the potential restriction of 
access to assets or sources of livelihood as a result of the 
proposed project activities. Since the exact geographic 
coverage of proposed activities is still to be determined, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project 
has been updated by the Borrower for the project to clearly 
outline the basic principles and guidelines for mitigating any 
potential impact that may require compensation in the event of 
land acquisition and in some cases involuntary resettlement in 
the broad sense.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No The project will not finance dam works or activities associated 
to existing dams.

Projects on 
International 

Yes Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is triggered 
because of planned irrigation activities. An exception to the 



Page 8 of 13

Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Riparian Notification Requirement under OP 7.50 (Projects on 
International Waterways) was approved by the RVP on 
December 15, 2016. Due diligence was also completed under 
the parent project and an exception to the Riparian Notification 
Requirement was approved by the RVP on Oct 27, 2009..

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will support activities related to the rehabilitation and the maintenance 
of feeder roads, the construction of key local markets, storage facilities, warehouses, processing 
centers, nurseries, etc. These civil works will unquestionably induce environmental and social 
adverse impacts in terms of trees cutting, dust, noise, waste management, and security and health 
issues both for populations and for employees. However, most of adverse impacts associated with 
these investments will likely be site-specific, so manageable at an acceptable level.  
In addition, those civil works will take place in forested areas. Potential adverse impacts could 
occur on forests and natural resources. The civil works could also induce impacts on Physical 
cultural resources.  
 
On social level, the rehabilitation/maintenance of feeder roads and the construction of local 
markets as well as warehouses may induce the displacement of populations. In addition, 
Indigenous people are present within areas where some civil works will be undertaken with the 
possibility to some adverse impacts on them.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
Anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project would result mainly from 
civil works associated with rural roads rehabilitation, but also from increase and intensified crop 
production. The consequence would be change in routine activities, use of fertilizers and 
pesticides, generation of solid and liquid waste, acquisition/taking of private land. In addition, the 
potential use of quarry materials for consolidation of rural roads could also be sources of negative 
impacts on both the natural and physical environment, which will require restoration actions after 
use.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project remains EA category B and triggers eight safeguards policies which are OP/BP 4.01; 
OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP4.36; OP4.09; OP/BP4.11, OP/BP7.50; OP/BP4.10 and OP/PB 4.12.   
 
Considering that the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions are not yet 
determined with certainty, the Borrower updated four environmental and social safeguards 
instruments, namely an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a 



Page 9 of 13

Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) and a 
Pest Management Plan (PMP) in compliance with the core requirements of the triggered 
safeguards policies : OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/
BP.4.10 (Indigenous People) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  The ESMF has also 
made provision to address basic requirements from both OP/BP 4.36 (forestry) and OP/BP 4.04 
(Natural Habitats). Both the ESMF and the PMP were reviewed and cleared by the Bank and the 
Government and disclosed both in-country on January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on January 
17, 2017. The RPF and the IPPF was were also reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed 
both in-country on  January 13, 2017 and at the InfoShop on  January 17, 2017. 
 
During the parent project implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure 
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. Consequently, many ESIA, RAP and 
IPPs have been prepared, disclosed and implemented as guidance/guidelines prior to activities 
implementation. As the parent project, the ongoing AF will follow the same process regarding the 
safeguard aspects.  
 
There is a recently recruited safeguards specialist in the PIU, who is familiar with project activities 
in the parent project, he has also been implicated in the preparation stage. For Component 2, the 
Contractor (UNOPS) has equally recruited a safeguards specialist, as well as the Netherlands 
Development Organization (Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers/SNV) that implemented the IPP 
of the parent project, also has a safeguards specialist in the team. To supervise the implementation 
of social measures, it is recommended that the project recruit a social expert. 
All the environmental and social safeguard specialists involved in the team will ensure that all the 
sub-projects to be financed under the AF are in full compliance with Bank safeguards policies and 
in line with the national regulatory framework. Furthermore, the National Agency in charge of 
environmental impact assessment and safeguards monitoring (Agence Congolaise de 
l➢❨ Environnementale-ACE) is also involved in the environmental and social aspects monitoring.  
 
Lastly, the safeguards specialists at the World Bank, part of the project team, will ensure that all 
the project staff are trained on safeguards on the one hand and will be part on supervision missions 
on the other hand with the aim to make sure safeguards aspects are properly handled.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary communities, Ministries in charge of Agriculture, 
fisheries and livestock, rural development, transport, Environment and sustainable development 
(and their relevant agencies/departments), municipalities, NGOs and other relevant institutions. 
 
One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant 
stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project implementation. The 
environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF, IPMP. IPPF and RPF, were also 
carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, 
involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities 
and impacts and foster ownership on their part. All the relevant bodies have been adequately 
informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have been 
taken into account in the body of the different reports and other results provided as Annexes. The 
key concerns raised during the consultation process included: (i) permanent information and 
sensitization of the population, (ii) compensation process for those impacted by the project, (iii) 
participation of local population as employee on works they qualify for, (iv) the involvement of 



Page 10 of 13

NGOs and state technical services during the execution of works. All these concerns have been 
addressed in the alternatives proposed through the developed safeguards instruments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 28-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 22-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 27-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 20-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 17-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Congo, Democratic Republic of 13-Jan-2017
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



Page 11 of 13

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural 
property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework 
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected 
Indigenous Peoples?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design 
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit or Practice Manager?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]



Page 12 of 13

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to 
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of 
livelihoods) 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints been carried out?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, 
does it include provisions for certification system?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Nora Kaoues



Page 13 of 13

Title: Senior Agriculture Economist

Contact: Amadou Oumar Ba
Title: Sr Agricultural Spec.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: DRC Ministry of Finance
Contact: Mr Tshiyoyo Honore
Title: Conseiller du Ministre des Finances et Corodonnateur de la C
Email: tshiyoyohonore@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies
Name: PARRSA PIU
Contact: Alfred Kibangula
Title: National Project Coordinator
Email: a.kibangula@yahoo.fr

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nora Kaoues,Amadou Oumar Ba
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA) Date: 24-Jan-2017
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR) Date: 24-Jan-2017

Country Director: Name: Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye (CD) Date: 24-Jan-2017

















































World Bank Document


 

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.: 110552  

Project Name Land Bank Financial Intermediation Loan (P150008) 

Region AFRICA 

Country South Africa 

Sector(s) General finance sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (20%), SME Finance (50%) 

Theme(s) Rural markets (50%), Other Financial Sector Development (50%) 

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing 

Project ID P150008 

Borrower(s) Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

Implementing Agency Land Bank 

Environmental Category F-Financial Intermediary Assessment 

Date PID Prepared/Updated 12-October-2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

23-January-2017 

Appraisal Review Decision 

(from Decision Note) 
 

Other Decision  

I. Project Context 

 Country Context 

 

More than twenty years after the end of apartheid, unemployment, poverty and inequality remain 

important development challenges in South Africa, despite substantial progress in overcoming the 

legacy of the past. While total employment increased from 9 million in 1996 to 16 million in 2015, the 

unemployment rate has stayed stubbornly high in the range of 20-26 percent. In 2015 approximately 5.4 

million South Africans were unemployed, of which about 40 percent were new entrants.  A 30 percent 

increase in per capita GDP since the late 1990s and a sharp expansion of the social grant coverage 

enabled a significant decline in the poverty rate—from 43.5 percent of the population living below 

ZAR219 (inflation-adjusted) a month in 2000 to 36.7 percent (or 18.3 million people) living below R501 

in 2015. Nevertheless, pockets of poverty remain deeply entrenched, mostly among the historically 

disadvantaged population. With a relatively stagnant income Gini coefficient of around 0.69 in 2011 

(versus 0.72 in 2006) and expenditure Gini of 0.634 in 2015 (versus 0.67 in 2006), South Africa has one 

of the highest inequality rates in the world. Land distribution, in particular, is one of the most unequal in 

the world. Threatening progress in poverty alleviation is the impact of the drought on agriculture and the 

widening gap between those with and without jobs. 

Recent developments in economic activity are not indicative of major improvements in growth or 

employment. South Africa’s annual GDP is estimated to have increased by 1.3 percent in 2015, 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



compared to 1.5 percent in 2014 and 2.2 percent in 2013, a result of depressed global conditions, as well 

as labor unrest and electricity shortages which compounded structural constraints. This weak growth is 

well-below the projected 5 percent growth needed to drive down unemployment. Inflation was relatively 

subdued in 2015 amid lower food and fuel prices (5.2 percent as of December 2015, up from 4.8 percent 

in November). However the Reserve Bank increased the repurchase rate by a total of 125 basis points 

from start 2015 to end March 2016 due to a deterioration of the inflation outlook as a result of the effects 

from rising food prices due to the drought, the risk of a higher pass-through from the sharp depreciation 

of the rand (depreciated by more than 30 percent against the dollar in 2015 and continued to weaken in 

January 2016, before showing a subsequent moderate recovery) and subdued global growth. 

A weaker growth environment will pose a challenge in the management of the fiscal deficit, which in 

turn increases the sovereign credit risk.  In an effort to mitigate sovereign credit risk, the National 

Budget Speech of February 2016 announced a strong fiscal adjustment effort, bringing the fiscal deficit 

from 3.9 percent of GDP for 2015/16 to 2.8 percent by 2017/18. The original target of the 2015 budget 

had been 2.5 percent, however deterioration in the growth outlook rendered the target unrealistic. In 

December 2015, Fitch and Standard and Poor’s (S&P) downgraded South Africa’s creditworthiness 

rating to BBB-, one notch above speculative grade, and S&P placed its rating on negative watch. The 

turmoil in markets experienced in December 2015 when a weakening in the government’s commitment 

to fiscal discipline was perceived, hints at the potential fallout from a further ratings downgrade.  

A substantial reduction in poverty and inequality will be hard to achieve without a major success in rural 

development. As stated by South Africa’s National Development Plan (NDP), the main challenge for 

rural development in South Africa is to “combat the marginalization of the poor”. While the rural share 

of poverty fell from 70 percent in 1993 to 58.3 percent in 2011, partly due to migration of the poor to 

townships and informal settlements around urban centers, rural areas remain characterized by greater 

poverty and inequality than urban areas.  The contraction in agricultural production at double-digit 

rates in the first three quarters of 2015, as extreme weather conditions related to El Nino led to the most 

severe drought in almost 20 years, pushed an estimated 50,000 South Africans into poverty. 

Agriculture development and successful land reform are key pillars of the strategy laid out by the NDP 

for integrated and inclusive rural development. South Africa’s agriculture sector is characterized by 

dualism: a modern, market-oriented capital intensive farming sector consisting of a small number of 

large commercial farms (around 40,000 farming units) and a large number of subsistence and 

small-scale or emerging farms, many in the former homeland areas. In addition, there is growing 

consolidation in the industry with a number of mergers taking place and the acquisition of smaller 

players. While improving economies of scale, this consolidation may also lead to lower competition in 

the market. Around 2006, over 80 percent of South African farmers worked on a piece of land of one 

hectare or smaller, and another 11 percent on one to five hectares. Only 3 percent had access to land of 

larger than 20 hectares. It is estimated that there are 2.5 – 3.5 million households engaged in subsistence 

farming, about 350,000 – 700,000 who can be classified as emerging farmers, producing part of their 

output for the market, and between 11,000 – 15,000 small to medium scale farmers who are 

commercially oriented. 

The progress of land reform has been slow and a large number of land reform beneficiaries are not using 

the land productively. The government committed itself to transfer 30 percent of the 82 million hectares 

of agricultural land owned by whites in 1994 to historically disadvantaged farmers by 2014, a total of 

24.5 million hectares, through both land restitution and land redistribution. According to the Twenty 

Year Review published by the Presidency, only 9.4 million hectares have been redistributed since 1994 

through both land restitution and redistribution. Achieving the objective of “productive use” of 

redistributed and restituted land requires even greater efforts and innovation. Land reform in South 

Africa to date has involved the transfer of relatively large commercial farms in their entirety to groups of 



beneficiaries. Land reform beneficiaries are typically resource-poor, risk-averse, and inexperienced 

historically disadvantaged farmers. Support provided to them after their takeover of the land, that is 

post-settlement support, has been inadequate. Land reform beneficiaries have experienced numerous 

problems accessing services, such as credit, training, technology extension, transport, plowing services, 

veterinary services, and marketing services. The well-developed agribusiness sector that services 

large-scale commercial agriculture has not been seen extending its operations to emerging farmers who, 

in most cases, would be cash-strapped and incapable of paying for such services anyway. As a 

consequence, there is limited integration of small farmers into the value chain.  

Support for small-scale farmers is equally crucial to job creation. Employment in the formal agriculture 

sector declined from 1.1 million in 1992 to 739,000 in 2014 despite output growth. Nevertheless, the 

NDP believes that with successful rural development and land reform the agriculture sector has the 

potential to create 1 million new jobs by 2030. The NDP counts on small-scale/ emerging farmers for 

over 35 percent of the job creation target, in addition to a 10 percent share from subsistence farmers, a 10 

percent share expected from better use of the land that has already been redistributed or restituted to land 

reform beneficiaries, and a 30 percent share from expansion of labor intensive commercial farming.   

 
 

Sectoral and institutional Context 

 

South Africa’s financial sector is the most developed in Sub-Saharan Africa and is significantly larger 

and more diversified compared to regional and income-group peers. It is supported by an elaborate legal 

and financial infrastructure and a generally effective regulatory framework. South Africa’s financial 

system totaled approximately ZAR 10 trillion in assets as of year-end 2014 (US$ equivalent of 1,026 

billion). As of end 2014, the banking sector constitutes almost 40 percent of the financial system assets, 

with pension funds and long-term insurers each contributing roughly 35 and 18 percent, respectively. 

The banking sector is highly concentrated, but at the same time commercially driven and professional. 

The ‘big four’ banks in South Africa, two of which are foreign owned, account for over 83 percent of 

total banking assets. This concentrated ownership structure has led to limited competition and distorted 

incentives for these banks to serve the lower end of the market, especially micro, small, and 

medium-sized enterprises and the low-income population. Nevertheless, the banking system generally is 

highly professional and commercially driven, and does not suffer from distortionary policies.   

Provision of agricultural finance and support  

One of the main challenges for rural and agriculture development is affordable access to working capital 

for emerging farmers and medium to long-term finance for small and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises. While the financial services needs of the large commercial farms are generally well catered 

for by the private sector, farmers in rural areas experience many of the challenges faced by their peers in 

other African countries, ranging from difficulties in accessing markets, poor infrastructure, and little or 

no physical assets that could be used as collateral for accessing financing. With few exceptions, 

emerging and small-scale farmers are unable to use the land that they farm on as collateral given that the 

state owns most of the land in the former homelands. FinScope’s 2010 Small Business Survey estimates 

that of the roughly 700,000 emerging and small commercial farmers, only 5.6 percent used formal credit 

services and only 2.5 percent from a bank. In contrast, nearly half of those farmers used formal savings 

and/ or payments services and about 30 percent formal insurance. 

Without adequate collateral, rural farmers face challenges in accessing credit from traditional 

commercial banks. While the ‘big four’ commercial banks have made efforts to become more inclusive, 

their business models and cost structure do not lend themselves to serving the agricultural sector. Some 



banks are funding value chain off-take agreements with large processors and retailers for on-lending to 

smaller farmers, but such lending is small compared to the overall loan book of commercial banks. 

According to the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF), total farming debt 

amounted to ZAR 116,576 million (US$10,137 million) in 2014, out of which ZAR 66,345 million 

(US$5,769 million) was from commercial banks and ZAR 30,580 million (US$2,659 million) from the 

Land Bank. Compared to total commercial bank loans and advances of ZAR 2,967 billion (US$258 

billion), agricultural lending amounts to about 1 percent of their total loan book. 

A wide range of programs have been implemented by the government to provide financial support to 

land reform beneficiaries and small-scale farmers. In 1994 the government introduced the 

Settlement/Land Acquisition Grant (SLAG) to enable individuals and groups to finance the purchase of 

land from a willing seller. Until 2000, redistribution policy centered on the provision of a grant of ZAR 

16,000 (~US$1,034) to qualifying households with an income of less than ZAR 1,500 (~US$97) a 

month. In 2001 the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) Grant was introduced to 

establish and promote emerging farmers. LRAD offered higher grants, paid to individuals rather than to 

households, and made greater use of loan financing through institutions such as Land Bank to 

supplement the grant. A few years later, the slow pace of land reform led to the introduction of the 

Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy (PLAS) in 2005-06. The use of grants for land acquisition was 

discontinued and the focus was shifted to the acquisition of strategically located land through PLAS by 

the state. Since its inception, PLAS has become the biggest single program area within redistribution, in 

terms of both budget and land area. 

There are also initiatives designed to provide post-settlement support to land reform beneficiaries. The 

LRAD policy for example sets out to close the post-settlement support gap that prevailed under SLAG. 

In addition, the Comprehensive Farmer Support Program (CFSP) provides two grants, one for capacity 

building and one for on-farm infrastructure. In order to access on-farm infrastructure grants ranging 

from a minimum of ZAR 5,000 to a maximum of ZAR 100,000 (~ US$323 to 6,462), beneficiaries must 

make an ‘own contribution’ along a sliding scale similar to that of the LRAD grant program. It is a 

once-off support package designed for LRAD beneficiaries. The Comprehensive Agricultural Support 

Program (CASP) supported by DAFF offers grants to support short-term operating expenses and small 

operating needs such as machinery. These grants are managed at the provincial level and come from 

funds that are transferred from the national to the provincial level. Combined land acquisition grants, 

both for redistribution and restitution, totaled ZAR 13.6 billion (US$1.61 billion) between 2008 and 

2012 while grants for movable equipment and fixed improvements amounted to ZAR 3.4 billion 

(US$1.58 billion) between 2004 and 2012 (DAFF). Borrowing for working capital needs to operate and 

expand farms has been one of the most acute challenges for emerging and small farmers as well as land 

reform beneficiaries due to the reasons mentioned above.  

Value chain integration is an opportunity to address significant skills and financing gaps of emerging 

farmers. In South Africa, there is a growing recognition in government and the private sector that value 

chain integration may be an effective way of building up a new class of commercial emerging farmers. 

Drawing on the successful experiences in the sugar, poultry, cotton, tobacco and forestry sectors, the 

government and private sector are joining forces to scale up efforts in these and other sectors. A new 

area opening for value chain integration is in the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables to retail 

supermarkets. With new BBBEE procurement policies government is encouraging the private sector to 

get involved. For example, Walmart-Massmart has established a supplier fund to support emerging 

farmer integration into their supply chain. The South African Poultry Association through the creation 

of the Developing Poultry Farmers Organization (DPFO) facilitates technical and financial assistance to 

access contracts with egg and poultry businesses. 



Land Bank 

In addition to government grants, financing from Land Bank has been expected to play a critical role in 

land reform and agriculture development. Land Bank was established in 1912 and is governed by the 

Land and Agricultural Development Bank Act of 2002. Land Bank was given a mandate of 11 aspects, 

which fall into five broader areas: (i) access of the historically disadvantaged population to land; (ii) 

agriculture productivity, growth and job creation; (iii) gender equity; (iv) environmental sustainability; 

and (v) food security. The NDP published in 2011 continues to call for a key role of Land Bank in 

providing financial support to land reform beneficiaries and to help them overcome difficulties in entry 

into commercial farming. 

As the leading development financial institution in the rural and agriculture sector in South Africa, Land 

Bank had an approximately 29 percent market share in agricultural financing as of July 2015. The bank 

has achieved a significant turnaround during the past five years. It is now on a sustainable trajectory with 

profits of ZAR 420 million in 2014/15 (up 61 percent from 2013/14), and a Return on Average Assets of 

1.12 percent and a Return on Average Equity of 6.78 percent. Total assets stood at ZAR 39.4 billion in 

2014/15 with a performing loan book of ZAR 36 billion. Non-performing loans (NPLs) under Land 

Bank methodology were at 3.72 percent in 2014/15 and the cost-to-income ratio was 54.9 percent. Fitch 

Ratings upgraded Land Bank from AA to AA+ in January 2014. The rating was maintained at AA+ in 

December 2015. The bank does not take general deposits and funds itself mainly through the debt and 

capital markets, issuing instruments such as promissory notes.  

Land Bank is fully owned by the South African government and supervised by the National Treasury. It 

follows prudential guidelines as issued by its Board of Directors. It is consequently not prudentially 

supervised by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The bank is audited by the Auditor General. 

Land Bank is engaged in both wholesale lending through intermediaries as well as direct lending. 

Intermediaries are mainly credit providers, cooperatives, or agri-businesses.  

In 2015, Land Bank adopted a new strategy following the completion of its organizational review. The 

review was undertaken following conditions set by NT pursuant to the issue of a Government guarantee, 

aimed at enabling the Land Bank to raise longer term funding. The review was completed in August 

2015 and subsequently an implementation plan was approved by the Land Bank Board. Land Bank has 

started implementing the new strategy and key changes are planned to be put in place over a two-year 

period in line with the priorities of Land Bank. The changes focus on: (i) a strategy to optimize the retail 

commercial banking segment of Land Bank, the long term viability of which was a concern owing to 

loan losses and significant operational costs; (ii) new initiatives to potentially expand the development 

portfolio of Land Bank for emerging farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner by 

adopting a project finance approach in partnership with large corporates and intermediaries to integrate 

the emerging farmers into established value chains; and (iii) steps to align Land Bank financial 

soundness indicators, credit appraisal processes and risk management practices with international 

banking standards.  

Following the adoption of this new strategy, Land Bank has two main business lines: Corporate Banking 

(CB) and Commercial Development Banking (CDB). The new CDB business line is a combination of 

previous Retail Emerging Markets (REM) and Retail Commercial Banking (RCB) business lines. In 

2014/15, CB accounted for 83.6 percent of the bank’s loan book and CDB accounted for 16.4 percent, of 

which 1.3 percent was composed of loans provided under REM. 

Under CDB, the REM sub-business line continues to focus exclusively on lending to emerging farmers 

for development purposes. Farmers supported under REM typically have no or limited access to 

commercial funding and little or no collateral, but can be commercially sustainable and viable with 



financing and technical support. Subsistence farmers are not supported under REM. Lending is based on 

cash-flows and non-financial support (end to end on-farm support) is provided by Land Bank 

intermediaries and agricultural specialists based in Land Bank branches. REM uses wholesale as well as 

direct lending and offers production financing, installment sale finance, and medium-term loans. The 

total REM portfolio amounted to ZAR 489 million in 2014/15 (increase of ZAR 97 million in that year).  

Intensive and high-quality extensions services under the REM program are effectively provided by Land 

Bank’s intermediaries. These intermediaries have a comparative advantage in providing these services 

due to their close interaction with the beneficiaries. The non-financial complementary services, 

especially extension services, are critical for emerging farmers to develop. The costs for the extension 

services are embedded in the overall cost structure under REM and are borne by the intermediaries. 

While the provision of extension services is costly, especially for new emerging farmers, intermediaries 

can generate profits from these clients over time due to the long-run and comprehensive nature of 

engagement between intermediaries and their clients. The current model of providing extension services 

is considered to be of high quality according to the assessment carried out during project preparation. 

Under CDB, the RCB business line which was exclusively focused on direct retail lending to medium 

scale farmers, through 27 Agriculture Finance Centers (AFCs), has been significantly restructured to 

improve its long term sustainability. RCB was loss-making due to high operating costs of the large 

branch network and had NPLs of 11 percent in 2014/15. RCB was losing clients to commercial banks 

and agricultural enterprises who started to lend in that space and could offer a wider range of products. 

The competitiveness and long-term viability of RCB was therefore questionable. The new strategy aims 

at consolidating the branch network into 9 provincial offices in strategically important geographical 

locations which will also result in significant staff reduction. Importantly, the consolidated branch 

network’s role will specifically focus on facilitating effective partnerships in their respective regions 

with corporate retailers, emerging farmers, government programs, as well as technical and financial 

intermediaries to leverage on high impact and high value chain finance deals. 

Importantly, as part of the new strategy, Land Bank aims to scale up financing support to emerging 

farmers in a sustainable and commercially viable manner through their integration in established value 

chains. The approach is anchored in identifying high-potential value chain projects in a given 

geographic region and securing buy-in from large agriculture corporates or technical partners to assist in 

supporting emerging farmers’ integration into the chain. The agriculture corporates will provide 

technical support (directly or indirectly) to the emerging farmers, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. Land Bank has identified selected potential value chain projects and 

agriculture corporates to partner with in the grains, winery, horticulture and livestock sectors for this 

type of financing. 

The CB business line is the corporate part of the bank and the most viable business line. The CB 

business line involves both direct and wholesale lending. Lending takes place primarily through 

intermediaries (cooperatives and agri-businesses). CB operates through two offices in Pretoria and Cape 

Town. The total portfolio of CB amounted to ZAR 31 billion in 2014/15. While CB targets commercial 

farmers, the workers employed on these farm tend to be part of the low-income population.  

Land Bank aims at increasing its developmental focus in both CB and CDB business lines by 

strengthening its wholesale business as well as its direct lending to emerging farmers. Both business 

lines contain a development portfolio with “development” referring to a focus on supporting the 

historically disadvantaged population in line with Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment 

(BBBEE). International experience with development banks suggests that wholesale lending is more 

likely to be successful than retail lending. The key reason is that wholesale lending does not require a 

large branch network which is costly to build and maintain but rather leverages the networks already 



built by other financial service providers. Wholesale lending is also more market enabling and does not 

aim at competing with the private sector.  Direct lending via value chain financing leverages the 

corporate partner’s ability to provide technical support to the borrower, building up their capacity to be 

sustainable suppliers to the chain. As such, emerging farmers in this scheme have the potential to 

increase their revenues and thus a greater likelihood of fulfilling debt obligations to the bank. The 

project will therefore focus on supporting Land Bank in scaling up its wholesale portfolio as well as 

expanding direct lending through LB’s new approach of integrating emerging farmers into established 

value chains. Using long-term financing to fill existing funding gaps will additionally help Land Bank 

meet its investment needs as well as improve its asset liability management.  

Land Bank is making an important contribution to job creation. Land Bank estimates that the impact of 

its loan disbursements on employment opportunities in South Africa was close to 400,000 in 2013-2014. 

This estimate is comprised of over 23,000 new employment opportunities generated and over 370,000 

jobs maintained during the year. One employment opportunity constitutes 240 days worked per year. 

The estimated new jobs created are arising out of the medium and long-term loans Land Bank is 

providing.  

II. Project Development Objective(s) 

 
The project’s development objective is to sustainably scale up Land Bank’s financing, specifically to 

benefit emerging farmers. 

III. Project Description 

 Component Name 

 Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing 

 Comments (optional) 

 

Land Bank will provide both wholesale finance to participating PFIs for on-lending to commercial 

and emerging farmers and direct financing, in partnership with large agriculture corporates, to 

emerging farmers to support their integration in established value chains. It will do so through two 

main financing windows 

Window 1: Wholesale finance to commercial and emerging farmers. This window will provide a 

wholesale line of credit to Land Bank. Land Bank will on-lend the funds to participating financial 

intermediaries (PFIs) which comply with eligibility criteria agreed with the World Bank. The PFIs 

will on-lend funds to eligible agriculture enterprises, commercial and emerging farmers, communal 

property associations and other eligible borrowers supported under the Land Bank’s CB and CDB 

business lines. Currently, the wholesale line under CDB primarily includes the REM portfolio, 

however, over the life of the project this may change to include other wholesale loans under CDB. 

Window 2: Financing to integrate emerging farmers into established value chains. This window will 

provide a line of credit to Land Bank to finance direct lending to emerging farmers for integrated value 

chain finance. For direct lending to value chain finance/development projects, Land Bank will finance 

eligible emerging farmers and agriculture enterprises in collaboration with large agriculture 

corporates and/or technical partners in a targeted value chain. 

. 

IV. Financing (in USD Million) 



 Total Project Cost: 95.00 Total Bank Financing: 95.00 

 Financing Gap: 0.00  

 Financing Source Amount 

 Borrower 0.00 

 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 95.00 

 Total 95.00 

. 

V. Implementation 

 

The project is a financial intermediary loan (FIL) of US$95 million to Land Bank as the borrower and 

implementing agency with a guarantee of the Republic of South Africa. The project has one component: 

a Line of Credit for Agricultural Financing in the amount of US$95 million. 

 

The loan will be extended to Land Bank as the borrower and implementing agency with a guarantee of 

the Republic of South Africa. Land Bank will use the funds under the LOC component for on-lending to 

PFIs. Land Bank will be responsible for project implementation and monitoring. Dedicated staff in Land 

Bank has been identified for managing all aspects of the project, including reporting on implementation 

progress and monitoring and evaluation, ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguards 

as well as with financial management and procurement arrangements. 

 

Land Bank will report on the PDO and intermediate indicators on a semi-annual basis. The data will 

come from Land Bank’s internal reports and from information provided by the PFIs. Land Bank will 

prepare quarterly Interim Financial Reports for the project. The specific reporting templates will be 

defined in the Project’s Operational Manual. Land Bank’s financial performance will be audited 

annually by the Auditor General. 

VI. Safeguard Policies  

 WBG Performance Standards Applicable  Yes No 

 
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks 

and Impacts 

X  

 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions X  

 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention X  

 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security X  

 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement X  

 
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living 

Natural Resources 

 X 

 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples  X 

 PS 8: Cultural Heritage  X 

 Comments (optional) 

  



VII. Contact point 

 World Bank 

 Contact: Gunhild Berg 

 Title: Senior Financial Sector Specialist 

 Tel: 473-1150 

 Email: gberg@worldbank.org 

 

 Contact: Uzma Khalil 

 Title: Senior Financial Sector Specialist 

 Tel: 458-5515 

 Email: ukhalil@worldbank.org 

 

 Borrower/Client/Recipient 

 Name: Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

 Contact: Bennie van Rooy 

 Title: Chief Financial Officer 

 Tel: 27-83380-0672 

 Email: bvanrooy@landbank.co.za 

 Implementing Agencies 

 Name: Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa 

 Contact: Bennie van Rooy 

 Title: Chief Financial Officer 

 Tel: 27-83380-0672 

 Email: bvanrooy@landbank.co.za 

VIII.  For more information contact: 

 The InfoShop 

 The World Bank 

 1818 H Street, NW 

 Washington, D.C. 20433 

 Telephone: (202) 458-4500 

 Fax: (202) 522-1500 

 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 

mailto:gberg@worldbank.org
mailto:ukhalil@worldbank.org
mailto:bvanrooy@landbank.co.za
mailto:bvanrooy@landbank.co.za
http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop


 


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20550

Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Bolivia Project ID: P158532
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P127743

Project Name: Additional Finance BO Rural Alliances Project II (P158532)
Parent Project 
Name:

Rural Alliances Project II (P127743)

Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

14-Dec-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

23-Feb-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): GOVERNMENT OF BOLIVIA
Implementing 
Agency:

EMPODERAR

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
Local Farmer Organizations 29.30
Financing Gap -4.30
Total Project Cost 125.00

Environmental 
Category:
Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Environmental Category of the parent project (B) remains unchanged, since 
there is no significant variation with respect to parent project; no major negative 
environmental impacts are expected; it is a low-risk project.

Is this a No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 14

Repeater 
project?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Bolivia's recent economic growth, one of the highest in Latin America, has brought about 
significant benefits to the poor, with poverty decreasing from 63 to 39 percent in the last decade. 
As in other Latin-American countries highly dependent on extractives industries, Bolivia's 
economy has been affected by multiple global factors, particularly by low commodity prices. The 
overall economy slowdown will make it difficult for countries like Bolivia to maintain the levels 
of investment that characterized the previous decade. Furthermore, damaging weather events, 
such as floods in 2013 and a severe drought in 2016, have taken a huge toll on Bolivia➢❨ s 
economy, particularly in the agricultural sector, where prices of domestic staple products have 
risen considerably, disproportionately affecting urban and rural poor. Changes in climate patterns 
will exacerbate climate variability, and therefore, their impacts on vulnerable populations.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The proposed AF, with its scale-up to reach poor producers countrywide, is consistent with WBG 
and GoB development agendas for 2016-2020, which prioritize inclusive economic growth, 
reducing poverty and inequality, and building capacity to cope with climate change. The AF is 
aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF- 2016-2020) for 
Bolivia, Pillar 1 (Promoting broad-based and inclusive growth), particularly under Objective 3 
(Improving opportunities for income generation, market access, and sustainable intensification); 
and also supports Pillar 2 (Addressing environmental sustainability and resilience to climate 
change). In relation to government priorities, PAR II will contribute to reaching the targets set 
forth in the General Economic and Social Plan (PGDES), particularly under Pillar 1, Result 2 
(reducing moderate poverty), and under Pillar 6 (sovereignty with productive diversification). It is 
important to note, that as part of its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDCs), the 
Government of Bolivia has committed to triple the irrigation area and double food production 
under irrigation by 2020; the Project is also aligned with those priorities. 
 
Key results. The AF will scale up activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project 
that has proven effective in improving rural income and reducing poverty; the alliance approach 
will also help small-scale producers cope with climate variability. With an expanded geographical 
area countrywide, the AF will reach directly an additional 30,000 rural and majority-indigenous 
households, via supporting about 850 productive alliances. Public infrastructure subprojects will 
reach out to about 70,000 indirect beneficiaries. As in the original project, the AF will continue 
promoting strong engagement by women in the subprojects. Maintaining the menu of activities of 
the original project, the AF will make extra efforts to improving efficiency in water use. As a 
result, the bulk of additional funds (up to 75%) allocated to alliances will not only serve to 
improve access to markets, as PAR has been doing over the past ten years, but also strengthen 
resilience to a harsher climate.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to markets for small rural producers in the 
Selected Areas by: (a) promoting productive alliances between different small rural producer 



Page 3 of 14

organizations and purchasers; (b) empowering rural producers through the establishment and 
strengthening of self-managed grass-root organizations; (c) increasing access to productive assets, 
technologyand financial services;  (d) promoting more effective, responsive and accountable 
service organizations at the local level; and (e)enhancing environmental sustainability of 
productive practices. The Project is a follow on operation to the successful PAR I, whichtested the 
model for improving market access.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The re-written PDO would be: ➢❨ The Objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to 
markets and climate resilience for small-scale rural producers in the country➢❨ 

Key Results 
The Project will track progress against the PDO through the following indicators: 
 
- Increase in the average volume of sales of the product(s) involved in the alliance 
- Producer Organizations (SPOs)➢❨ s members that apply climate -related resilience practices/
measures as defined in the business plans 
- Producer organizations that maintain or improve their commercial relations (alliances) for at 
least two productive cycles 
- Direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by men and women): Direct producer beneficiaries 
from SPOs (disaggregated by men and women) and Beneficiaries of public investment sub-
projects (there is not disaggregation).

D.  Project Description

PAR II project aims at strengthening market access and climate resilience for small scale 
producers by: supporting producers➢❨  collective action via the establishing and strengthening of 
small producer-based self-managed grass-root organizations; strengthening farmers➢❨  linkages 
with buyers; and increasing their access to productive assets, climate-resilience technologies/
practices, knowledge, and financial resources. As in the parent project, Small Producer 
Organizations (SPOs) will identify opportunities for business upgrades; consolidate those 
opportunities into Business Plans (BPs); and co-fund and implement those plans. Although the 
Project will maintain its demand-driven focus, it will introduce mechanisms to contribute to shape 
the demand by SPOs, in alignment with the increased resilient emphasis of the project's 
investments. In fact, in the AF phase, the Project will more strategically support climate resilient 
investments via irrigation modernization and climate smart practices. Investments under the BPs 
will be complemented with off-farm investments under Municipal Subprojects to improve 
productive infrastructure and facilitate market linkages. 
 
PAR II safeguard performance has consistently been rated as satisfactory. The track record of 
EMPODERAR carrying out PAR and PAR II, confirms strong capability to monitoring 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards throughout the lifespan of subprojects. 
Over the years, the PIU has put in place a set of standards and procedures, which has proven 
effective in diverse environments and social contexts, and which form the basis for the 
instruments that the PIU will use countrywide in the AF. These tools are included in the Social 
Assessment & Management Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework, and the 
Environmental Management Framework, and will allow the PIU to conduct permanent social and 
environmental analysis, reinforce information and consultation, strengthen women➢❨ s 



Page 4 of 14

participation, and define site-specific mitigation measures, among other multiple actions.

Component Name
Institutional Strengthening
Comments (optional)
This component will continue supporting pre-investment activities for the creation and 
strengthening of Rural Alliances. As in the parent project, this component will support alliance 
pre-investment activities to: (i) promote the project concept and outreach, viacommunication and 
dissemination campaigns; (ii) strengthen capacities of eligible Small Producer Organizations to: 
form Rural Alliances, identify potential business opportunities, fully prepared business plans, 
formalize their organizations, and improve their marketing and business skills; (iii) strengthen 
capacities of service providers and local governments; and (iv) appraise alliances.

Component Name
Implementation of Rural Alliances
Comments (optional)
This component would provide grants to co-finance investments found technically and financially 
feasible under component 1. These include grants to co-finance the implementation of 
competitively selected business plans / rural alliances (Subcomponent 2a); and co-finance the 
implementation of public infrastructure subprojects (Municipal Subprojects Subcomponent 2b). 
Support to SPO via advisers (acompanantes) would be provided under Subcomponent 2c.

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)
This component would support the incremental costs associated with project administration and 
monitoring, to support project activities, such as: updating and operation of the Geo-referenced 
Management Information System (SIGG, for its acronym in Spanish) and of the public 
information system; baseline information collection and the impact evaluation of the Project. The 
component will also support the undertaking of studies.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

In the additional financing phase, PAR II will expand opportunities to farmers countrywide. The 
expanded geographical coverage of the project, includes a variety of six ecological regions 
spanning from high-altitude valleys to tropical humid forests. The Borrower has finalized an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) including a guide of good environmental practices that 
complements and updates the earlier assessments of environmental characteristics and problems 
relevant to the Project by each ecological region, including projected concerns of climate 
vulnerability. The Borrower conducted a complementary social assessment (SA) for the extended 
project area. The SA analyzed the particular social, cultural, and productive features in each of the 
eco regions, with emphasis on the TCO/TIOCs and their regulations. The social instruments that 
were part of the original SA in the parent project (e.g. those for detecting potential social 
dynamics that might affect the subproject) were revised taking into account the new project area.  
 
To facilitate the application of the social tools, the Social Assessment was broken down into 3 
items.  



Page 5 of 14

- The Social Assessment (Part I) includes the analysis of social context, poverty aspects, cultural 
diversity, gender and cross-generation issues in the 6 eco regions (Amazonia, Yungas, Altiplano, 
Valles, Oriente and Chaco), covering 339 municipalities. The preparation of this document also 
included a systematic consultation process, which was based on an initial stakeholder analysis.  
- The Social Management Framework (Part II) provides technical criteria and customized tools 
for assessment of feasibility of alliances through social lens; systematizes pertinent information 
for social monitoring and evaluation; and includes criteria to retro-feeding the beneficiaries➢❨  
organizations with valuable recommendations to ensuring cohesion and sustainability.  
- The Social Management Framework (for Indigenous Peoples/Part III) includes specific tools and 
procedures to strengthen consultation processes with indigenous peoples; those tools are 
particularly useful to analyzing the conditions and specific regulations of minority groups located 
in the TCO/TIOCs and conducting Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes 
- The Resettlement Policy Framework has been updated to reflect the geographic expansion of the 
project. A land donation protocol has been included to address the land cession for municipal 
infrastructure subprojects. 
  
Overall the institutional arrangements of the Parent project will remain unchanged, including 
responsibilities in the supervision of environmental and social aspects. To strengthen 
implementation capacity, with the expansion of project coverage, the PIU will hire additional 
safeguard specialists for the Departmental Units and provide them with pertinent training, with 
support from the Task Team.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Angela Maria Caballero Espinoza (GSU04)

Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GEN04)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
In order to streamline the implementation of subcomponent 2.2 (Municipal Subprojects), in the AF, 
the National Fund of Productive and Social Investment (FPS) would take responsibilities in the 
administration of financing resources aligned with Subcomponent 2.b activities.  Under the original 
design, EMPODERAR performs most of the activities for subcomponent 2b, such as: defining the 
Municipal Subprojects pipeline; funding the preparation of pre-feasibility/feasibility studies, and 
paying contractors. Meanwhile, the FPS was only assigned with the function of appraising the 
Municipal Subprojects, and procuring and overseeing (from a technical and safeguard perspective) 
the civil works. 
 
The proposal to assign fiduciary responsibilities to the FPS in the implementation of subcomponent 
2.b activities derives from recent changes in public procurement rules, which are slowing-down the 
implementation of Municipal Subprojects, particularly resulting from cumbersome registration 
procedures and new requirements for registering procurement processes. To reverse these unforeseen 
obstacles that emerged during implementation, EMPODERAR will hand over to FPS the 
responsibility of managing the financing resources for Subcomponent 2b, including the payment for 
contractors that perform the civil works. This will allow FPS to register the budget for subprojects 
and manage the procurement in a more straightforward manner. It is important to note that, besides 
this change, the AF will maintain the same distribution of roles and responsibilities as in the Parent 



Page 6 of 14

project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes As in the original project, no large-scale impacts are expected 
given the limited, producers-based nature of Project activities. 
In the AF phase, most of the alliances will be devoted  
to agricultural /livestock primary production. A number of 
associated small municipal public works will also be financed 
such as road rehabilitation and improvement and small 
vehicular bridges. The AF will place strong emphasis on 
irrigation and water management both on-farm and in 
municipal subprojects. To account for it the project has 
triggered OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.5 
(Projects in International waterways). An EA was conducted 
by the Borrower to reflect the expanded coverage area (six 
eco-regions). The EA report includes an updated 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) at the Project 
level reflecting management measures in compliance with OP 
4.37 (Safety of Dams), instructed in the Environmental 
Management Manual. The updated EMF will be included as an 
annex to the Operational Manual.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes The updated EMF includes a comprehensive exclusion list to 
be applied at the early stage of subproject evaluation in order 
to prevent any negative impacts on natural habitats. No 
activities will be eligible within the core zones of protected 
areas, but specific activities such as beekeeping can be 
financed within their buffer zones, provided pertinent 
authorizations have been obtained and the activities are 
compatible with the area's Management Plan.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes As in the original project, the updated EMF contemplates 
deforestation risks of humid or dry forests related with 
expansion of croplands or pastures that might be induced by 
some of the beneficiary rural alliances or other Project effects. 
On the other hand, rural alliances focused on eco-tourism and 
gathering of non-timber forest products could effectively 
promote natural habitat conservation by rural producers. PAR 
II, has however, financed very little (if any) of these types of 
productive activities.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes As in the original project, Pest management is expected to be 
one of the main risks to environmental management. To 
minimize this risk, the PIU revised and improved the pest 
management plan, which is part of the EMF, taking into 
account the extended project area (and new crops).

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 

Yes Considering the portfolio of investments supported by the 
original project and expected to be financed in the AF, the 



Page 7 of 14

4.11 major risks regarding OP/BP 4.11. are associated with civil 
works such as roads and irrigation canals that could possibly 
uncover significant cultural property. This risks did not 
materialize in the original project. As in the original project, 
management plans in individual subprojects will be developed 
to manage specific issues if identified. It is possible that 
excavations could unearth cultural artifacts. The ESMF 
includes measures to ensure that chance finds are timely 
determined and respected before proceeding with approval of 
municipal subproject financing.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes Given the fact that most of the potential beneficiaries identify 
themselves as indigenous (58% of the targeted population), 
PAR II AF will operate further as an Indigenous People 
Project in compliance with the OP/BP 4.10. 
The PIU will encourage minority groups inthe lowlands to 
benefit from the intervention. Project documents and the 
Operational Manual will include key procedures and activities 
to ensure culturally adequate implementation, which 
essentially consists of using their native languages to the 
greatest extent possible, as well as respecting their traditional 
and functional social structures and deliberation forms. 
Furthermore, the project will include regular consultations at 
the local, regional and national levels, following the principle 
of Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes.  
Finally, the project will pay special attention to the traditional 
and valid gender roles in production. By doing so, the PIU 
seeks to avoid any negative impact derived from the 
interference or disruption of social and productive traditional 
networks. IP rights and women rights will be mapped during 
all the project cycle.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes As in the parent project, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP/BP 4.12) will continue triggered in the AF because of the 
possibility of minor physical impacts on land (up to 5% of the 
property) and assets,  in complementary municipal 
infrastructure investments. The PIU updated the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) to reflect the new project area and 
included more specific mitigation measures related to access to 
services, natural resources and physical impacts on land, 
infrastructure and assets. A land donation protocol has been 
included to address land cession for municipal infrastructure 
subprojects.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although PAR II does not finance the building of any large 
dam, this policy is newly triggered in the AF because of the 
emphasis on irrigation. In the event that a subproject depends 
on water supplied from an existing dam, the EMF stipulates 
that, before financing the subproject, the PIU will require a 
preliminary specialized dam safety assessment.



Page 8 of 14

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes This policy is newly triggered because of the renewed 
emphasis of the AF on supporting irrigation investments. The 
exception to riparian notification has been requested because 
the project will essentially rehabilitate and improve efficiency 
in existing irrigation systems. Moreover, the proposed project's 
activities are not likely to damage the quality or quantity of the 
water flowing to downstream riparians; similarly, the Project 
will not be affected by other riparians' possible water use.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No No project activities are contemplated in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
It is not anticipated that the AF would generate negative environmental impacts, based on the 
experience of the original project. As in the parent project, the bulk of the investments in the AF 
will continue to be of a small scale and be led by the beneficiaries themselves. In addition, the 
projected investments in irrigation, both on-farm and off-farm, will focus on improving efficiency 
of water use and, therefore, are likely to generate positive environmental impacts. Based on the 
experience gained with PAR I and PAR II, the PIU has incorporated into the revised EMF multiple 
good practices that have proven effective in minimizing environmental impacts, such as crop 
rotation, terracing, reforestation, and soil protection. 
 
By applying the revised EMF, PAR II AF is likely to result in positive long-term environmental 
impacts, at least, on the following three fronts: (i) reducing risk of soil erosion through the 
adoption of practices such as crop rotation, pasture management and terracing; (ii) reducing 
negative effects of pesticides on health and environment as a result of the reduction of toxicity of 
products used and through awareness-building training; and (iii) improving efficiency in water use 
through implantation of modern irrigation systems. 
 
 
Findings from the consultations for the AF phase, highlighted the importance of continue 
strengthening women participation in project activities. In Amazon and Chaco regions, the 
participation of women in the project activities is lower as a result of diverse constraints that they 
face. Under these considerations the project will continue promoting the participation and 
empowerment of women in the 6 ecoregions but particularly in the Amazon and Chaco ecoregions 
by improving the access to opportunities of training and decision making in the Alliances. The 
project will continue promoting women participation and empowerment by, among others, 
facilitating their access to and engagement in training and decision making in the subprojects. In 
particular, the PIU will make extra efforts to hire more female technical staff for training, technical 
assistance and technology transfer, so that the project can reach out to women in a more effective 
manner. 
 
Additionally, in alignment with the up-coming new safeguard requirements, the SA includes 
instruments to better understand the possible risks of the project associated with child labor issues 
and possible mitigation measures to address them if identified. The prohibition of the management 



Page 9 of 14

and use of pesticides by minors is introduced. 
 
EMF, including subproject screening, has been updated to mitigate potential risk.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
AF is expected to benefit approximately 850 new SPOs in nine Departments. The ongoing project 
experience shows that PARII has the ability to significantly increase capacity building in the 
SOPs, and promotes inclusion by women and youth. In the original financing, women➢❨ s 
participation in subproject identification and implementation was strengthened. As a result, 30 
percent of the participants in alliances were women. However, the SA recommend strengthening 
gender-related activities in some regions (Amazons and Chacho).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
It is expected that the social impact of the project in general is positive. Mitigation measures 
incorporated into the project design and/or reflected in the Operations Manual of the project 
include mechanisms for: a) improving information and transparency, and adopt participatory 
monitoring at the SPO level; b) integrating vulnerable groups within farmers' groups to the 
processes of decision-making on priority needs, as well as the implementation, maintenance and 
equal access to benefits of subprojects, and c) promote the inclusion of women.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on previous experience, for the PAR II project, EMPODERAR has developed a series of 
criteria and instruments for the environmental management, monitoring and control process. The 
instruments developed serve to identify and assess possible environmental impacts and establish 
mitigation and control measures that are necessary for each type of activities. In the same way, it 
has developed instruments for the process of control and monitoring of climate threats and 
measures to adapt to climate change. In the case of Municipal Subprojects, FPS will have the 
responsibility to follow and comply with the EMF. 
 
EMPODERAR has in place reasonable standards and procedures for the implementation of the 
social safeguards policies. In the AF, the PIU will take advantage of those instruments to ensuring 
information and consultation for indigenous minorities during the project cycle. The use of those 
instruments will be an integral part of  the assessment of proposals from the social perspective.  
In addition, the PIU will identify opportunities to strengthening women's participation and 
developing further the existing GRM mechanisms, which thus far comprise the following three 
elements:  
(i) The regional units use a protocol to assessing and, to the extent possible, solving conflicts by 
identifying key stakeholders and their views, interests and needs; this tool seeks to anticipate risks 
and tensions that can either strengthen or weaken the Alliances, and to handle expectations and 
possible conflicts before escalating.  
(ii) The regional units also offer an open space, where individuals can file complaints, affectations 
or recommendations; The NCU receives and processes the claims. To strengthen this mechanism, 
each regional unit will make available a Community Book of Complaints.  
(iii) The PIU will put in place a public transparency platform to track beneficiaries' satisfaction 
and provide public information; the NCU will monitor the system on a regular basis.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



Page 10 of 14

The key stakeholders of the project are community members, including ingenuous populations, 
women, government agencies, and the private sector. 
 
In the AF phase, extensive stakeholder consultation took place during project preparation, and will 
continue through implementation. Particularly vulnerable groups, such as women and minority 
indigenous groups, were specifically targeted. This process included six consultation workshops 
and various group interviews held in the following ecoregions (Valles (Cochabamba), Altiplano 
(La Paz), Yungas (Chimore) and Amazon (Rurrenabque). Each consultation comprised two stages: 
(i) discussion on the project concept, its development objectives and eliciting suggestions, the 
project components and discussion on how best to implement and develop partnerships, and (ii) 
discussion on potential risks and how to avoid or mitigate them, listening and answering to 
consultations. As a result, the exercise made it possible to gather a comprehensive set of 
recommendations, in particular with respect to  minority indigenous groups  and gender issues. 
 
Consultations with a total of 496 participants were held between August and September 2016. In 
addition, through structured interviews and questionnaires the PIU collected and analyzed valuable 
socio-economic data for the social assessment. In addition to these primary sources of data and 
inputs from stakeholders, secondary sources such as existing studies and project reports were  
reviewed to ensuring appropriate design and targeting in terms of indigenous groups, gender, cross 
generation needs and priorities, and mitigation of social risks and impacts.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 13-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure



Page 11 of 14

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural 
property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 12 of 14

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework 
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected 
Indigenous Peoples?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design 
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit or Practice Manager?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to 
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of 
livelihoods) 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints been carried out?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, 
does it include provisions for certification system?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent 
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the 
Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



Page 13 of 14

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Luz Berania Diaz Rios
Title: Senior Agribusiness Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: GOVERNMENT OF BOLIVIA
Contact: Jules Cesaire YAGANZA
Title: Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit
Email: legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies
Name: EMPODERAR
Contact: Jules Cesaire YAGANZA
Title: Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit
Email: legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Luz Berania Diaz Rios
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Noreen Beg (SA) Date: 15-Dec-2016



Page 14 of 14

Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Garry Charlier (PMGR) Date: 15-Dec-2016

Country Director: Name: Emmy Silvya Yokoyama Tsuchikame 
(CD)

Date: 05-Jan-2017

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 
 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 1 of 25  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 2 of 25  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Congo, Republic of P159979 Congo Commercial 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 21-Mar-2017 06-Jul-2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Congo Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Livestock 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity of farmers and market access for producer groups 
and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective 
response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMES 
Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial agriculture 
Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial agriculture 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 3 of 25  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. The Republic of Congo (ROC) is sparsely inhabited, with a population of 4.4 million people 
and ranks among the least densely populated in the world (12.8/km

2
). The country has an   

urbanization rate of about 62 percent, with more than half of the population living in 

Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, its two largest cities. Oil’s share of total GDP increased from 

56 percent in 2000-2004 to 66 percent in 2010-2014 and – despite the recent oil price decline 

– still accounts for more than half of GDP and more than 80 percent of total exports. 

Agricultural exports (palm oil, sugar, and cocoa) are stagnant and the country suffers from a 

rapidly deteriorating trade balance for food. ROC’s cereal import dependency ratio is 94 

percent
1
.  

 

2. ROC is highly endowed in natural resources, but with poor social indicators. The 
country is largely covered by the Congo Forest Basin, with 31 percent of its total surface area 

comprising cultivable land. The country is also endowed with significant hydrocarbon 

reserves with an estimated 1.6 billion barrels of oil reserves and with a proven 90 billion m
3
 

of natural gas, respectively the 4
th

 largest oil reserves and the 5
th

 largest natural gas reserves 

in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, the country is significantly endowed in mining ore such 

as iron, potash and magnesium. However, ROC’s key social indicators, notably health and 

education outcomes, as well as service delivery in these sectors, are much lower than 

countries with similar resource endowments, evidence of the Country’s inability to harness 

its potential into dividends for its citizens. 

 

3. High vulnerability of the economy and inequality. Despite steady GDP growth of 5 
percent over the past 10 years, ROC continues to suffer from high rates of poverty and 

inequality due to jobless growth. 63 percent of the population are self-employed in either 

agriculture or the informal services, with youth severely affected by unemployment. The 

unemployment rate for those aged 15-29 is 32.7 percent.
2
 The country has a Gini coefficient 

of 0.45 with a poverty incidence of 74.8 percent in rural areas against 32.3 percent in urban 

areas. Gender and disability have an indirect impact on poverty as women and disabled 

persons exhibit lower levels of education and employment opportunities. The ROC’s Gender 

Inequality country index is 137 out of 157 countries. Cultural division of labor and a 

preference for boys regarding expenditure on education often work against women. The 

malnutrition rate remains high (32 percent), with a total of 1.4 million people estimated as 

                                                           
1
 FAO food security indicators. Figure is from 2010. 

2
 Poverty Report Republic of Congo 2016 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 4 of 25  

 

malnourished
3
 and 31 percent of children stunted. Food and nutrition insecurity is driven by: 

(a) inadequate access to quality food; (b) poor hygiene practices and lack of awareness of 

food and nutrition requirements; and (c) unsafe food.    

 

4. Business climate and access to financial services. ROC was listed the 177
th

 country out of 

190 in the ranking of the World Bank Doing Business report 2017, which noted it takes an 

average of 50 days to register a business well beyond the regional average of 27.3. Access to 

finance is cited as the second highest constraint by businesses
4
. Bank credit to agriculture 

accounts for 6 percent of short-term credit and 17 percent of medium-term credit, and is 

focused primarily on the forestry industry
5
. Microfinance institutions are mostly focused on 

urban markets, and agriculture accounts for only 2 percent of Mutuelles Congolaises 

d’Epargne et de Crédit (MUCODEC)’s portfolio (the largest microfinance institution). Low 

penetration of financial services in rural areas, knowledge of the agriculture sector and 

collateral requirements limit access to credit for producer groups and micro, small and 

medium agribusiness enterprises (MSME).  

 

5. Private sector development. The private sector in ROC is largely fragmented with little or 
no structured public-private dialogue taking place to improve the enabling environment for 

business. The contribution of the private sector to growth is limited, as reflected by the level 

of private investments (excluding oil), which represents only 5 percent of GDP (against 14 

percent on average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 25 percent of GDP in Asia). Sectors with 

strong growth potential identified by the Government include transport services, 

agribusiness, forestry and mining. 

 

6. Environment. As part of its Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
(REDD+) agenda, ROC is developing an Emissions Reductions Program in the Sangha and 

Likouala departments. The government program seeks to access a variety of REDD+ funding 

sources like the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), the Forest Investment Program 

(FIP), and the Central Africa Forest Initiative (CAFI). ROC’s forests are at risk of 

deforestation due to mineral extraction, road development, illegal logging, agricultural 

expansion and charcoal collection. In addition, trends
6
 indicate that exposure to periods of 

intense rainfall has been increasing. ROC, in its recently submitted Intended Nationally 

Determined Contribution (INDC), has highlighted agriculture among its priority areas. 

Climate actions with regards to agriculture will embrace adaptation and mitigation through 

the promotion of agro-forestry plantations, an increase in the number of producer 

associations, and production of bioenergy. 

                                                           
3
 Undernourishment means that a person is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary 

energy requirements, over a period of one year. FAO defines hunger as being synonymous with chronic 
undernourishment. Food Hunger Map 2015. 
4
 Enterprises Survey Report surveyed in 2009  

5
 The Republic of Congo ranks 118 out of 190 countries in access to credit according to the World Bank Doing 

Business report 2017. In rural areas, 58 percent of rural adults save, but only 8 percent do so in a financial 
institution. 
6
 Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 

http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/countryprofile/home.cfm?page=country_profile&CCode=COG 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 5 of 25  

 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture, including forestry, employs about 40 percent of the labor force and contributes 
5 percent of GDP. Approximately 498,000 people are actively engaged in agricultural 

production, of which 70 percent are female. With an average rainfall of 1,200 mm per year 

and only 2 percent of the 10 million hectares of arable land exploited, the agricultural sector 

holds potential for growth. ROC has three types of agricultural production systems: (i) 

subsistence agriculture, mainly composed of small-scale producers farming 1 to 2 hectares 

per household, and accounts for 90 percent of agricultural output. Subsistence producers 

cultivate primarily staple crops such as plantain, cassava, ground nuts, maize, potatoes, 

beans, banana, and yam. Yields of these crops are lower on average than in other Sub-

Saharan countries mainly due to the poor quality of planting materials, the low use of 

fertilizer and the limited access to improved technologies and mechanization; (ii) urban and 

peri-urban agriculture is mainly composed of producers with small-scale gardens and semi-

modern commercial farms producing for urban consumers; and (iii) agro-industrial 

production systems, mainly monocultures geared towards export markets or niche urban 

markets. Apart from that of sugar cane, the production of traditional export and cash crops 

(e.g. coffee, cocoa, palm oil and rice) collapsed over the past couple of decades. A few large 

private agribusiness investors have recently started to invest again in these crops (including 

large-scale maize cultivation and the revival of palm oil and cocoa plantations). 

 

8. The cumulative effects of the different production systems have left an undeniable 
impact on the environment. Studies revealed that the sector contributes a total of 79 percent 

of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
7
. Subsistence farming has promoted deforestation 

through slash and burn shifting cultivation techniques. As a result, particularly in the 

Province of Plateau, producers are experiencing: (i) earlier planting times and longer crop 

cycles; (ii) soil degradation, which makes some crops no longer suitable; and (iii) greater 

occurrences of flooding. Lastly, peri-urban vegetable and fish farming are competing with 

growing demand for water from urban dwellers. 

 

9. Gender in agriculture. Women are underrepresented in politics and higher levels of 
government, even though the Family Code protects them against racial, ethnic and sexual 

discrimination. Women earn less than men and are more likely to be self-employed as they 

do not have equal opportunities for accessing secondary education and paid employment. 

Labor market analyses show that gender employment gaps result from unequal access to 

education and skills training. Lack of education gives women limited power in business and 

social dealings with men, who typically are better educated. Women are customarily 

encouraged to focus on subsistence farming, family and child-rearing activities (fertility rate 

is high at 3.8 percent) and, as a result, 70 percent of the country’s agricultural workforce are 

women. Congolese women face additional barriers compared to men in accessing credit, 

agriculture inputs, land ownership and labor.   

 

10. Agricultural skills, competencies and jobs. Access to formal paid wage job is very limited 

                                                           
7
 CCKP’s Country Adaptation and Risk Profiles (Republic of Congo). 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 6 of 25  

 

for the youth who are more likely to be unemployed. If they manage to find a job, those aged 

15-29 are more likely to be employed by a household (15 percent) or by an SME (12 

percent)
8
. There is only one institute for higher education in agriculture, Ecole Nationale 

Supérieure d’Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), with approximately additional 7 

agriculture vocational skills training centers. They are under resourced and do not offer all of 

the relevant skills and entrepreneurship training. Internship arrangements with the private 

sector are difficult to organize and the capacity to train masters and doctoral students is 

limited. 

  

11. Demand for food is high and growing in domestic and regional markets. ROC is highly 
dependent on food imports, with a negative trade balance. Food imports increased from US 

$197 million to US$240 million between 2007 and 2013, and spiked to US$353 million in 

2011. Volumes of imported food in 2013 included 104,567 tons of wheat, 50,581 tons of 

palm oil, 45,878 tons of chicken meat, 41,541 tons of rice and 38,455 tons of wheat flour
9
.
 

The domestic cassava market is valued at US$ 174 million with some value addition already 

taking place. Cassava is consumed by 90 percent of the population. There is a high 

consumption of chicken at household level and consumption of other livestock products is 

expected to grow significantly, e.g. 80 million eggs and 15,000 tons of pork per annum by 

2020
10

. Demand for milk (and milk-based products) is high and growing. Fish consumption 

is at 24.4 kg per head per year, one of the highest in Africa. Other regional markets present 

sizable opportunities as well, for instance the Kinshasa market (over 12 million inhabitants) 

in the Democratic Republic of Congo, or other neighboring countries such as Angola, Gabon 

and Cameroon.  

 

12. Food safety concerns are huge and compounded by the absence of a food policy and 
regulatory framework. No analysis has been done to understand the national cost of food 

borne diseases (e.g. loss of human lives, cost of treatment and loss of income especially on 

poor households). Food safety issues from imports include: (i) food spoilage; (ii) absence of 

harmonized food and product standards; (iii) poor product quality (e.g. expired food, 

deceitful labelling and high levels of preservatives in food); (iv) limited coordinated national 

surveillance and inspection capacity; and (vi) no laboratories for food testing. In addition to 

the risks created by limited awareness amongst consumers and low levels of hygiene 

standards (e.g. unregistered food street vendors & unsanitary urban markets), additional food 

safety risks from domestic agriculture include: (i) the use of animal waste and sewage on 

crops as agriculture fertilizer; (ii) poor harvesting and post-harvest handling (raises risks of 

mycotoxins and aflatoxins); and (iii) unhygienic agricultural transport systems.          

 

13. Every segment across the agriculture value chain is characterized by under 
development and fragmentation. Most inputs are imported, at high cost with no quality 

assurance. Agricultural production is performed in a rudimentary, inefficient, low input-

output model making unit costs of production much higher than imported commodities. The 

                                                           
8
 Republic of Congo Poverty Assessment 2016. 

9
 FAOSTAT. 

10
 Plan de développement du secteur Agricole –PDSA département BRAZZAVILLE, Rapport SOFRECO CEAREPE. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 7 of 25  

 

transport sector is managed by cartels that fix the transport prices, making it difficult for 

producers to transport commodities and processors to source primary material. There is only 

a few domestic agro-processing companies and the distribution and retail of food is done 

mostly through formal open markets, informal markets and small corner stores. There are 

only seven registered retail outlets (supermarkets) in urban areas selling mostly imported 

food.  

 

14. Commercial agricultural production is constrained by a multiplicity of factors. The 
competitiveness of domestic production – in value chains such as poultry, piggery, and fish 

for livestock, cassava and groundnuts for staple crops, and cocoa and palm oil for cash crops 

– is hampered by: (i) sector specific legislative and governance constraints (seed policies, 

land access, food safety policies and guidelines, taxes and registration procedures for the 

legal status of cooperatives); (ii) weak producer organizations (iii) non-existent agricultural 

extension and veterinary services and obsolete Research and Development (R&D) capacity;  
(iv) high costs of agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, land, animal feed, credit); (v) an 

ageing and under skilled workforce; and  (vi) poor road and communication networks and 

costly logistics and energy services.  

 

15. A substantial number of smallholders have the potential to engage successfully in 
commercially demanding value chains.

11
 These producers are found amongst farms located 

outside cities and towns (urban and peri-urban) as well as within specific value chains (e.g. 

cocoa, palm oil).
12

 These producers work in groups but are often marginalized from higher-

value markets due to high unit costs of production, poor infrastructure and limited access to 

credit and technical assistance. Three main profiles have been identified in the ROC of SMEs 

that are currently operating in the agribusiness sector and could establish business 

relationships with producer groups for commercial agriculture: (i) suppliers of critical inputs 

(e.g. day-old chicks, veterinary medicine and technical assistance provided by 

Transcontinental Business Néerlandais (TBN) in Pointe-Noire); (ii) off-takers for agricultural 

products (e.g. tropical fruits to produce concentrate bought by Bayo in Brazzaville); and (iii) 

firms that are both input suppliers and off-takers (e.g. supplying cassava cuttings then 

purchasing of cassava for saka-saka processing by Agridec in Dolisie).    
 
 
 

                                                           
11

 M.H. Collion, Rural Productive Partnerships: An Inclusive Agribusiness Model for Overcoming Small-holder 
Market Barriers, World Bank, 2012. This finding is echoed by studies in Africa and Asia which indicate that 50-70% 
of farmers are unable to move out of subsistence (S. Ferris et alt., Linking Smallholder Farmers to Markets and the 
Implications for Extension and Advisory Services, MEAS Discussion Paper 4, 2014). 
12

 The Ministry of Agriculture holds a Registry of Farmer Cooperatives that totals 1,055 cooperatives nation-wide, 
out of which 25% (approximately 250) are estimated to be active according to a survey conducted by the Ministry 
in 2015.  According to records from ongoing projects (PDARP, PADE), there are approximately more than 500 
additional active producer groups that are not registered with the Ministry since they registered at the 
Department level or they decided to register as an Association with the Ministry of Interior instead. There are 
therefore approximately 800 active producer groups (associations/cooperatives) in Congo, totaling approximately 
16,000 smallholders. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 8 of 25  

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity and market access for producer groups and micro, 
small and medium agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones, and provide immediate and effective response in the 
event of an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
 
 
Key Results 

1. Direct beneficiaries, of which Female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core); 

2. Average seasonal yield per standard area of specific crops among targeted farmers; and  

3. Increase in marketed production volume of raw and processed products by producer groups 

and MSMEs supported by the project. 

 
 

 
D. Project Description  

16. Key issues to be addressed. Through the support of the emergence and the revival of a 
competitive commercial agriculture sector, the project will address: (a) access to market 

with: (i) consistent supply of high volumes of quality produce meeting market requirements 
for commercial and industrial production; (ii) high quality value added agricultural products; 

(b) an enabling business environment with: (i) favorable legislation; (ii) a partnership 

framework for public-private dialogue between agricultural stakeholders; and (iii) an 

enabling institutional framework for private investors in the agricultural sector; and (c) an 

ecosystem of services that provide actors with: (i) appropriate inputs (feed for livestock, 

seeds, organic fertilizers, finance, processing technology, micro-irrigation equipment, etc.); 

(ii) a qualified workforce,; (iii) marketing infrastructure (logistics, agricultural feeder roads, 

storage); and (iv) access to water and electricity. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 9 of 25  

 

17. Additional development challenges to be considered. The project will also help address 
nutrition and food insecurity by promoting producer groups’ access to nutrition and climate 

sensitive technology, agriculture extension services, and by supporting MSMEs to produce 

fortified and enriched foods in the market. Skills development and job creation for youth 

challenges (auto-employment, semi-permanent, temporary jobs, etc.) will be addressed 

through support to internship arrangements between institutes of higher learning and the 

private sector. 

The gender gap 

with respect to 

access to 

services, inputs 

and finance and 

ownership of 

economic 

resources will be 

reduced by 

promoting female 

producer groups’ 

access to 

matching grants. 

Female owned 

MSMEs will also 

be promoted 

through access to 

a tailored 

technical 

assistance 

package for 

women MSMEs 

(business 

leadership, 

entrepreneurship 

training, 

mentorship and networking support).  Targeting principles and the approaches by component 

are described in Box 1. 
 
 

A. Project Components 

Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs (IDA: US$25 million)  

18. Component 1 seeks to increase productivity and value addition along value chains, and 
improve food and nutrition security. Support provided under this component will be through 

a matching grant program financing technical assistance and productive investments to 

support production, marketing and processing activities. This component has two sub-

components. 

Box 1: Targeting Principles 

Two basic principles will guide project design: (i) an open menu approach with 

respect to the selection of value chains, subsectors and business opportunities; 

and (ii) a geographical concentration and targeting of project interventions where 

commercial opportunities and the need for support have been identified and 

expressed by market actors (producers, processors and others). The rationale for 

an open menu is to avoid excluding any potentially viable value chain and 

business opportunity. The project’s geographical focus will start where 

commercial agriculture has the strongest potential: the three main cities of 

Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie and in the North of the country. In its first 

component, the project will directly support private sector initiative in agriculture 

by facilitating market access for producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs. 

Support to producer groups will follow a Productive Alliance approach through 

which these producer groups target new markets and seek to establish commercial 

relationships with buyers and off-takers. Support to MSMEs will focus on 

helping agribusiness firms to connect with specific off-takers and markets (both 

domestic and export), through  sound business plan development, supply chain 

development for sourcing quality raw materials, and access to know-how to 

improve processing techniques, relevant market information and/or equipment, 

etc.  

 

The second component will support public investments in agricultural service 

roads and other improved public infrastructure (e.g. access to electricity and 

water supply for agro-processing) selected based on the location (clustering) of 

the demand for sub-projects from producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs in 

Component 1. Producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs will need to identify 

(along with their expression of interest) if their value chain development activities 

are constrained by the lack of viable infrastructure. Activities in Component 2 

will also contribute to improving the business climate for commercial agriculture. 

Lastly, the project will support the strengthening of institutional capacities for 

commercial agriculture development in its third component. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 10 of 25  

 

 

Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable intensification and commercialization of crop and animal 

production (IDA: US$ 20 million)  

19. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support producer groups in 
Productive Alliance arrangements with buyers and markets for increased production, value 

addition and improved marketing of their products. It will support the intensification of 

production and commercialization of products within supported value chains through 

technical assistance and financing of business plans using a matching grant scheme 

administered through a Productive Alliance approach.  

 

20. Productive Alliance approach.
13

 Productive Alliances will aim to develop the managerial 

and technical capacity of producer groups and help them implement business plans that 

include support for productive investment (access to inputs, production facilities, nutrition 

and climate-sensitive technology) and technical assistance (agriculture advisory, extension 

services and business development skills and practices). The project will also seek to 

strengthen existing business arrangements between producer groups and buyers and/or 

support new ones.  

 

21. Business plans. Producer groups will be supported to translate their vision and strategy into 
a business plan that clearly identifies specific markets, marketing plans and technical and 

financial needs. Business plans are expected to finance a series of investments (depending on 

market requirements, the supply chain and associated constraints), such as: (i) improved 

access to quality inputs (e.g. seeds, cuttings, chicks, fertilizer, feed, water through small 

pumped and piped irrigation systems, etc.); (ii) infrastructure and/or equipment for 

processing; and (iii) infrastructure and/or equipment to improve the storage and transport to 

reach target markets. Investments will systematically be accompanied with technical 

assistance to install and maintain the investment and to improve the producer group’s 

marketing skills and management of its business and finances. The matching grants, 

however, will be awarded based on a competitive process. Applicants will have to meet a set 

of eligibility criteria to present their business plan, which will then be assessed on the basis 

of additional relevant prioritization criteria
14

. In forest areas, application of REDD+ 

principles will for instance be a precondition for relevant value chains. Female producer 

groups will receive tailored technical assistance that will include business leadership 

networking support to enable them to access markets and manage business operations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
13

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Productive Alliance approach. 
14

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Matching Grant’s selection process.  



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 11 of 25  

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: Productive Alliance Cycle 

 
 

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Development of agro-industrial activities (IDA: US$ 5 million) 

22. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will support the competitiveness of 
MSMEs involved in agribusiness, from input supply to the production, processing and 

distribution of agricultural products, as well as the delivery of agri-based services. These 

actors face efficiency challenges linked to the cost of processing, packaging and marketing 

their products. Efficiency gains in operations will result in higher quality agricultural 

products (nutritional and safety standards compliant), jobs (full, part-time and seasonal), and 

a secure market that rewards farmers with quality produce with higher prices. Female owned 

MSMEs will access a technical assistance plus package (business leadership, 

entrepreneurship training, with additional mentorship and networking support) to support 

them to bridge specific gender related challenges. This subcomponent will aim to allow 

MSMEs to have better access to training, equipment and skills they need to develop their 

business. 

 

23. Business plans. Agribusiness MSMEs will be able to apply for grants on a competitive basis 
through the same matching-grant scheme as the one described for Subcomponent 1.1. They 

will have to submit a business plan that identifies market demand for the firm’s products and 

services and shows returns on investment and financial sustainability of the firm’s 

operations, while clearly demonstrating that the investment contributes to addressing at least 

one of the following challenges: product upgrade, process improvement, new product 

development, volume increase, or reduction of the environmental footprint. The matching 

grants will cover technical assistance and equipment. Technical assistance will systematically 

accompany equipment requests to ensure the proper use and maintenance of the investment. 

Eligibility and prioritization criteria will be applied to maximize the transparency of the 

Promotion plans and 

activities targeting 

potential members of 

productive alliances. 

This process 

continues during the 

call for proposals 

phase.

Public calls for 

potential productive 

alliance partners (i.e. 

producer groups, 

input suppliers, 

buyers, etc.) to 

present business 

plans. 

The calls will be 

accompanied by a 

communications 

campaign, as well as 

field information and 

training workshops.

Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest (EOI) from 

producer groups with 

the following criteria: 

(i) compliance with 

basic eligibility criteria 

and safeguards; (ii) 

location based on 

pre-identified areas; 

and (iii) commitment 

by producer groups 

to co-financing.

Producer groups, 

whose profiles are 

approved, receive 

technical assistance 

for the formulation of 

their business plan.

Groups that do not 

meet basic criteria 

receive capacity 

building support.

EOI and business 

plans identify public 

infrastructure gaps to 

help prioritize 

infrastructure support 

under Component 2.

5. Evaluation of 

proposals

Evaluation of the 

commercial, technical 

and financial 

soundness of 

business plans 

conducted by an 

independent entity. 

Safeguards 

evaluation and 

inclusion of mitigating 

measures, if required, 

are carried out by the 

project unit.

4. Formulation of 

business plans

3. Evaluation of 

expressions of 

interest

2. Call for 

proposals

1. Marketing 

strategy and 

promotion

6. Implementation

of business plans

Implementation of 

subprojects by 

producer groups, with 

systematic technical 

assistance to improve 

organizational, 

managerial, business 

and risk-management 

skills. 

Other agents (e.g. 

input suppliers, 

buyers, technical 

assistance providers) 

implement agreed 

measures separately. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 12 of 25  

 

selection process and the sustainability of the investments made and assistance received
15

.  

  

Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 45 million) 
24. This component aims to foster the development of commercial agriculture by lifting 

constraints in terms of infrastructure and business climate. This component consists of two 

sub-components:  

 

Subcomponent 2.1: Public infrastructure for the development of commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 

37 million)  

25. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent will contribute to the development of 
basic infrastructure essential for the promotion of commercial agriculture and the emergence 

of an agro-industry. It will include public investments in the rehabilitation and maintenance 

of the feeder road network and improved access to other public infrastructure (e.g. access to 

electricity and water supply for agro-processing, and other public infrastructure) in a targeted 

way.  

 

26. Prioritization criteria. High logistical costs and limited access to markets are major 
obstacles faced by the private sector. To address these important issues, the project will make 

a provision to ensure public investments in infrastructure: (i) are identified by the 

Government as infrastructure of a public nature; and (ii) are located in targeted geographic 

zones where producer groups and MSMEs promoting commercial agriculture development 

express interest in receiving Productive Alliance and / or MSME support (see Component 1). 

 

27. Sustainability of investments. Technical assistance will also be provided through this 
subcomponent to selected departmental councils to implement the new road maintenance 

strategy developed with the assistance of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 

Rehabilitation Project (PDARP) in order to make such maintenance more sustainable.  

 

Subcomponent 2.2: Governance and regulatory framework for commercial agriculture (IDA: US$ 8 

million) 

28. Objective and instruments used. This subcomponent aims to improve the legal and 
regulatory framework for commercial agriculture. It will do so by: (i) establishing and 

financing platforms for public-private dialogue on commercial agriculture at the 

departmental and national levels to identify needed reforms; (ii) providing technical 

assistance to draft the identified legislation and regulations; (iii) policy advocacy with 

parliamentarians (e.g. policy notes, sensitization, training); and (iv) conducting sensitization, 

dissemination and training activities toward relevant stakeholders (i.e. ministries and public 

institutions, producer groups, agribusiness MSMEs and other private sector actors, etc.) on 

drafted legislations and regulations pertaining to commercial agriculture. 

 

29. Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) on commercial agriculture. The project will build on the 
mechanism for public-private dialogue put in place with the support of PADE to start a 

                                                           
15

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the Matching Grant’s selection process. 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 13 of 25  

 

public-private dialogue specifically on commercial agriculture by providing technical 

assistance and budget support to set up and operate PPD platforms
16

 on commercial 

agriculture at the departmental and national levels. The platforms are expected to identify and 

contribute to building consensus around changes to legislation and practices that constrain 

commercial agriculture.    

 

30. Identified reforms. Some of the needed improvements to constraining legislation specific to 
commercial agriculture have already been identified with stakeholders and their drafting will 

be supported by the project. The legislation pertains to: (i) compliance with the Organisation 

pour l’Harmonisation du Droit des affaires en Afrique (OHADA) Uniform Act on 

Cooperatives; (ii) National Seed Policy in compliance with the norms of the Economic 

Community of Central African States (CEEAC); (iii) Rural Code to clarify and secure land 

access; and (iv) food safety policy and regulatory framework, standards and the certification 

of products
17

. 

 

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities to support the development of commercial 

agriculture (IDA: US$ 30 million) 

31. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of public and non-public 
service providers involved in the implementation of project activities and / or supporting the 

development of commercial agriculture in the Republic of Congo. At the same time, it will 

ensure and oversee the successful management and implementation of the project, while 

making a provision to enable an immediate response in case of declared crisis or emergency. 

This component has three sub-components: 

 

Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity-building of institutions providing support to commercial agriculture 

(IDA: US$20 million) 

32. Objective and instruments used. The subcomponent will provide equipment, training and 
operating cost support to government and non-government actors that are necessary for 

commercial agriculture to succeed, including a number of technical departments of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP).  

 

33. Targeted institutions. These capacity-building efforts will target institutions involved in key 
areas related to: (i) agricultural statistics services; (ii) the access to improved genetic 

materials; (iii) the implementation of the reform of the national public system for agricultural 

extension and advisory services; (iv) the agricultural vocational and higher education training 

systems; and (v) the policy framework for food safety, quality standards and product 

certification supported in Subcomponent 2.2
18

. 

                                                           
16

 When business practices and legislation identified by these sector-specific PPD platforms are economy-wide in nature (e.g. easing business 
entry and business exit, facilitating trade across borders, etc.), the project will share these inputs with PADE, which is better placed to address 
them. When identified reforms are specific to commercial agriculture, and if a strong consensus can be built with stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors around them, the project will provide support for their drafting through this subcomponent. 
17

 See Annex 1 for more detail on the reforms that have been identified. 
18

 A list of the institutions identified for capacity-building support includes: (i) the Studies and Planning Department 
of MAEP; (ii) the Ministry of Scientific Research and Technical Innovation through the Institut National de 
Recherche Agronomique (IRA) and the Centre National de Semences Améliorées (CNSA), among others; (iii) the 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 14 of 25  

 

 

Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, coordination and monitoring at national and provincial 

levels (IDA: US$ 10 million)  
34. This subcomponent will support project management, coordination, communication, 

monitoring and evaluation, adequate monitoring of the environmental and social safeguard 

policies, at the national level as well as at the departmental levels. Under this subcomponent, 

a strong fiduciary management system will be introduced and an effective monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be designed, which will not only monitor impact indicators, but 

will also ensure real time data collection that will facilitate the adoption of corrective 

measures in a timely manner and even attempt to integrate the data into the national 

agricultural statistics database.  

 

35. Through this subcomponent, the project will finance a baseline study, mid-term review study, 
final impact assessment, the recruitment of staff, consultancy services, the acquisition of 

property and equipment, and will support relevant seminars and training, as well as diverse 

operating costs to supervise the project activities. 

 
Component 4: Contingency emergency response (IDA: US$ 0.0M) 

36. This component will provide support for immediate response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency, as needed. A crisis or emergency eligible for financing is: an event that has 

caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact to 

the Borrower, associated with a natural or man-made crisis or disaster. Rapid disbursement 

of funds will allow the Government to request a reallocation of project funds to partially 

cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component will be triggered if: (i) the 

Government has determined that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and has 

furnished to the Bank a request to include said activities in the Contingency Emergency 

Response Component (CERC) for emergency response; (ii) the Government has prepared 

and disclosed all safeguards instruments required for said activities; (iii) the Borrower has 

adopted the CERC Operations Manual (OM) in form, substance and manner acceptable to the 

Bank. A specific OM for this component will be prepared detailing financial management, 

procurement, safeguards, and any other necessary implementation arrangements. While 

Components 1, 2 and 3 focus on pre-crisis disaster risk mitigation and climate resilience 

enhancement measures, Component 4 will help to strengthen the Government’s capacity to 

respond effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
 
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

37. The institutional arrangements proposed for this project, under the supervision of the 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
Cooperative Action Department of MAEP and Agricongo among others; (iv) the Ministry of Higher Education 
through the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Agronomie et de Foresterie (ENSAF), among others; and (v) institutions 
identified through the food safety reform supported in Subcomponent 2.2. See Annex 1 for more detail on the 
institutional capacity-building work of Subcomponent 3.1.    



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 15 of 25  

 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP), includes the following supervisory 

and implementation bodies: (i) a Steering Committee; (ii) a National Coordination Unit of 

the project (including a Matching Grant scheme); (iii) Project Implementation Units at 

departmental level; (iv) technical service providers (public, private, NGOs); and (v) financial 

institutions, which will render financial services to the private sector (producer groups, 

agribusiness MSMEs) (See Figure 2). 

 

38. Public service providers will participate in the project through the structures of the MAEP, 
The ongoing reform of MAEP and the introduction of specialized agencies is an opportunity 

for re-thinking and repositioning the role of public technical services, including agriculture 

advisory and extension services.  

Steering Committee (CP)  
39. A high level Steering Committee will be officially established before effectiveness. It will be 

chaired by the Minister in charge of Agriculture and composed of representatives of key 

project stakeholders (relevant ministries, private sector, and civil society including producer 

groups) in the project. The Steering Committee will be responsible for the strategic direction, 

operational oversight, communication and overall good governance of the project. 

 

National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU)  

40. It is proposed that the current PDARP national project coordination unit, with a proven track 
record in administrative and fiduciary management, be retained and strengthened to 

coordinate and manage the Commercial Agricultural Project. The NPCU will be responsible 

for project implementation, management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and 

supervision. The NPCU will rely on specific expertise, including the hiring of an independent 

firm contracted for the management of the matching grant program of Component 1.  

 

Project Implementation Units (PIUs) 

41. Four Project Implementation Units will be established at departmental level to support 
specific zones targeted by the project. They will ensure project activity monitoring and 

evaluation as well as receive and process complaints related to the implementation of the 

project in collaboration with the authorities and civil society.  
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project envisages to target 3 main high potential agricultural zones as defined in the Schema National 
d’Amenagement du Territoire (National Spatial Master Plan). These are (i) agri-zone 1 South Corridor 
Brazzaville - Pointe Noire, (ii) agri-zone 2 Central Corridor Konda- Oyo-Lekye- Gambona, including special 
economic zone Oyo-Owando where fisheries and palm oil are being promoted; and (iii) agri-zone 3 North 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 16 of 25  

 

special economic zone Ouesso where cocoa, coffee and palm oil are being promoted. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Lucienne M. M'Baipor,Grace Muhimpundu,Claude Lina Lobo 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Activities from Subcomponent 1.1: Intensification of 
Agricultural and Livestock value chains; 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of logistic, trade 
and business services; and Subcomponent 2.1: 
Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development are expected to impact 
environment and these impacts are evaluated to be 
moderate, localized and manageable; so the project 
is classified to the EA category “B”. And the 
Environmental Safeguards Policies triggered are 
PO/PB 4.01 "Environmental Assessment"; PO/PB 
4.04 "Natural Habitats"; OP/PB 4.09 "Pest 
management and pesticides"; PO/PB 4.10 
"Indigenous Peoples"; PO/PB 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources"; OP/PB 4.12 "Involuntary Relocation"; 
PO/PB 4.36 "Forests"; OP/PB 7.50 Projects relating 
to International Waterways; PO/PB 17.50: Right of 
access to information. 
To ensure that any environmental issues by the 
project activities are appropriately addressed, the 
safeguard instrument elaborated according OP/BP 
4.01 is the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). This one is also designed to 
serve as a guide for developing ESIAs and ESMPs as 
needed, when the exact sites of sub-projects will be 
known. In particular, the ESIA will include a 
diagnostic of the project areas, potential 
environmental adverse impacts, potential issues 
related to labor influx, and mitigation measures to 
manage properly expected adverse impacts. The 
ESIA will highlight specific provisions that need to be 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 17 of 25  

 

included in construction/installation contracts to 
ensure that contractors’ ESMPs address relevant 
mitigation measures. 
The ESMF include specific sections to address all 
issues related to OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; 
OP/BP 4.36 on Forests and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical 
Cultural Resources. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to enable the project to 
perform the screening of the identified sites and 
their vicinities relative to natural habitats, the aim is 
to avoid project activities to create significant 
degradation of natural habitats. Project will also 
seek to identify appropriate conservation measures, 
follow-up, assessment and management of natural 
habitats within the project area. The Government 
will be encouraged to provide necessary information 
to the people and to provide them with the right 
incentives to protect and to support the 
conservation of natural habitats and to facilitate, if 
necessary, the rehabilitation of degraded habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This project could possibly impact the health and 
quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people 
and their level of dependence upon the interaction 
with forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP/BP 4.09 is triggered because the project supports 
activities that requires the use of pesticides, 
fertilizers, vaccines and other chemicals like in the 
production of eggs, of cattle feed and veterinary 
products in the poultry, goats, pigs, cattle, fish 
farming and aquaculture, and some projects 
activities will lead to a surge in the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers which can create negative effects on 
the environment. This policy supports the integrated 
pest control approaches. It identifies pesticides that 
can be financed under the project and develop an 
appropriate plan of pests to deal with risks. To 
comply with this policy a Plan of Management of 
Pests and Pesticides (PMPP) was prepared in 
separated document from the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 
This policy, OP/BP 4.11, is triggered by the project 
because during implementation of project activities, 
it is possible to discover or to affect some cultural 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 18 of 25  

 

relics. The Physical Cultural Resources Policy aims to 
protect cultural resources, to avoid any significant 
conversion (loss) or degradation of these resources. 
To be in compliance with this policy, project has 
developed, into a separate document, the Physical 
Cultural Resources Framework (PCRF). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Indigenous Peoples are found on a large part of the 
Republic of Congo’s rural territory, and a number of 
the areas visited under project preparation and 
evaluation phase are known to inhabit Indigenous 
Peoples (IPs). This includes the Cuvette (Oyo-
Owando), in the Sangha (Ouesso), and Plateau (Oyo, 
Gamboma). Since the project will be implemented at 
the national level, with specific zones of 
interventions yet to be identified (based on targeted 
crops, agribusiness, and in accordance to the 
national agricultural plan), the project has prepared 
an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF), 
which will establish the framework for consultation 
and inclusion of IPs in the project areas. The project 
will identify various IPs associations and IP 
communities in the selected zones as collaborators, 
as well as potential CSOs and local NGOs. Once the 
specific sites are known, an Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP) will be development, and it would identify the 
targeted IPs, and ensure their inclusion as 
beneficiaries of project activities, in a culturally 
appropriate and inclusive manner. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Activities suggested in Component 2, Subcomponent 
2.2 “Public Infrastructure for Agribusiness and Agro 
industrial Development”, may require acquisition of 
land. Due to low population density in rural areas, 
however, the risk of physical resettlement is 
minimal, although there may be potential economic 
displacement or loss of assets.  
The project has prepared the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) since the exact site locations are 
yet unknown, and eventually Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAP) or Abreviated Resettelement Action 
Plans (ARAP) will be prepared to mitigate potential 
negative impacts.  
This new project is to some regards an extension of 
the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project (P095251, and Additional 
Finance P145627). The project established an escrow 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 19 of 25  

 

account of US $500,000 for resettlement 
compensation. Since the project did not require any 
land acquisition and therefore did not induce any 
resettlement (physical or economic displacement), 
no RAPs were prepared for the project. The funds in 
the escrow account remain unused, and the account 
will be transferred to the new project in order to 
fund potential compensation cases for the new 
Commercial Agriculture project.  
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
This Safeguard Policy is not trigged because no 
project activities involved in dams or located in their 
vicinities. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

OP 7.50 is applicable to the Project because 
activities may have an impact on the Congo, 
Oubangui and Sangha river basins, all of which are 
international waterways. ROC is one of the riparians 
of the Congo-Oubangui-Sangha basin together with 
DRC, Central African Republic, Cameroon, Gabon, 
and Angola. The proposed Project covers primarily 
high potential agricultural zones around the main 
cities of Brazzaville, Pointe Noire and Dolisie, the 
south corridor along the national road from 
Brazzaville to Bouenza and Kouilou and the northern 
part of country, Sangha and Likouala. The planned 
rehabilitations of irrigation systems are very small in 
size. Most of these schemes will be located around 
the three big cities and markets of Brazzaville, Pointe 
Noire and Dolisie (using the rivers of Djoué, Niari, 
Kouilou … ), the country’s bread basket and where 
70% of the population live. The task team has 
carefully considered any potential impacts of the 
proposed investments, and because that: (i) the 
project will not cause appreciable harm to the 
riparian countries; and (ii) no activities are expected 
to have any adverse effects on the water quality or 
quantity, no notification is required under OP 7.50 
since the project deals only with micro/minor 
irrigation rehabilitation, and thus falls under the 
exception to the notification requirement under 
paragraph 7 (a) of the Policy. An exception memo 
has been prepared and was approved by the AFRVP 
on May 15, 2017. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No This Safeguard Policy is not triggered. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 20 of 25  

 

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In agricultural development and infrastructure implementation, the expected negative impacts are inherent in 
deforestation and the loss of biodiversity; soil erosion, silting of rivers, degradation of water courses; pollutions and 
nuisances, the generation of construction waste, rubble and other demolition residues, disruption of activities on land 
rights, etc.  
In the operational phase, the risks relate to pollution and degradation of watercourses linked to the use of pesticides 
and fertilizers; pollution and nuisance due to solid and liquid waste from agricultural activities, pollution of the 
environment by sewage and solid waste disease, risk of accidents, risks (HIV / AIDS) and development of water-related 
diseases (malaria, bilharziasis), social conflicts related to local customs and practices; losses of land and socio-
economic income sources; influx of the population as a result of the installation of structuring facilities, strong 
pressure on land and water with increasing development.  
Terrestrial and aquatic habitats (wetlands) can be altered mainly during the start-up and implementation phase of 
agricultural. But globally, all these impacts are evaluated to be moderate, localized and manageable. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
This project would increase agricultural productivity, enhance food security and nutrition. No adverse long term or 
indirect environmental or social impacts are expected. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
There are no significant negative impacts of the project, designed on the contrary to have positive social and 
environmental impacts. No alternatives were therefore considered to avoid impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Based on experience gained through the implementation of the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads 
Rehabilitation Project, a Category B project, the capacity of the Implementing Agency housed in the Ministry of 
Agriculture to implement the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies is considered high. An 
environmental specialist has been included as part of the PIU core team, and the project will recruit a social specialist. 
The two specialists will monitor and supervise the environmental and social measures as recommended in the various 
safeguards instruments for the project. The current environmental specialist, as well as the Project Coordinator have 
both benefitted from the World Bank organized capacity-building initiative in November 2016.   
Finally, to manage and monitor safeguards implementation in a timely manner, the PIU will prepare quarterly reports 
of the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The Project will equally ensure that all the instruments (in 
accordance with OP 4.01, OP 4.10, OP 4.11 and OP 4.12) put in place and the Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs). 
The project will monitor indicators set forth in the safeguards instruments. To this extent, the two safeguards 
specialists in the PIU, will closely collaborate with the M&E specialist in the PIU, and reflect the findings in the 
quarterly reports. 
An important lesson learned under the previous Agriculture project was the poor management of grievances. The 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 21 of 25  

 

mechanism as established in the safeguards documents were not appropriate or applicable to existing local structures. 
The PIU has drafted a new GRM to manage complaints ensuing from the new project.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders outside of government structures are agricultural producers, civil society, private sector (MSMEs 
and SMEs), Indigenous Peoples communities and representatives. Overall, the design of the project has been 
participatory at various levels, through consultation with the different stakeholders throughout preparation. This is 
complemented with additional consultations as part of the review of safeguards instruments.  Representatives of the 
national government formulated the design of the project, while regional governments, local authorities, and 
conservation actors provided inputs. The project will be implemented with the participation of local stakeholders. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_I P_DIS CL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017  

   
"In country" Disclosure   



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 22 of 25  

 

 

  
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

NA 20-Mar-2017 31-Mar-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

All safeguards instruments were disclosed in country and on the Bank’s Infoshop prior to Negotiations (May 5, 2017). 
Any ensuing safeguard instruments (IPP, ESIA, RAP, and/or PSR) will also be publicly disclosed prior to implementation. 
The project team will ensure that all compensation and resettlement is completed prior to any civil works. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
NA   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 23 of 25  

 

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes   

OPS_I P_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
  
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with 
affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes   
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit or Practice Manager? 
NA   

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
NA 
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
 
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
Yes    

OPS_ PIW _C OMP_ TABLE  

 

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 24 of 25  

 

  
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes   
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes   
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes    

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
No   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
No  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Amadou Oumar Ba 
Sr Agricultural Spec.  

 

Jean Edouard Albert Saint-Geours 
Economist 

  

 



 

The World Bank  
Congo Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979) 

 

 

  
Mar 22, 2017 Page 25 of 25  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Congo 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock 

Henry Djombo 

State Minister 

pdarp_maep@yahoo.fr 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Amadou Oumar Ba 
Jean Edouard Albert Saint-Geours 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 15-May-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Dina Umali-Deininger 15-May-2017 

Country Director: Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye 16-May-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA16272
Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan Project ID: P157736

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P125999

Project Name: Additional Financing for Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity 
Program Phase-1 (P157736)

Parent Project Name: PK Punjab Irrig Agri Productivity Improvement Prog Phase-I 
(P125999)

Region: SOUTH ASIA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Jan-2017 Estimated Board Date: 23-Mar-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Implementing Agency Directorate General Agriculture (Water Management)
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 130.00

Local Farmer Organizations 70.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 200.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? Yes
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Pakistan posted the GDP growth of 4.2 percent in FY2014/15, below the 5.1 percent target. Private 
investments as share of GDP declined to 9.7 percent, but overall deficit remained 5.3 percent of GDP, 
0.3 percent higher than estimated. While Pakistan continues to score poorly on doing business 
indicators, there are signs of improvement. Growth in FY16 was expected to be moderate at 4.5 
percent, well below the 5.5 percent target. For FY17, the expected growth is 5.2 percent while for 
FY18 it is projected at 5.5 percent.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Pakistan’s agriculture sector is heavily depends on irrigation - more than 90 percent of production is 
form irrigated lands. However, per capita availability of useable water is decreasing with population 
growth, pollution and inefficient use of water. An estimated 40 percent of water is lost in the unlined 
watercourses due to seepage, spillage, side leakage and evapotranspiration. In Punjab, out of the total 
59,500 watercourses, about 43,700 were improved in various projects and Government’s National 
Program for Improvement of Watercourses (NPIW). Under PIPIPP 5,500 new watercourses are being 
improved leaving about 10,300 that still need improvements.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Key Results 

The AF would support: (a) installation of high efficiency irrigation systems; (b) improvement of 
community irrigation systems; (c) introduction of modern technologies and methods in irrigated 
agriculture, assistance in crop diversification and training; and (d) Project management, construction 
supervision, quality control, technical assistance and training.

.

D. Project Description

The AF would provide resources for: (i) component B of the project related to upgrading of the 
Community Irrigation Systems; (ii) a new sub-component C3 is added focusing on post-harvest 
processing, value addition and market linkages; and (iii) make up for loss of resources due to changes 
in exchange rates between SDRs to USD.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Upgrading of the Community Irrigation Systems
Comments ( optional)
W/Cs would be improved using only pre-cast concrete sections (PCPS) with water-tight joints. The 
WUAs/farmers would share costs through providing labor, and the Government of the Punjab 



would provide PCPS and other material needed for watercourse improvement. The AF would 
improve 2,000 W/Cs and irrigation schemes – making the total number of schemes under 
component B 11,000.

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Improved Agriculture Technology/Practices and Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments ( optional)
Changes in this component are based on implementation experience and lessons learnt. These 
changes include: (i) supplementing support under sub-component C1 and C2 for monitoring and 
evaluation and impact assessment of the additional works under the AF; and (ii) adding a new sub-
component to address value addition and market access for farmers adopting efficient irrigation 
technologies.

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known)
The AF project will be implemented in Punjab province of Pakistan. Agriculture in Punjab is affected 
by waterlogging and salinity. In central and southern Punjab, rainfall is more sporadic and agriculture 
is entirely irrigation dependent.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ahmad Imran Aslam( GEN06 )

Salma Omar( GSU06 )

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation arrangements under the AF will remain the same as for the Original 
Project. The Director General Agriculture (Water Management) (DG-AWM) will continue to be 
responsible for the implementation of the Project. The Directorate of On-Farm Water 
Management (OFWM) has demonstrated that it has the capacity to implement such programs in 
the Punjab.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Government prepared an Environmental 
and Social Assessment (ESA) for the original 
project. An Addendum to ESA covering 
revised and up-scaled scope of work has also 
been prepared. The Addendum is cleared and 
disclosed. The key potentially negative 
environmental and social impacts of the 
proposed interventions under the AF project 
include changes in land use pattern 
particularly where barren/fallow land is 
brought under cultivation, contamination of 
soil and water caused by excessive use of 
agro-chemical inputs, salt build up in crop 
root zone, loss of natural vegetation and trees 
for water course improvement, loss of crops 
caused by water course improvement works, 



and reduced ground water recharge caused by 
water course lining.  These potential impacts 
are temporary and reversible in nature and can 
be mitigated with the help of appropriate 
mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots 
and wildlife protected areas when expanding 
the cultivation fields, awareness raising and 
capacity building of farmers for judicious use 
of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation 
in fields using high efficiency irrigation 
systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree 
plantation to compensate any tree cutting, 
avoiding cropped area while carrying out the 
water course improvement and other 
construction works during the project, and 
limiting the extent of water course lining in 
the sweet groundwater zone to minimize 
negative impacts on groundwater recharge. 
Some of the new activities proposed under AF 
may have additional environmental impacts 
like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit washing bays and 
cleaning platforms, construction related issues 
with small-scale platforms, and disposal of 
discarded fruits, vegetables (generally and 
largely biodegradable material). Occupational 
health and safety may be an additional 
potential environmental impacts for the new 
activities related to post-harvest processing 
centers. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for these issues and after 
the adequate implementation of mitigation 
measures, no residual impacts are forecasted.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project supports activities only in already 
disturbed environment and no project site is 
located in any natural habitat.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project does not support any activity in 
the forest land.

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The proposed interventions are likely to 
reduce the quantities of agro-chemicals 
particularly the ones that are water soluble.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The project activities will be undertaken 
where cultivation is being practiced for 
decades if not longer. Hence presence of any 
physical cultural resources is extremely 
unlikely.  Chance Find procedures are 
nonetheless included in the main ESA.



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no indigenous communities in 
project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No No land acquisition is envisaged for the 
proposed activities.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project does not include any component, 
which involves construction of new or 
rehabilitation/upgradation or renovation of 
any existing dam.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

Yes An exemption to notification was obtained for 
the original project that also applies to the AF.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project is located in the Punjab province, 
which does not have any disputed area as 
defined in the policy.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report, which suggests 
that the proposed project does not pose any long term or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts. The key potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed 
interventions under the original project include changes in land use pattern particularly where 
barren/fallow land is brought under cultivation, contamination of soil and water caused by 
excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of natural vegetation and 
trees for water course improvement and reduced ground water recharge caused by water 
course lining.  Scope of additional work proposed under Component B does not bring in any 
additional or new environmental impacts other than those which have already been covered in 
the ESA prepared for the original project. New activities proposed under Component C3 may 
have additional environmental impacts like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit/vegetable washing bays and cleaning platforms, construction related 
issues with small-scale washing bays and platforms, and disposal of discarded fruits, 
vegetables (generally and largely biodegradable material). Occupational health and safety 
may be an additional potential environmental impacts for the new activities related to post-
harvest processing centers. These potential impacts are temporary and reversible in nature and 
can be mitigated with the help of appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the 
cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for judicious use of 
chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high efficiency irrigation systems 
to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped 
area while carrying out the water course improvement and other construction works during 
the project, and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to 
minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for the issues arising out of the implementation of component C3 and 
after the adequate implementation of proposed mitigation measures, no residual impacts are 
forecasted. Land acquisition will not be required for the project rehabilitation works, which 



will be undertaken within their existing boundaries.  There are no indigenous communities in 
the project areas as defined under World Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. The project 
will support livelihoods through improvements in food harvesting and handling of produce. In 
particular, women may benefit from these interventions through decreased work load in post-
harvest processing. The community water course improvement will benefit agricultural 
communities’ especially small farmers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:

Agriculture and irrigation development are key priorities of the Government’s development 
agenda with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, irrigation efficiency and livelihood 
of the people. The long term impacts of the project will contribute to reduction in poverty in 
conjunction with environmental protection.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

The ESA report elaborates on various project alternatives including, ‘no project’ option, 
alternative irrigation methods, alternative land-leveling methods, alternative methods of on-
farm water conservation and alternative methods of implementation. Analysis concluded that 
high efficiency irrigation results in reduced need of farm inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, 
fungicides, and herbicides, as well as reduced vulnerability of crops to pest attacks and 
proliferation of weeds, leading to less use of pesticides and herbicides. In addition, fertigation 
(application of fertilizers or other soil additives through the irrigation system) is done through 
drip and sprinkler, which results in increased effectiveness of fertilizers with reduced 
quantities needed.  Similarly, through high efficiency irrigation systems, chemigation 
(application of pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides) is also done through drip and sprinklers, 
resulting in effective use of chemicals with reduced quantities needed. The overall result of 
high efficiency irrigation system is therefore a much reduced usage of chemical inputs and 
introduction of post-harvest technology under AF will help better achieve the PDO. The only 
comparable alternative for this activity is ‘no project option’.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The original ESA is based on detailed assessment and includes an Environment and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for any possible environmental and social impacts under the 
project. The Addendum to the ESA uses the same ESMP with some additions related to the 
proposed activities under Component C3 and proposes preparation of a separate ESMP for 
each post-harvest fruit/vegetable processing facility. These ESMPs will need to be cleared by 
the Bank before these facilities can be established. For establishing these facilities, transparent 
and accessible guidelines on the selection process will be established, and communicated 
widely to all farmers to ensure that the selection process is seen as transparent and fair, and 
possible social conflict is avoided. The ESA Addendum is cleared and disclosed.
The original ESA report presents a well-structured organogram for the implementation 
arrangements of EMP. The Director General Agriculture Water Management (DG-AWM) is 
overall responsible for environmental and social performance of the project in accordance 
with the national and WB requirements. An officer is designated as the Environmental and 
Social Coordinator (ESC) for ensuring effective implementation of ESMP. The ESC 



coordinates with the WMOs at the district level, who have been designated as the district 
environmental and social coordinators (DESCs) at district level. The DESCs supervise and 
coordinate with the WUAs and farmers for the actual implementation of the environmental 
and social guidelines and other ESMP requirements. These institutional arrangements have 
been effective in ESMP implementation of the original project and will be continued for AF 
project.
The Project Implementation and Supervision Consultant (PISC) are responsible for 
implementation of ESMP while M&E Consultants are responsible for monitoring. Production 
and maintenance of all documentation outlined in ESMP is to be done by PISC. The client has 
been successfully implementing the ESMP in the original project and understands fully the 
planning and operational levels of safeguards requirements. While GD-AWM does not have 
an environmental management unit within its operational hierarchy, it continues to implement 
project level implementation of ESMP. The implementation performance of environmental 
safeguards in the original project is satisfactory. Quarterly progress reports are done regularly 
and will continue for the AF. Training is conducted for field staff as outlined in the ESA and 
these will continue for the AF. Monitoring will include both quantitative and qualitative data 
through consultations and feedback from beneficiaries, especially women, and will be 
included in the progress reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders consulted at various levels include: (i) People directly affected by the 
Project and Project beneficiaries (i.e., farmers, WUA members, and other villagers), (ii) Sales 
and service companies, (iii) Officials from the Agriculture Department and agriculture 
research institutes, (iv) Environment Protection Agency of Punjab, (v) Academia, (vi) Donors, 
and (vii) NGOs, international organizations, and other interest groups. Consultations with the 
project stakeholders were carried out during preparation of original ESA. The stakeholders 
have remained involved during the implementation including the project affected people, 
project beneficiaries and other local communities in several districts. Similar consultations 
were carried out for AF project during the preparation of the ESA Addendum and will 
continue during the implementation of the AF.

.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete

Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Mar-2015

Date of submission to InfoShop 15-Jun-2016

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHEnvCtry

Pakistan 14-Jun-2016
Comments:Addendum to the ESA is prepared for the AF project. The ESA Addendum is disclosed by 
GoPunjab and is available through website: 
http://ofwm.agripunjab.gov.pk/system/files/PIPIP_ESA.pdf
PHResCtry

Pakistan



Comments:
PHIndCtry

Pakistan
Comments:
PHPestCtry

Pakistan
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::

.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA 
(including EMP) report?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit 
or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve 
the EA report?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the 
EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

PHCompliance

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the 
project?

Yes [] No [X] NA []

If the project falls under one of the exceptions 
to the notification requirement, has this been 
cleared with the Legal Department, and the 
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [X] No [] NA []
PHCompliance

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents 
been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-
country in a public place in a form and language 
that are understandable and accessible to 
project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

PHCompliance

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear 
institutional responsibilities been prepared for 

Yes [X] No [] NA []



the implementation of measures related to 
safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures 
been included in the project cost?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of 
the project include the monitoring of safeguard 
impacts and measures related to safeguard 
policies?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements 
been agreed with the borrower and the same 
been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents?

Yes [X] No [] NA []

V. Contact point
World Bank

PHWB
Contact:Masood Ahmad
Title:Lead Hydropower Specialist

PHWB
Contact:Tahira Syed
Title:Senior Rural Development Speci

.

.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
PHBorr
Name:Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Contact:Mr. Tariq Pasha
Title:Secretary
Email:

.

.

.

Implementing Agencies
PHIMP
Name:Directorate General Agriculture (Water Management)
Contact:Malik Muhammad Akram
Title:Director General
Email:pipipwm@gmail.com

.

.

.

VI. For more information contact:
.

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name:Masood Ahmad,Tahira Syed

Approved By:
PHNonTransf

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


Safeguards Advisor: Name: Aki Tsuda (SA) Date: 14-Feb-2017

Practice Manager/Manager: Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR) Date: 18-Feb-2017

Country Director: Name:Anthony Cholst (CD) Date:07-Mar-2017


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC18688

Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Angola Project ID: P159052
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Angola: Commercial Agriculture Development Project (P159052)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

18-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of Angola
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 230.00
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 230.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

1.  The Republic of Angola is still recovering from a turbulent past despite oil and mineral wealth. 
With approximately 25.8 million inhabitants,  it is the seventh most populated country in Africa. 
Angola is one of the largest oil exporters in the region, and is rich in diamonds and other mineral 
resources. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975, but was then engulfed in a 27-year 
civil conflict, which ended with a peace accord in 2002. Despite the country➢❨ s upper-middle 
income status with GDP per capita of US$5,400 in 2014, poverty remains pervasive with 30.1 
percent of the population living below the international poverty line in 2008. 
 
2.     Propelled by the end of the civil conflict and the expansion of the oil sector, the Angolan 
economy posted an average growth rate of 12.5 percent between 2004 and 2008. This period of 
high growth was interrupted by the 2008-09 global financial crisis. Following a slowdown 
between 2009 and 2011, when GDP grew at 2.5 percent on average, fast growth resumed in 2012 
(7.6 percent). 
 
3.  Limited progress was made in improving social indicators during the oil boom years. Angola's 
remarkable growth has not been equally shared. Large parts of the population lack access to basic 
services. Life expectancy is 52.3 years and the country ranks 149th out of 188 in the Human 
Development Index. Income inequality is high and marked disparities in regional and urban/rural 
poverty persist. More than half of Angola➢❨ s poor are located in rural areas and depend almost 
exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood. Among the most vulnerable groups in the country 
are women-headed agriculture households, which represent 33 percent of agriculture households. 
 
4.  Angola is experiencing a major macroeconomic shock due to the dramatic oil price drop since 
2014. This is not surprising as oil represents about 30 percent of GDP, over 95 percent of export 
earnings, and 75 percent of government revenue. The country faces a scarcity of foreign exchange 
(FX), fiscal and external deficits, higher inflation and weakened economic activity. The impact on 
households are considerable. Lower government expenditures and a reduced public sector wage 
bill have resulted in reduced private consumption, compounded by the elimination of fuel 
subsidies. Because of the crisis, GDP growth is forecasted at just 0.9 percent in 2016, followed by 
a rebound of about 3 percent in 2017 . 
 
5. The government has implemented bold fiscal measures since mid-2015 to address the effects of 
the oil price drop, but challenges remain on the monetary front. A revised budget was adopted in 
March 2015 to reflect the major shortfall in revenue, with oil prices dropping from US$80 in the 
initial budget to US$40. The government cut capital expenditure by nearly half, and significantly 
reduced fuel subsidies. The Strategy to Exit the Crisis brought further fiscal consolidation 
measures such as the institution of a new tax on financial transactions and the cancellation of 
double payments to former combatants. The adjustment however has not progressed much on the 
monetary and external sector. Although interest rates have risen and the currency has devalued, 
inflation reached 29.2 percent in May and the spread between the official and parallel exchange 
rate has more than doubled. Imports have been contained and international reserves have been 
kept high due to strong administrative controls on access to foreign exchange (FX). As a result, 
companies are postponing investments and reducing production because they cannot import the 
inputs needed. 
 
6. Despite recent reforms, Angola➢❨ s investment climate remains challenging. The country 
underperforms in competitiveness, business environment, and governance rankings. For example, 
the World Economic Forum➢❨ s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2014-2015 ranked 



Page 3 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Angola 140th out of 144 economies while the country ranks 181st out of 189 economies in the 
Doing Business 2016 report, suggesting a complex regulatory environment. Angola lags other 
Sub-Saharan Africa countries in the 2015 Worldwide Governance Indicators. Recent reforms 
include a reduction in the costs and requirements to start a business, a new Labor Code, and an 
overhaul of investment policy. Other efforts are underway to modernize tax and customs 
administration, and the justice sector. Well implemented, they could contribute to a more 
effective and transparent government interaction with the private sector. However, institutional 
weaknesses and governance issues defy reform implementation. Overall, Angola➢❨ s business 
environment is characterized by cumbersome regulations, constrained competition and 
considerable government presence in economic activity. Limited access to finance, poor 
infrastructure, weak workforce skills and corruption are the main constraints mentioned by firms. 
 
7. Diversifying the economy away from oil is an urgent priority and part of the Government➢❨ s 
response to the oil price crisis. Dependency on oil leaves Angola vulnerable to price and 
production shocks. For years, an overvalued exchange rate contributed to reduce the 
competitiveness of the non-oil sectors. The government crisis response strategy, presented in 
February 2016, aims at reducing the reliance on oil to generate revenues, substitute imports and 
promote non-traditional exports. Agricultural production plays a large role in the government➢❨  
strategy. Diversifying the economy will require economic transformation and eliminating 
obstacles to private investment, as well as efficient use of government resources to address 
infrastructure bottlenecks, and invest in human capital.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8.  Angola➢❨ s agriculture potential remains largely untapped. The country has an abundance of 
land, water, and diversity of climatic and soil conditions for the production of a large variety of 
crops, but only 8 percent of its 58 million hectares of arable land is currently cultivated .  The 
agricultural sector in Angola currently represents around 5 percent of GDP, compared to 57.7 
percent for industry, including extractive, and 37.7 percent for services, and could contribute 
more to employment creation, especially for the youth. Nonetheless, agriculture is the main 
source of income for 90 percent of the 8.5 million Angolans living in rural areas (about 37 percent 
of the population). 
 
9.  Once a large exporter of coffee, cotton, sisal, sugar cane, bananas and tobacco, Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture sector suffered widespread destruction during the conflict and has not fully recovered 
since. Before the war the country was self-sufficient in all food crops except wheat. The exodus 
of Portuguese settlers after independence and the ensuing civil war that ravaged the country 
meant the loss of technical capacity and infrastructure destruction, cutting production areas from 
markets. Roads, bridges and other rural infrastructure were largely destroyed. Large-scale 
population displacement in rural areas and land mines➢❨ as many as 10 million➢❨ further 
constrained the sector recovery.  
 
10.  Production has been growing in recent years and the country has reached self-sufficiency in 
sweet potatoes and manioc, but Angola still relies on imports for most of its food consumption 
needs. For example, locally produced chicken supply only 40 percent of the local demand and 
production is limited by the lack of feed. In general, Angola has greater opportunities to compete 
with imports of perishable goods, including fruits, vegetables, and eggs, and local production of 
these goods has increased in recent years. Statistics on agriculture production are unreliable and 
outdated, but should improve with the planned agricultural census. According to MINAGRI 
2013/2014 production data, major crops based on volume include sweet potatoes, cassava, 



Page 4 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

bananas, maize, pineapples, citrus fruits, beans, peanuts, and tomatoes. Agriculture exports 
represent less than 0.8 percent of total exports. Excluding fish, where little value is added in 
country, agriculture exports amount to just US$3.5 million. Coffee accounts for 43 percent, 
followed by non-alcoholic beverages (32 percent), beer (9 percent), fruit juice (5 percent) and 
medicinal plants (3 percent). The country is slowly opening new export markets including to 
neighboring DRC. It recently restarted exporting bananas to Portugal, 42 years later, with a 
shipment of 17 tons.  
 
11. Smallholders represent over 80 percent of agriculture production and 92 percent of land under 
cultivation. A small but growing formal distribution sector is establishing partnerships with local 
producers to ensure quality supply of primarily fresh produce. Still, most agriculture production is 
used for self-consumption or sold through informal channels. 
 
12. Macroeconomic conditions and the business climate constrain private investment in 
agriculture. An overvalued exchange rate in recent years and the current scarcity of foreign 
exchange affect the sector competitiveness and hamper private investment. The challenging 
business environment, including high cost of doing business, uncompetitive input markets, and 
insecurity of land tenure, as well as government crowding out the private sector, further reduce 
the sector➢❨ s attractiveness to private investors. However, based on discussions with private 
operators, investment opportunities exist in the production and processing for products such as 
horticulture, grains and beans, poultry and livestock, as well as aquaculture. While foreign 
exchange shortages are resulting in some of these investments being put on hold, they could 
materialize once macroeconomic conditions improve. New investment could bring much needed 
capital and know-how to the commercial agriculture sector. 
 
13. Access to finance is a serious hindrance to commercial agricultural development. 
Notwithstanding the high credit growth from 2004 to 2014 (going from 5 percent to 22 percent of 
GDP), the share of credit going to agriculture has remained very low at less than 5 percent of 
overall credit provided. Additionally, despite the general increase in access to finance over the 
five years between 2010 and 2014 (with an increase of two-thirds of branches, doubling of ATMs, 
and tripling of Points of Sale), there has been a clear urban/rural divide in access with Luanda 
accounting for the bulk of financial sector outreach. Specifically, Luanda, which has 27 percent of 
the population, accounted for 83 percent of credit, 94 percent of deposits and the majority of bank 
branches, ATMs and POS in 2015. Government programs such as the Angola Investe, offer 
subsidized credit, guarantees and a public risk capital fund, however most supported projects 
belong to non-agribusiness sectors and tend to be concentrated in Luanda. The Angola 
Development Bank also offers some lines of credit to the agriculture sector. Finally, the enabling 
environment for promoting agriculture finance (including agriculture insurance, warehouse 
receipts, equipment leasing, moveable collateral registry) is yet to be developed. 
 
14.  Infrastructure weaknesses hinder the creation of value addition through processing, and the 
integration of small producers into value chains. Market linkages are constrained by poor road 
and storage infrastructure. The total road network is about 76,000 km, many in need for 
rehabilitation, and the road density is 6 km /100 kmÂ², one of the lowest in Southern Africa. The 
rural access index is 42 percent, which is the fourth lowest in the world after South-Sudan, Chad 
and Mali (WDI). Although the government has heavily invested in improving the transport 
network over the last decade, including road and railways, limited budget is available for rural 
roads. Moreover, the limited reach of the electricity grid and the high cost of operating generators 



Page 5 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

hamper the competitiveness of agribusiness, including agro-processing, irrigated agriculture, and 
livestock. The sector also suffers from lack of other adequate dedicated public services and 
infrastructure, such as phytosanitary and quality systems and commercial infrastructure. 
 
15.   Lack of technical knowledge and access to inputs further constrain commercial agriculture 
development. Poor agronomic practices, limited use of improved seeds, fertilizers, and irrigation 
technology, undermine productivity, growth and diversification. Most agricultural inputs, 
including fertilizers and machinery, are imported at high cost, and remain out of reach of small 
producers. These shortcomings are compounded by the very low technical capacity all along the 
value chain. 
 
16. Responsibility for agriculture policy and program development falls under the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MINAGRI). The Ministry is represented at the provincial level by the Provincial 
Directorates of Agriculture (DPA), and at the municipal level by the EstaÃ§Ã£o de 
Desenvolvimento AgrÃ¡rio (EDAs). MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity for program design and 
implementation has room for significant improvement. The World Bank Market Oriented 
Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP), which closed in March 2016, and its follow up 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP), approved by the 
Board of Directors on July 5, 2016, include activities to strengthen MINAGRI➢❨ s capacity at the 
local, provincial and national levels. This project will build on and complement these efforts. 
 
17.   Other Government agencies are involved in the development of the agribusiness sector. 
These include the Ministry of Economy, which manages the Angola Investe program to provide 
subsidized credit to productive investments, the Angola Development Bank, the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, which is in charge of investment promotion (through APIEX) and  the 
agriculture commercialization program (PAPAGRO). Other relevant agencies include the 
Ministry of Construction (for road construction), Ministry of Transport, and Ministry of Energy 
and Water. The coordination among the various Government agencies in the implementation of 
complex multisectoral projects to support agribusiness development needs substantial 
strengthening. This is hindered by limited technical capacity and a centralized approach to 
decision-making. 
 
18.  In an effort to spur commercial agriculture, the government has invested in spatial approaches 
and infrastructure development. Government-sponsored projects range from integrated socio-
economic projects, following Israel➢❨ s Kibutz model (Aldeia Nova) to large-scale agro-
industrial poles such as the 400,000 ha Capanda development pole, as well as irrigated perimeters 
with plots for large, medium and small-scale producers. These projects are often financed by 
foreign lines of credit, and management is frequently contracted out to foreign firms, which bring 
the technology and know-how to run them. A state owned company, Gesterra, sponsors many of 
these projects. While some of these projects have achieved productivity close to international 
good practices , others are still not operational or have failed to attract private producers (e.g. 
Family Aviculture Project). Overall, the financial and economic viability of these projects on a 
purely commercial basis needs to be confirmed. Other government investments include 
distribution centers and cold storage, some of which remain underutilized. Support infrastructure 
is still insufficient and existing facilities need to be more effectively used. 
 
19.  Low and declining public spending in agriculture highlights the need for mobilizing private 
investment. The share of agriculture in the national budget declined from 1.10 percent in 2013 



Page 6 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

(US$701.76 million) to 0.41 percent (US$543.9 million) in 2015. In the current constrained fiscal 
environment, there is a need to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures to 
develop strategic infrastructure, strengthen institutional capacity and improve research and 
extension services, and support smallholders. More efforts are needed to attract private 
investment and promote public-private partnerships under transparent criteria. The Commercial 
Agriculture Development project will contribute to these goals. 
 
20.  Weak public sector governance and poor capacity have considerably limited agriculture 
development efforts in the past. These issues affect resource allocation across a range of key areas 
in the agriculture sector, from access to land to financing of irrigation, agricultural infrastructure, 
and inputs. For example, one bottleneck for investment in agriculture is secured land access: land 
allocation procedures and coexistence of several legal systems for recognition and governance of 
land rights in Angola (state law and traditional rights) weaken legal certainty and hinder the 
sector➢❨ s development. To attract transformative private investments in the agriculture sector, 
particular attention will need to be paid to: (i) legal and regulatory measures; (ii) institutional 
mechanisms and delivery platforms; and (iii) transparency and social accountability. Besides 
involving several agencies/departments within the Ministry of Agriculture, the Project will need 
to work closely with, and reinforce the capacities of, several public institutions that have critical 
influence on agricultural investment generation.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
21. Supporting integrated national economic diversification is one of the pillars in the Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-16. Development of the agriculture sector, through productivity 
increases and market linkages, is seen as an important source of growth, employment creation and 
poverty reduction. Making progress toward the twin goals is found to be feasible building on the 
adoption of pro-poor growth strategies and policies. The draft Performance and Learning Review 
(PLR) envisions an extension of the CPS until FY18 and a reformulation of the objectives to 
respond to the macroeconomic challenges emerging from the oil price drop. The draft PLR 
maintains economic diversification as one of the key objectives of the CPS. A specific outcome 
related to enhancing productivity and competitiveness in the agriculture sector has been proposed, 
which is directly related to the activities of this project. 
 
22.  This Project will also build synergies with other World Bank Group projects, such as the 
Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SACDP, P154447) and 
Angola Statistics Project (P157671). Close coordination between the IFC and the Bank (IBRD) 
will play an important role to mobilize investment, sector financing and PPPs, where each 
institution will contribute on the basis of its respective mandates. 
 
23.  Economic diversification and the development of commercial agriculture are critical 
priorities for the government, as outlined in the National Development Plan (NDP) 2013-2017. 
The National Development Plan seeks to promote an enlargement of the productive base to 
increase employment, leveraging the country➢❨ s natural and human resources. It underscores the 
role of the private sector as the engine of economic growth, with the public sector playing a 
leveraging role. For the agriculture sector, the NDP objective is to achieve sustainable 
development building on the country➢❨ s natural resources and competitive advantage to ensure 
food security and self-sufficiency, as well as maximizing regional and international market 
opportunities. Developing a competitive agriculture sector, with increased private investment and 
market linkages for smallholders is an objective that will be supported by the activities of this 
project. The project also contributes to the objectives of Angola➢❨ s Medium Term Agriculture 



Page 7 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Development Plan 2013-2017, which seeks to foster agricultural and rural transformation, based 
on the development of smallholder agriculture, cooperatives and public-private partnerships, as 
well as contribute to the country➢❨ s industrialization.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
24.  The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to promote commercial agriculture 
development, increasing production and employment within selected value chains, in targeted 
areas in Angola.

Key Results (From PCN)
25.  The project strategy to achieve the PDO is to support the transformation of Angola➢❨ s 
agriculture towards a greater role for the private sector, building on existing programs, and 
focusing on value chains with the largest growth and employment creation potential. More private 
investment in agriculture is needed to increase production, productivity and commercialization, 
and to help create employment opportunities for the Angolan poor. This will be achieved by 
identifying and helping prepare Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs) ➢❨  private investment 
opportunities in selected value chains, and providing support to Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs), including cooperatives, and producer organizations, in those value chains to increase 
their production, productivity and linkages with larger firms. In order to create the conditions for 
private investment the project will support investments in supporting infrastructure, as well as 
improvements in the regulatory environment and government capacity to play a catalytic role for 
the commercial agriculture sector development. 
 
26.  Success in achieving the PDO will be measured by the following PDO-level indicators: (i) 
increased investment in dollar terms; (ii) support infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated by the 
project; and (iii) jobs created in the beneficiary firms. 
 
27.  External factors may affect the realization of the PDO: (i) evolution of international markets 
(e.g., commodities prices, growth, and external financing), (ii) security and/or disease outbreak in 
Angola, and (iii) global warming, that may worsen droughts and lead to severe floods.

D.  Concept Description

28.  The overall approach is to foster commercial agriculture  through a set of integrated 
investments in hard and soft infrastructure, and developing an enabling environment for private 
participation in the sector. By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions, the project 
aims to remove key constraints to business formation and strengthen the platform for growth in 
high-potential value chains. World Bank support is required first to identify and prioritize these 
investments; and to develop the capacity to procure them and manage their execution. The project 
will also seek to mobilize private funds for the sector through PPPs and targeted investment 
promotion. At the same time, the project will support activities to create more conducive 
conditions for the future development of commercial agriculture, including regulatory reforms, 
and strengthening of research capacity. Strong coordination among the government agencies 
involved (agriculture, transport, energy, commerce, etc.) and building a constituency for the 
project among public, private and non-governmental stakeholders will be necessary, as suggested 
by previous experience in supporting integrated interventions along agriculture value chains. 
 



Page 8 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

29.  Initially, two value chains will be supported and this would be scaled up during the life of the 
project to a maximum of five. Criteria for selecting value chains will be based on the 
competitiveness of specific value chain segments, potential impact (on jobs, food production, 
export diversification, and opportunities for upgrading), and readiness (existing production, 
necessary investments, and sector organization). Identifying competitive value chains in Angola 
will require a more in-depth analysis of demand, current cost structure and existing constraints. 
Two initial value chains will be selected during preparation, in consultation with the Government 
and private sector stakeholders. Existing studies of priority value chains for the Government, 
including horticulture, livestock, chicken and dairy, and by extension maize and soy, provide 
limited analysis on existing cost structures to assess their competitiveness. Preliminary work on 
the poultry sector inspired by the value chain segmentation methodology identified opportunities 
for competitive production of fresh chicken to supply the local market, provided reliable supply of 
local feed can be secured (see Annex 3). The Government has requested initial focus on poultry 
and by extension maize/soy as a priority due to growing demand, recent growth and the large 
share of chicken in the country➢❨ s imports. Support to export-oriented value chains, such as 
coffee, another government priority, also requires careful consideration of the competitiveness of 
Angola vis-➃❫ -vis other countries. Analytical work supported by the project will inform public-
private dialogue to agree on priority subsectors and constraints. The experience and capacity 
developed by the project will enable supporting other value chains in the future. 
 
30. The project will be geographically concentrated in the areas (to be defined during 
preparation), with the highest agricultural potential to meet domestic consumption (as would be 
the case for example in the poultry/maize/soy value chain) and export (e.g. coffee value chain). 
Other factors to select geographic areas include having a critical mass of potential commercially 
oriented producers, and access to downstream value chain activities and markets through 
proximity to agrologistical networks and platforms. 
 
31.  Moreover, the proposed project will ensure that: (1) equal opportunities and support will be 
provided to women➢❨ s and youth groups to participate in several aspects of the project; (2) 
training in gender awareness will be provided using appropriate media, language and gender-
sensitive approaches and methods; and (3) a gender informed M&E system will be implemented, 
will collect and present gender-disaggregated data on project beneficiaries. 
 
32. Given the institutional weaknesses, governance, and other risks, a flexible and modular design 
is called for. The project must remain flexible to potential delays in specific components, 
changing implementation realities, and to the response of private sector supply and demand. It 
should allow subcomponents to be removed or amended without compromising the overall 
project framework and the causal chain of activities.  Starting with a focus on existing investment 
opportunities and just two value chains will help test the approach while striving to deliver results 
early on in the project. In parallel, efforts to build client project implementation capacity and to 
improve the enabling environment will start.  Once key conditions   are established, such as: (i) 
progress in business environment reforms, PPD, analytical and implementation capacity (ii) 
selected area and pilot value chains under implementation, in compliance with all activities 
planned for the first two years of the project life, work on other value chain will be undertaken (to 
be defined during preparation). Therefore, the proposed time for the project implementation is 6 
years. 
 
33.  With an amount of $230 million,  the project will support commercial agriculture 



Page 9 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

development through three interrelated components: (1) Agribusiness development by means of 
mobilizing investment, including PPPs, providing financial and non-financial support to value 
chain actors and developing support infrastructure (rural roads, storage, irrigation, and energy); 
(2) Support to create an enabling environment for commercial agriculture; and (3) Project 
management, coordination, and public-private dialogue. 
 
34.  Component 1 ➢❨  Agribusiness Development (US$ 190 million). This Component will 
address the following challenges: (i) underinvestment by SMEs in inputs, technology and skills 
development due to access to credit constraints and information failures; (ii) insufficient linkages 
among value chain actors due to coordination and information failures and (iii) underprovision of 
infrastructure oriented to underpin market-oriented agriculture. This component aims to mobilize 
investments in agribusiness and support improvements in productivity, quality assurance and 
market linkages through the following subcomponents: 
 
35. Subcomponent 1.1 Technical and financial support to SMEs development.  This 
subcomponent will have a value chain focus and will aim to (i) support SME development, 
including market-ready producer groups and cooperatives, and help them overcome constraints in 
access to credit and managerial/technical knowledge; and (ii) support links and partnerships 
between large, medium and small-scale producers and purchasers through business alliances. As a 
result of project investments, enhanced capabilities and links to larger firms, it is expected that 
SMEs will be able to grow their business, improve productivity and quality, strengthen market 
connections, and create jobs. An important aspect during preparation will be to assess the actual 
size of the SME sector in the pilot value chains and adapt the intervention design to uptake, 
capacity, and sustainability considerations. 
 
(a) This subcomponent will provide support through a competitive  matching grant facility: 
 
1. Provision of technical assistance for pre-investments. This window will provide financial 
resources for the development of innovative business and linkages between small producers and 
other actors along the value chain. 
 
The competitive grant will provide ➢❨ startup➢❨  capital for promoting the introduction of new 
sustainable practices and technologies, and processes that improve the competitiveness of 
agricultural production by SMEs. The grant will consider three main levels of support to be 
further defined during preparation. These could include: (i) extension and technology 
development; (ii) studies for business alliances, including the formulation of business plans and 
associated productive subprojects and pilots➢❨  investments; and (iii) capacity building for 
entrepreneurs, individually or as member of a formal group (e.g. associations, cooperatives, 
farmer organizations).  
 
2. Establish a Matching Grant facility for Value Chain Development.  . This window will 
finance investments based on the business plans directly linked to the selected value chains and 
will have a geographical focus.  
 
SMEs investments will be identified through a competitive process based on a review of feasible 
business plans and selected proposals identifying SMEs financial contribution through a matching 
grant (at least 60% of total investment, to be confirmed during preparation), and presenting social 
environmental and economic sustainability analysis.  



Page 10 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

 
The grant will combine innovation with a focus on partnerships with the market and will consider 
to implement investments designed based on business plans agreed with their business partners. 
The objective of each proposal would be to reach the product specifications (quantity, quality, 
delivery, etc.) agreed and established in the business plan. Eligible activities that would be 
financed could include expenditures at the level of both individual producers and their 
organizations (e.g. cooperatives), such as: (i) minor on-farm infrastructure and working capital, 
(ii) technical assistance services, (iii) agriculture inputs, equipment, production facilities 
(nurseries, greenhouses), (iv) value addition investments (post-harvest processing and storage, 
packaging), soil and water conservation measures and (v) other minor infrastructure, e.g. off-farm 
infrastructure for storage specific to the needs of the business alliance. If needed, the project will 
provide additional training to improve their governance, organizational, managerial, business and 
risk-management skills and to facilitate adoption of good agricultural and environmental 
practices.  
 
Eligible applicants would include: (i) organized producer organizations associations and related 
farmers organizations with developed or developing linkages to agricultural value chains, and 
supporting the development of smallholder farmers; (ii) agribusinesses linked with smallholders, 
involved in processing, trading, and marketing of agricultural and food products/commodities 
which help to improve the growth and competitiveness of smallholder farmers either directly to 
farmers at the production stage, or further down the value chain as part of the processing chain of 
agricultural commodities; (iii) input suppliers; (iv) nucleus commercial farms working with 
smallholders; and (v) publicly and privately funded agricultural and industrial institutions and 
trusts.   
 
In addition, for mobilizing business alliance investments, the project will carry out a differentiated 
communication and dissemination campaigns to: (i) inform potential stakeholders about the scope 
and rules of the Project; (ii) the publication and dissemination of Project activities including, inter 
alia, information on demand, approvals, procurement and results; and (iii) promote investments 
and contract farming/buying contracts in agricultural sector value chains.  
 
 (b) This subcomponent will also provide support to mobilize and select larger private investors. 
 
1. Selected interventions will need to demonstrate (i) alignment with the value chain development 
and (ii) potential impact on job creation. The stakeholders jointly with the PIU will develop 
proposals to request select interventions that are not firm-specific but that benefit their segment of 
the value chain and the value chain as a whole (i.e. common goods). 
 
2. Following the Client➢❨ s and the Chamber of Commerce➢❨ s advice, the investors will need 
to be strongly involved in crafting these proposals for interventions to ensure their commitment 
aspect and consistency with the constraints faced by groups of firms in the VC. The project will 
support the creation of a national committee composed of public and private sector stakeholders 
that will be in charge of reviewing the requests for funds to finance catalytic activities, ensuring 
that they conform with the strict eligibility criteria that will be imposed (e.g. demonstrate direct 
contribution to the VC➢❨ s development and job creation) and selecting the best proposals that 
receive project support. 
 
36.  Subcomponent 1.3. Establish a Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) fund to promote access to 



Page 11 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

credit for the project target groups. The fund is expected to lower the risk exposure of financial 
institutions through a PCG arrangement and thus increase the incentives for financing agricultural 
activities. The fund would target the agribusiness SMEs in the selected value chains for their 
financing needs whether these are for fixed assets or for working capital. It would therefore 
support matching grants beneficiaries to provide the contribution required to benefit from the 
matching grants. It is anticipated that the project PCG fund will utilize the existing structure 
established by the Angola Investe Program. However, a dedicated Fund for commercial 
agriculture will be created and will be governed in accordance with applicable Bank Group➢❨ s 
policies and the recently issued Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for MSME, with 
IFC support. For participating banks wishing to benefit from the guarantee coverage, a 
prequalification process will be undertaken.  
 
Financial institution eligibility criteria will be transparent and open to all institutions that have an 
interest to lend to the beneficiaries of the Project.  The PCG will cover 50 percent of the risk pari-
pasu for loans to and it will be priced to cover the administration costs and risks it covers. 
However, the PCG fees would be priced, so that the facility would remain sustainable after the 
project conclusion and would continue to serve this market segment following project conclusion. 
 
37. Eligibility criteria and selection processes for investment support may vary according to the 
type of support required, and will be detailed during the preparation phase and described in the 
Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 
 
38. Subcomponent 1.3. Develop critical infrastructure. This subcomponent aims to (i) address 
existing gaps in infrastructure (rural roads, post-harvest facilities, irrigation, and energy); (ii) 
strengthening the capacity of public agencies to formulate, prepare and promote medium and 
long-term public-private partnerships in the sector. Special focus will be given to the promotion 
of climate smart agriculture approaches and renewable energy technologies. 
 
39. This subcomponent will support infrastructure investments in selected value chains and 
geographic areas of focus. It will leverage existing transport, logistics, energy, and irrigation 
infrastructures to support improvements in agriculture production and productivity, reduce post-
harvest losses, and connect production areas with markets: 
 
- Construction and rehabilitation of feeder roads. Once geographic areas of focus have been 
identified during preparation, a mapping will be conducted of existing road links and current gaps 
between production areas and the main national road networks (for example, the Luanda-Malanje 
corridor for the poultry/maize/soy value chain). Maximum length of rural roads supported by the 
project will be no more than 50 km to the main road (to be confirmed during preparation). The 
project will build on the existing Strategic Plan for the Rehabilitation of Tertiary Roads and the 
National Integrated Plan for Accessibility, Mobility and Transport (PENAMT) by the Ministry of 
Transport. 
 
- Post-harvest facilities: support to landing docks infrastructure and rehabilitation/construction of 
storage facilities to facilitate collection of production. 
- Irrigation infrastructure: support to irrigation infrastructure including water storage facilities and 
main canals will be agreed during preparation. Private investors will finance the construction of 
secondary canals to their farms. 
 



Page 12 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

- Energy investments will be further explored during preparation phase, depending on 
confirmation of targeted value chains and the degree of electrification of the selected geographic 
areas of focus. Other sources of clean energy will also be explored. 
 
40.  This subcomponent will also support the identification and assessment of existing 
government storage and agro-industrial infrastructure amenable to private sector participation, as 
well as other rural infrastructure and agribusiness services that could advantageously be 
developed and implemented by private entities as PPP or as purely private investment. Whenever 
the local conditions so require, opportunities for the use of PPPs for the integrated development 
and management of rural facilities and services should be identified, particularly when those 
facilities and services are apt to be co-funded by commercial and individual users. Following that 
initial assessment, the project will support pre-feasibility studies for the 3-4 most promising 
opportunities to enable the government to decide whether to move ahead with a PPP. This 
subcomponent can also provide support to strengthen the legal framework for PPPs in Angola and 
support capacity building efforts in this area. This would be done not as an isolated effort, but in 
order to guarantee an adequate environment for private investment, and conditions for effective 
definition of incentives for private investors to implement the government➢❨ s agricultural 
policy. 
 
41.  Component 2 ➢❨  Support to develop an enabling environment for commercial agriculture 
(US$ 25 million). This component will focus on addressing challenges related to (i) existing gaps 
in the Government strategy for commercial agriculture development and analytical capacity; (ii) 
limited government investment generation capacity (iii) constraints in the agriculture input 
markets; (iv) high costs and uncertainty of doing business, related to burdensome regulations and 
procedures; and (iv) weaknesses in the agriculture research and development capacity. The 
component will focus on strengthening the building blocks for creating a competitive commercial 
agriculture sector, including strategy and regulatory reforms, as well as support to enhance 
research and development (R&D) for the sector. 
 
42.  Subcomponent 2.1 Support sector strategy development and enhance client analytical 
capacity. This subcomponent will contribute to strengthen institutional capacity at MINAGRI to 
develop strategies for competitive and sustainable agriculture value chain development based on 
analysis of local, regional and global demand and existing competitive advantage. By doing so, it 
will complement envisioned support by SADCP to strengthen the capacity of local, provincial, 
and national units of the Ministry of Agriculture to provide services to smallholders in the areas 
of irrigation, extension, market information, statistics and policy analysis. Specific areas of 
support will be defined during preparation, but may include: (i) capacity building for evidence-
based economic research, value chain segmentation analysis, and M&E; and (ii) technical 
assistance to develop Climate Smart Agriculture Country Profile .  It could be an important 
mechanism to build awareness of country options, facilitate dialogue, and help prioritize 
investments to deliver on the ➢❨ triple win➢❨ , implementing agriculture and food production 
practices that not only boost productivity but also enhance resilience and lower greenhouse gas 
emissions, the three pillars that form the basis of climate smart agriculture. 
 
In order to support the thinking on Government strategy, the project preparation advance will 
fund the organization of a practitioners➢❨  forum on international experiences, including 
successes and failures, in developing commercial agriculture with a special focus on value chain 
approaches and agroindustrial poles. 



Page 13 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

 
43.  As part of this component, the project will also support the establishment of a team of 
analysts at MINAGRI with strong skills in economic and market analysis. They will be in charge 
of reviewing and validating the outputs of consultants hired previously by the Government, and in 
assessing the experience of failed prior agribusiness initiatives. They will receive training on 
value chain segmentation methodology and will conduct additional analysis as needed to identify 
the most promising value chain segments for Angola and the existing binding constraints for their 
development. This analysis will inform the discussions in the public-private dialogue platform 
(Component 3). The team will formulate proposals for addressing such constraints in 
collaboration with the relevant government agencies. This activity will be developed in 
coordination with other Government efforts to develop skills to support economic diversification 
strategies. 
 
44.  Subcomponent 2.2 Promote investment opportunities. This subcomponent will work with the 
recently established Agency for Investment and Export Promotion (APIEX) and MINAGRI➢❨ s 
Technical Unit for Investment Promotion to strengthen investment promotion, facilitation and 
aftercare in agribusiness. In particular, the project will support the compilation of a pipeline of 
investment leads and build capacity for assisting investors during the process of establishing their 
operations. Additionally, the project will assess current investor aftercare functions and provide 
training and other capacity building activities to ensure client➢❨ s effective support to existing 
investors, with the goal to encourage reinvestment. Technical assistance will be provided to 
prepare information packages and implement targeted investor outreach efforts in the priority 
value chains. Finally, the project will include additional support to the implementation of the 
revamped Investment policy and legal framework, including an assessment of existing incentives. 
 
45. Subcomponent 2.3 Improving the regulatory environment. This component will support key 
regulatory and administrative reforms to remove barriers to private sector activity in agribusiness. 
Strong emphasis will be given to ensure capacity for implementation of amended regulations is in 
place and adequate monitoring systems are developed. In these, the project will focus on those 
areas (i) have been identified as key constraints by analysis and private sector actors in the 
priority value chains, and (ii) where there is clear government commitment. This subcomponent 
will be closely coordinated with efforts to support regulatory improvements in the business 
environment under the DPL series and other World Bank Advisory work, including support in the 
areas measured by the Doing Business report. Areas for support will be confirmed based on the 
value chains selected. The following four areas have been identified as problematic in initial 
consultations with agribusiness private sector actors: 
 
- Policy and competition barriers in agricultural inputs: limited supply and high costs of improved 
seeds, fertilizers, and equipment is a critical constraint to increased productivity and production. 
The project will support studies to assess existing constraints affecting input availability including 
sector policies, tariffs, entry barriers and market competition. Recommendations emanating from 
these studies will inform public-private dialogue and the development of actions to address 
existing constraints. The project will provide technical assistance for implementation of these 
actions. 
 
- Trade facilitation and identification, classification and removal of Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs): 
Given Angola➢❨ s dependency on imports for food and agriculture inputs and the country➢❨ s 
objective to develop exports as a way to diversify export revenues away from oil, an efficient 



Page 14 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

trade environment is essential. Building on ongoing reform efforts, the project will identify 
activities that will further simplify trade logistics systems and services, focusing on reducing the 
time and cost associated with international trade, through coordinated agency efforts. In addition, 
NTBs in Angola severely hamper the import of key products and inputs. There is a strong need to 
streamline NTBs, especially those related to agriculture. This exercise would include building 
capacity for streamlining non-tariff measures (NTMs) and identifying and removing non-tariff 
barriers, effective simplification of import-export procedures, and strengthening risk-management 
approaches for SPS (Sanitary and Phytosanitary) and TBT (Technical Barriers to Trade) 
measures. 
 
- Land administration: This subcomponent will support targeted interventions to strengthen land 
management and administration. Land in Angola is owned by the Government and the 2004 Land 
Law (Lei de Terras de Angola, Lei 09/04) defines the mechanisms for the Government to grant 
transferable land use rights for rural and urban land. The law recognizes customary uses, and the 
Government can grant surface rights to individuals and entities. Land is a delicate issue in 
Angola. It is estimated that 85-90% of the land is not registered due to weaknesses in land 
administration institutions, among other factors. Given the magnitude of this challenge, the 
project will focus on local level interventions based on needs identified in the priority value 
chains and focus on transparent and fair procedures for land acquisition and regularization, 
protecting communities➢❨  rights to land use and natural resources. The project will build on the 
experience of the FAO implemented Land Project and will follow the ➢❨ principles for 
responsible agriculture investments➢❨ . 
 
- Regulatory reforms to promote agriculture finance: In addition to the catalytic interventions to 
promote access to credit, the project would support reform efforts to improve the enabling 
environment for agriculture finance. Activities will be defined during preparation, but may 
include diagnosis and support to reforms to enable agricultural equipment leasing, establish a 
moveable asset registry, warehouse receipts and commodities exchange development, and 
agriculture insurance (including weather base d index insurance). 
 
46.  Component 3 ➢❨  Project Management, Coordination and Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) 
(US$ 15 million). This component will support the costs of establishing and funding the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU), which will be comprised of a technical team, supplemented by 
external consultants, to manage the following activities: Project Manager, Financial Management, 
Procurement, Social and Environmental Safeguards, Monitoring & Evaluation, Technology & 
Information, among others. Lessons learnt from Bank operations in several weak and fragile 
environments suggest that both Borrower and Bank teams typically tend to underestimate project 
implementation costs, and run into associated difficulties. The team will re-visit the estimated 
costs of implementation during project preparation. In addition, this component will address 
existing weaknesses in implementation capacity, coordination, and public-private dialogue for 
development of commercial agriculture by (i) providing capacity building and technical assistance 
to the inter-agency working group to be created by MINAGRI to coordinate project activities, and 
(ii) creating and implementing a PPD platform. 
 
47. Subcomponent 3.1 Project Implementation Unit and coordination support. This component 
will fund the activities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Strong emphasis on capacity 
building based on the experience from MOSAP will be included in this component. The MOSAP 
PIU, which will remain in place for SADCP, will be used during project preparation, but the 



Page 15 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

client has requested creating a separate PIU for this project. This component will also provide 
technical assistance and training to the inter-agency working group to be established by 
MINAGRI to coordinate project implementation. Support may include successful experiences 
from other countries in planning, development of action plans, and implementation monitoring, 
among others. 
 
48. Subcomponent 3.2. Establishing Public-Private Dialogue. The project will support increased 
public-private dialogue specific to the agribusiness sector. An assessment will be conducted on 
existing public-private dialogue mechanisms in Angola. Recommendations for establishing an 
inclusive public-private dialogue platform, including institutional arrangements, will be 
developed, followed by technical assistance for implementation. The objective of the dialogue 
will be to ensure private sector inputs to sector policies and programs, including the identification 
of priority value chains, identify specific constraints and remedy actions to increase private 
investment, and assess implementation progress, as well as avenues to improve the effectiveness 
of public investments. In addition to government and private sector, efforts will be undertaken to 
ensure the maximum representativeness of the PPD including farmer organizations, as well as 
other stakeholders as relevant, such as academia or civil society. Special attention will be given to 
ensure the voice of women is well represented and the specific constraints for women in 
agribusiness are discussed in the PPD.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
49.  The project is expected to be at national scale however, specific geographic details of the exact 
project footprint and its impacts will be determined during project preparation and will be reflected 
in the safeguards documents (ESMF, ESIA, MP, RPF, and RAP, PMP, etc.).

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
50.  At the framework level, there are no relevant gaps between the Angolan environmental 
legislation and the World Bank➢❨ s Safeguard policy and guidelines. The environmental legislation 
in Angola is quite recent and inspired by the international Conventions that Angola takes part. In 
regard to the environmental impact assessment, the existing Angolan regulatory framework covers 
the most relevant principles and best practices, including public consultation and participation, 
monitoring and licensing procedures. 
 
51.  The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) through the Institute for Agriculture Development 
(IDA) will be the lead implementing agency. IDA will have the responsibility of coordinating 
implementation by hosting a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with sub PIUs at Province level, 
tasked with the responsibility of project coordination and management using Technical Assistance 
(TA) when needed. MINAGRI has acquired reasonable experience in handling World Bank projects 
that require Safeguards attention, such as MOSAP. Hence, Commercial Agriculture Development 
Project will build up from the experience in safeguards management acquired by IDA-MINAGRI 
during MOSAP implementation. Nonetheless, substantial capacity building and training will be 
required to deal with this project Safeguards requirements, particularly in ensuring adequate 
subproject screening and subsequent preparation of ESIA/ESMP and RAP as necessary.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava (GSU07)



Page 16 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GEN01)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The construction of rural roads, electricity and water 
infrastructure for irrigation , including a series of 
land administration reforms, under component 2.3, 
may have adverse impacts on soil, water, air quality, 
flora and fauna. Some of the adverse impacts may 
include land right conflicts, soil erosion and water 
logging, alteration of water flows due to irrigation 
schemes, vegetation loss and fauna disturbance for 
access road and power transmission construction, 
risks to the human health by those handling 
pesticides. Consequently the OB/BP4.01 is triggered 
to comply with the Environmental Assessment 
safeguard requirements. Specific geographic details 
of the exact project footprint and its impacts are not 
yet know and will be determined during project 
preparation.  Hence, the recipient will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to help mitigate the potential environmental 
and social impacts by the direct and indirect 
investments in the project selected areas and to guide 
the preparation of ESIA and ESMP. The ESMF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and at the 
Infoshop prior to appraisal.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project is not expected to invest in activities that 
may have direct impacts on natural habitats. 
However, rural roads improvements and water 
infrastructure may happen in proximity to national 
parks or protected areas and therefore lead to 
downstream impacts that may affect ecosystem 
services and functions provided by natural habitats. 
Hence, OP/BP 4.04 is triggered and the ESMF will 
include the specific provisions to prevent or mitigate 
impacts on natural habitats.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes The Project will not have any direct or indirect 
negative impacts on health and quality of forests, or 
the health and safety of people who depends on 
forests. However, clearance of vegetation for rural 
roads improvements and water infrastructures may 
require compensatory reforestation and tree 
maintenance along the rehabilitated roads. OP/BP 
4.36 is triggered and the ESMF will include specific 
provisions to address the requirements.



Page 17 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes Promotion of agriculture activities may include the 
use of small quantities of pesticides, though expected 
only at a small scale, to treat orchards and crops 
against pest and infestations to enhance agriculture 
productivity of project beneficiaries. Hence, OP/
BP4.09 is triggered and a Pest Management Plan will 
be prepared to help mitigate potential risks to human 
health and to the environment using the integrated 
pest management approaches.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

Yes The policy is triggered as project investments 
involve infrastructures (roads, irrigation, electricity) 
that may require large movements of earth in areas 
likely to contain sites deemed physical cultural 
resources by communities living there (e.g. holy sites 
sacred graves, sacred forests, etc.). To ensure due 
diligence, the ESMF will include a Chance Find 
procedures that will be detailed in the ESIA/ESMP 
then reflected in the constructor contracts.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will finance activities associated with 
construction/ rehabilitation of small scale irrigation 
infrastructures, rural roads, electricity transmission 
lines that could necessitate involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in physical of people and/or loss 
of assets, means of livelihoods or resources. The 
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to adequately deal with issues of 
land acquisition resulting with compensation and/or 
the physical displacement of peoples. The RPF will 
be consulted and disclosed both in-country and by 
the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF will include 
detailed guidance for the preparation of site specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prior or during 
project implementation.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD The proposed project is not expected to engage in 
large scale irrigation activities or other activities that 
would adversely affect the quality or quantity of 
water flow within shared waterways. 
Notwithstanding, triggering this policy will be 
determined once specific details of the project are 
known.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No This policy is not triggered. The area in which the 
Project will be implemented is not known to include 



Page 18 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

BP 7.60 any disputed areas, at this stage.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
15-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: September 2016 to 
March 2017

III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas
Title: Senior Rural Development Speci

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of Angola
Contact: Joao Francisco Quipipa
Title: State  Secretary
Email: joao.quipipa@minfin.gv.ao

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture
Contact: Joaquim Duarte
Title: Director
Email: Joaquim.gomes@minagri.gv.ao

IV. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria de Fatima de Sousa Amazonas
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA) Date: 24-Aug-2016
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR) Date: 24-Aug-2016

Country Director: Name: Elisabeth Huybens (CD) Date: 25-Aug-2016



Page 19 of 19

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons. 

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 9

.

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18482
.

Project Name Tanzania: Resilient Natural Resource Management for Tourism and 
Growth (P150523)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Project ID P150523
Borrower(s) United Republic of Tanzania
Implementing Agency Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 30-Jan-2017
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Jul-2017
Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

21-Sep-2017

.

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context

1. Tanzania has experienced strong and rapid economic growth, with its annual GDP growth averaging 
around seven percent in the last decade. Despite the strong economic growth, Tanzania is one of the 
poorest countries in Africa with approximately 13 million people (28 percent of the population) still 
living below the basic needs poverty line.

2. A rapidly expanding population will require continued growth, translating into the creation of 
employment opportunities and household wealth, just to keep pace. The population is growing at an 
average rate of 2.9 percent, one of the fastest in the world, with about 1.3 million people being added 
to the population annually (NBS, 2009). Economic expansion must be accompanied by creation of 
quality jobs if poverty rates are to continue to drop.

3. Tanzania's growth and economy depend heavily on its renewable natural assets such as water, 
forests, and wildlife. Almost half of GDP is harnessed from natural resources in agriculture, energy, 
and tourism.  An estimated 89 percent of the country's water withdrawals are for irrigation, which 
contributes to 20 percent of agricultural production from 6 percent of the land. An estimated 90 
percent of Tanzania's energy needs are satisfied by water and wood fuels: hydropower generates 39 
percent of the installed 1,438MW electricity generation capacity, while charcoal and fuel wood serve 
as the overwhelming source of energy for urban and rural households. Tanzania's tourism industry - 
which is largely based on the country's unique natural resources and wildlife - is an important driver of 
the national economy, generating $1.88 billion in revenues in 2013, or 13 percent of GDP, in 2013. 
Tourism contributes approximately 28% the total export earnings in 2013.

4. The majority of the population lives in rural areas, and is dependent on natural resources in the form 
of food, fuel, and fodder. In 2010, an estimated 73.6 percent of Tanzanians were rural residents. These 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 9

people largely comprise 80 percent of Tanzanian households who depend on agriculture, the majority 
of which is rain fed, as their primary economic activity. Food security is often supplemented by bush 
meat protein. They depend overwhelmingly on forests for their energy; only 3 percent of rural 
populations have access to electricity, with most households being dependent on charcoal or fuel 
wood.

5. Rural poverty remains pervasive and deep. All data sources suggest that Tanzania has not made 
adequate progress in raising incomes in rural areas, where the majority of the poor live. Lack of access 
to technology, credit, water, and power resulted in stagnant productivity and high vulnerability to 
shocks, leaving many rural households in the same or weaker position as at the beginning of the 
century.

6. Slowing agricultural growth is a challenge in the rural space. The agricultural sector has seen its 
share of the economy decline from 48 percent in 1990 to 28 percent in 2010. Agricultural GDP grew at 
around 4 percent per year since 2000, or only around 1 percent in per capita terms, with acute droughts 
in 2004 and 2006. Yields of staple crops, which are the livelihood of small farmers, appear to have 
been flat or declining, with agricultural growth primarily driven by extension of cultivated areas, along 
with modest shifts in the composition of crop production.

7. Addressing rural poverty will require the creation of new off-farm jobs. The share of goods and 
services exports of GDP has grown from 13.4 percent in 2000 to 23.2 in 2009. In 1998, minerals and 
non-factor services, mainly tourism, accounted for 47 percent of exports, while they rose to 66 percent 
by 2010. In 2013, tourism represented the largest source of foreign exchange. At the same time, the 
share of traditional agricultural exports declined from 60 percent of total exports in 1998 to 12 percent 
in 2009, replaced mostly by tourism and minerals such as gold. Manufacturing exports have grown by 
about 17 percent annually since 2005, but account for less than 5 percent of GDP and 25 percent of 
total merchandise trade. Efforts to promote rural development must look to expanding off-farm 
employment opportunities. Tanzania's tourism industry, which is predominantly wildlife-based, 
provides an important potential source of new rural jobs and household revenues, provided linkages 
with local communities are in place.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

8. Tanzania's natural resource-based economic sectors such as wildlife-based tourism have strong 
potential for generating economic growth, creating jobs, and improving livelihoods. Tanzania is one of 
the world's mega diverse countries with its outstanding wildlife, ecosystems, and other natural assets, 
and represents a prime global tourist destination with significant potential for growth. It is the 
abundance of wildlife and unique ecosystems that have made Tanzania a prime African tourist 
destination, generating significant revenues. In fact, Tanzania is very successful in attracting high-
expenditure tourists; Tanzania earns more money per tourist than any other country in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Notably, despite significantly fewer tourist arrivals, its tourism sector earned as much as 
neighboring Kenya before the recent decline of tourism in the latter due to security concerns. 
Tanzania's "low-volume high-value" approach has significant economic, social and environmental 
benefits, particularly in ecologically sensitive areas such as the greater Serengeti eco-system and other 
areas.

9. Tourism today is largely concentrated on a few areas, in and around the Serengeti, Ngorogoro 
Crater, and Mount Kilimanjaro (i.e., the "Northern Circuit") and Zanzibar. While there are many high-
potential tourism sites, ranging from high mountains to spectacular landscapes and coral-fringed 
beaches, there are signs of over-crowding. Pressures on the carrying capacity of key ecosystems such 
as the greater Serengeti lead to concerns that future expansion of visitors in some of Tanzania's key 



Page 3 of 9

attractions may soon undermine the quality of the tourism experience. As highlighted in a recent 
World Bank study (in draft), the expansion of the tourism sector must consider options to ensure that 
growth in tourism does not compromise the natural asset base; that is, efforts to increase tourism 
numbers and revenues must not undermine the quality of the very resource base that tourists are 
attracted and paying to see.

10. The Government of Tanzania (GOT) is keen to develop new tourism products to expand the 
tourism sector while in core areas maintaining the low-volume high-value approach that has been 
successful in capturing the highest per capita revenue in the region. Specifically, it is interested in 
developing a more diversified tourism sector that balances the focus on the "Northern Circuit" with 
developing the "Southern Circuit", which includes a number of parks (i.e., Ruaha, Katavi, Mahale, 
Kitulo), game reserves (Selous being the largest), two Rift Valley lakes (Nyasa and Tanganyika), and 
other areas of cultural interest. Such elements would be a core part of an updated tourism policy.

11. The sustainable management of natural resources is fundamental to Tanzania's economic growth. 
Natural resources are among the few assets that Tanzania's poor access and utilize. Sustainable 
management of natural resources is therefore an integral part of development, poverty alleviation and 
growth. This suggests that depletion of the natural resource base will inevitably compromise poverty 
alleviation efforts unless there is rapid and exponential growth in employment to absorb labor 
surpluses and provide high quality jobs. Already, poor land use and watershed management practices, 
which lead to degradation of forests and watercourses, are threatening the very natural resource base 
upon which Tanzania's economy and poor depend on, while rampant wildlife poaching threatens to 
reduce the assets that are key to current and future tourism potential. Recent GOT studies point to the 
need to ensure that decisions on development initiatives are supported by robust data and information 
in order to avoid unintentional externalities, which can in turn lead to constrained future development 
opportunities. Given the strong links with poverty, livelihoods, and food security, particular care 
should be taken to ensure sound management of land, water, and wildlife are a core focus of any rural 
intervention.

12. Water is at the heart of the sustainable natural resource management imperative. Tanzania, long 
considered a water-rich nation, is increasingly struggling with local incidences of water insecurity, 
driven by unsustainable levels of agricultural abstraction and poor watershed and land management. In 
some areas, such as the Pangani, Rufiji, Wami-Ruvu and the Internal Drainage Basins, conflicts over 
water among different users - farmers, hydropower plants, wildlife - are already undermining 
economic potential of sectoral investments in agriculture, energy and tourism, and may curtail 
Tanzania's ambitious growth plans. Notably, some of the areas targeted for increased irrigation under 
various government programs are already known to suffer from some degree of water conflict.

13. For example, the Great Ruaha River provides about 56 percent of flow to the Mtera and Kidatu 
power plants, which together are responsible for 50 percent of the country's total hydropower capacity. 
Within the Great Ruaha basin, expansion of (mainly rice) agriculture in the Usangu Plains from about 
14,500 ha in 1986, to 24,000 ha in 1998, to 115,000 ha in 2013, 87 percent of which is small-scale 
informal irrigation farms. As a result of this irrigation expansion, the Great Ruaha River has since 
2005 gone from a perennial river, serving as the lifeblood of Ruaha National Park, and a key input to 
the Mtera/Kidatu power system, to a seasonal river, leading to impacts on tourism and wildlife, power 
production and Tanzania's economy.

14. The sustainable management of natural resources across users at the watershed, landscape and 
ecosystem levels is a key condition to the success of the government's plans. Responding to this 
challenge requires strong cross-sectoral coordination and action. Improved watershed management, 



Page 4 of 9

including promoting sound landscape management and conservation practices, is needed to ensure the 
long-term productivity of key basins. Recent studies by the GOT suggest that while achieving 
important short-term goals in target sectors, these programs may unintentionally lead to negative 
consequences in other sectors and over the longer term.

15. Specifically, the impact of unplanned irrigation expansion in the Great Ruaha sub basin on 
downstream flow, has led to significant negative impacts on tourism (in Ruaha National Park) and 
energy generation (at Mtera and Kidatu dams) as noted in the Ministry of Water's Integrated Water 
Resources Management and Development Plan for Rufiji Basin. Likewise the Strategic Regional 
Environmental and Social Assessment undertaken for the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor 
points to the need for careful planning of agricultural development in order to avoid unintended 
downstream impact on water quantity and quality.

16. Climate change represents an additional important risk for Tanzania's natural asset-based growth. 
Tanzania is already experiencing changes in its climate: the average temperature rose by 1°C between 
1960 and 2006, and models indicate future increases in average annual temperatures between 1°C to 
3°C by the 2050s. Likewise, precipitation is increasingly unpredictable with studies showing a shift in 
the onset of the rainy season(s). Changes in timing and quantity of rainfall are also predicted, with 10 
percent annual precipitation decreases possible in the south, decreases up to 26 percent in the north, 
and heavier, more concentrated rain events along the coast.  Water security, which is already under 
threat from current climate variability and social, economic and environmental change, is likely to be 
under greater threat from future changes in the climate. Increasing temperatures and changing rainfall 
patterns will have multi-dimensional effects on the Tanzanian economy, affecting agricultural 
productivity, energy use, water dynamics, and the wildlife upon which tourism depends. Efforts to 
promote climate resilience in these key natural asset-based sectors will have important longer-term 
effects on food security and livelihoods.

17. To achieve the GOT's goal to expand broad-based tourism in a sustainable way, a long-term 
concerted effort is needed.  The following deserve special attention:
- Managing water resources. Water is an increasingly scarce resource in many areas critical for 
wildlife and tou rism, including the Rufiji Basin, which is dominated by the Great Ruaha River. This 
has far reaching consequences for the ecology of parks, such as Ruaha.
- Developing the value proposition and strategy for tourism, with a focus on the "Southern Circuit". 
Market research, positioning, planning, and focused development are needed to utilize and 
commercialize the area's tourism potential. Strong public and private sector partnership would be 
important to leverage respective roles.
- Providing an enabling environment for the private sector. There are many obstacles for private 
operators to enter and operate in the tourism sector in Tanzania, particularly for local operators. The 
policy and regulatory environment, including a comprehensive look at the licensing requirements, 
would need to be reformed.
- Developing visitor infrastructure. Infrastructure, such as air strips, visitor services, logistics, 
hospitality, and park management investments, are essential elements of enhancing accessibility and 
the overall quality of the tourism product.
- Curbing wildlife poaching. One of the key threats to the management of existing and potential 
tourism assets is the recent unprecedented increase in wildlife poaching. Elephant populations in 
Tanzania have declined precipitously: between 2009 and 2013, populations in the Selous -Mikumi 
Ecosystem declined by 66 percent, while in the Ruaha-Rungwa ecosystem, populations declined by 
36.5 percent. The crisis has been fueled by the rising price of ivory in the illegal destination markets, 
which provides a strong incentive to local populations who do not otherwise see direct benefits from 
wildlife.



Page 5 of 9

- Linking tourism with local economies and communities. Despite the national economic importance 
of tourism, at the local level communities in and around protected areas are some of the poorest in the 
country. While in other African countries (such as Namibia, Mozambique and parts of Kenya), tourism 
is providing an important source of revenue and employment to local communities, Tanzania's current 
policies, which aim to promote local benefit from tourism, have not been as effective. Rather, local 
populations, which are highly dependent on natural resources for food, fodder and fuel, generally 
consider wildlife to be worth more dead than alive. Sustainable tourism development would need to 
rely on stronger connection with local economies through training and job creation, supply chain 
development, and other forms of benefit sharing.

Relationship to CAS

18. The proposed Project is consistent with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
(CPSPR) FY12-15 (Report No. 80313-TZ) for the United Republic of Tanzania that was discussed by 
the Board on July 3, 2014. The CPSPR has two strategic clusters: (i) Productive investments for 
growth of labor-intensive industries and job creation; and (ii) Programs that target reduction of 
extreme poverty and improvements in quality of social services and six strategic objectives. The 
proposed project contributes to CPSPR strategic cluster one - Productive investments for growth of 
labor-intensive industries and job creation. The proposed project contributes to the CPSPR's second set 
of activities under cluster one which addresses key infrastructure gaps and promotes sustainable 
management of natural resources. In particular, the proposed project enhances ecosystem resilience 
and improves the environmental services of natural resources through development of infrastructure to 
better protect environmental assets. The project would also enhance capacities of government 
institutions at the national, districts and village levels as well as park and wildlife management 
authorities.

19. The proposed Project is one of the initiatives which contribute to the TerrAfrica Platform for 
Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM). It also supports the African Wildlife for 
Development Program in support of the Elephant Protection Initiative supported by the Bank and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) along with other development partners.

20. The proposed project also contributes to the GOT's strategies and plans, in particular current jobs 
creation initiatives, tourism development and tourism growth, and rural economic development.

.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)

21. The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environment Objective (GEO) of the 
proposed project are to improve natural resources management in priority areas of Southern Tanzania. 
By achieving the proposed PDO, the Project will assist the GOT in addressing rural poverty which has 
been persistent in and around the country?s parks and game reserves, home to globally significant 
biodiversity. The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical 
assistance and capacity building for communities living in and around the priority areas, and 
government institutions at the national, sub-national and local levels.
Key Results (From PCN)
22. The achievement of the PDO and key results will be measured by a set of key outcome indicators. 
Proposed key outcome indicators are listed below.

a. Land area brought under an improved and climate resilient catchment system (ha).
b. Protected area management effectiveness enhanced (%);
c. Number of visitor bed nights in targeted areas with tourism potential (%); and



Page 6 of 9

d. Direct project beneficiaries (#), of which XX% are female.
.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description

23. The PDO will be achieved through the following four project components.

24. Component 1 - Improving management and development of priority tourism assets (Total Cost 
US$50m). This component will focus on investments that aim at improving the management of natural 
resources inside priority protected areas in southern Tanzania to increase tourism. The expected 
outcome of this component is an increased number of tourists and bed nights in priority tourism sites. 
Expected outputs include (i) an adopted tourism strategy for Southern Tanzania; (ii) an adopted 
tourism master plan for southern Tanzania; (iii) number of roads, enhanced airstrips, viewing 
platforms, and visitor centers built; (v) a strengthened monitoring system in place to improve wildlife 
protection; (vi) number of trainings conducted; and (vii) strengthened policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 1.1: Improve the knowledge base at (i) the sub-national level by assessing tourism 
potential and investment needs, developing a new tourism strategy, and a tourism master plan for 
southern Tanzania; and (ii) the site level through ecological monitoring and conservation planning and 
integrated planning for key tourism aspects.

Sub-Component 1.2: Improve tourism infrastructure to enhance accessibility and the overall quality of 
the tourism product, including through, e.g., building unpaved roads inside protected areas to provide 
improved access to viewing areas, enhancing airstrips to allow for planes to safely land, and building 
viewing platforms and visitor centers. Develop Public Private Partnership (PPP) model to help 
enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 1.3: Improve the capacity for management of tourism assets. Improve the capacity for 
management and development of tourism assets through training and supplying of goods including for 
wildlife monitoring.

Sub-Component 1.4: Strengthen policy and institutional framework including through private-public 
dialogue.

25. Component 2 - Enhancing local economic benefits from tourism (Total Costs US$20m). This 
component will support investments that ensure local communities in vicinity to the protected areas 
benefit from tourism. The expected outcomes of this component are increased community employment 
levels in tourism and wildlife related sectors, while expected outputs include: (i) creation of PPP 
ventures in priority areas; (ii) number of micro-finance groups operational; (iii) number of tourism 
infrastructure outputs to promote local benefits built; and (iv) an adopted policy and institutional 
framework.

Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthen supply value chains for local communities and businesses that are 
linked to tourism (e.g., vocational training to enhance skills in communities to better participate in 
improved labor market such as hospitality industry and guide services), and infrastructure to promote 
local benefits may be supported (e.g., building schools).

Sub-Component 2.2: Build awareness and capacity to engage with the private sector including through 
nurturing SMEs and enabling PPPs. Develop model and associated processes to help ensure local 



Page 7 of 9

economic benefits when using PPP to enhance tourism asset management and accessibility.

Sub-Component 2.3: Build capacity for communities to manage wildlife and tourism (e.g., 
investments in community co-management initiatives).

Sub-Component 2.4: Provide access to finance (e.g., piloting targeted support in the form of micro-
finance or grants to support alternative livelihood development including activities linked with tourism 
supply and support).

Sub-Component 2.5: The policy and institutional framework will be strengthened.

26. Component 3 - Improving landscape management (Total Cost US$20m). This component will 
support investments and technical assistance to promote the integrated management of landscapes with 
an aim to securing environmental services within priority sub-basins in Southern Tanzania.  The 
expected outcomes for this component are improved land management in watersheds that are critical 
for agricultural productivity and/or priority tourism assets. Expected outputs include (i) number of 
watershed management plans prepared, (ii) number of improved soil and water management measures 
in place; and (iii) number of incentive programs established.

Sub-Component 3.1: Support activities to sustainably manage watersheds through a participatory 
process.  Depending on the size of the watershed, a planning unit will be micro-watershed of XX ha.  
The key activities include inter alia (i) planning, implementation of micro-watershed plans, and related 
capacity building (e.g., link village land use planning with watershed planning, studies), and (ii) 
communication and awareness raising activities.

Sub-Component 3.2: Strengthen small-scale water and land management through (i) implementation 
of measures developed in planning process referred to in component 1.1 above; (ii) check dams, 
control gates, and erosion control measures to reduce run-off and improve water use efficiency; (iii) 
reforestation and reduced deforestation; and (iv) sustainable incentive programs such as payment for 
environment services to promote water use efficiency and upper watershed management for protecting 
water sources.

Sub-Component 3.3: Strengthen policy and decision-making capabilities to support the protection of 
key natural assets. Activities will include (i) an inventory of key wetland, wildlife and tourism areas; 
(ii) improved monitoring; and (iii) capacity building for analytics to inform decision-making.

27. Component 4: Project management (Total cost: $10m). This Component will focus on project 
management arrangements and mechanisms including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 
implementation. In addition, funds under this Component will be used to support the procurement of 
essential goods and equipment such as vehicles, office equipment and furniture, imagery, software and 
other accessories, etc. To strengthen project management, funds would be available to finance selected 
technical assistance such as for safeguards, fiduciary management, and monitoring and evaluation. The 
expected outcome of this component would be the effective implementation of the project activities 
with due diligence and efficiency.

IV. Safeguard Policies that Might Apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 X



Page 8 of 9

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 X

Forests OP/BP 4.36 X

Pest Management OP 4.09 X

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 X

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 X

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 X

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 X

Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 X

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 X
.

.

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 150.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00

Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount

International Development Association (IDA) 150.00

Total 150.00
.

.

VI. Contact point
.

World Bank
.

PHWB Contact: Daniel Mira-Salama
PHWB Title: Senior Environmental Specialis
PHWB Tel: 5355+3712
PHWB Email: dmirasalama@worldbank.org
.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
.
PHBORROWERSEC
TION

Name: United Republic of Tanzania
PHBORROWERSEC
TION

Contact: Doto M. James
PHBORROWERSEC
TION

Title: Permanent Secretary
PHBORROWERSEC
TION

Tel: 002552221111746
PHBORROWERSEC
TION

Email: ps@mof.go.tz
.

.

Implementing Agencies
.
PHIMPLEAGENCYS
ECTION Name: Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
PHIMPLEAGENCYS
ECTION Contact: Major General Gaudence S.  Milanzi
PHIMPLEAGENCYS
ECTION Title: Permanent Secretary
PHIMPLEAGENCYS
ECTION Tel: 00255-22-2861870
PHIMPLEAGENCYS
ECTION Email: ps@mnrt.go.tz
.
.

.

VII. For more information contact:



Page 9 of 9

.

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects














































Page 1 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC33685

Project Name Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project 
(P153604)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Wastewater Collection and Transportation (40%), Solid waste management 

(20%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal produc tion 
(20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Pollution management and 
environmental health (30%), Water resource management (30%), Parti 
cipation and civic engagement (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153604
Borrower(s) People's Republic of China
Implementing Agency Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

27-Dec-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

10-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

02-Nov-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

31-Mar-2017

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
China's rapid urbanization over the past three decades has facilitated impressive economic and 
social gains. The country became the second largest economy in the world in 2010, with over half of 
its population now living in cities. About 500 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the 
process. Further transition is projected to add another 300 million to China's urban population by 
2030 and continue boosting the economic growth. Unfortunately, China's economic gains came at a 
significant cost to its environment, with serious implications on health and quality of life, as 
environmental depletion and degradation were overlooked during China's impressive economic 
growth period. The cost of environmental degradation and resource depletion in China is estimated 



Page 2 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

to approach 10 percent of GDP, of which water pollution accounts for 2.1 percent, based on China 
2030 Study estimates. The Government of China has recognized that it cannot continue on this road 
and has put in place plans to ensure the environmental sustainability of its economic development 
pathways.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The Chinese water sector suffers from both water quantity and quality challenges. In terms of water 
quantity, with 20 percent of the world's population but only 7 percent of its freshwater, water 
scarcity is a major problem for sustainable urban development in China. Moreover, there is also a 
strong disparity in spatial distribution of its water resources, as only 19 percent of China's water 
resources are available to 40 percent of the population in the north, where most of the major grain 
production is located, and in the west. In terms of water quality, due to environmentally 
unsustainable development trajectory pursued over the last three decades, a significant portion of 
China's freshwater sources are polluted. According to 2010 data, about 40 percent of rivers in China 
were seriously polluted and unfit for drinking water. Similarly, the groundwater quality in more 
than half of 200 cities surveyed was classified as 'bad' (in 40.3 percent of cities) or 'extremely 
bad' (14.7 percent). Similar figures are reported for the quality of other water bodies in the country, 
including lakes. 
 
Poyang Lake is the largest freshwater lake in China with a maximum surface area reaching 5,050 
km2 and a storage capacity - 30 billion m3. The basin area of the lake is about 162,200 km2 
covering over 97 percent of the land area of Jiangxi Province. The lake plays many vital functions, 
such as hydro-morphologic, environmental, social, cultural and economic; the livelihood of more 
than 40 million people is closely linked to the water and environment of Poyang Lake. Poyang Lake 
connects to Yangtze River in the middle reach at Hukou, Jiujiang County. The dynamics of the lake 
water movement is governed by both the stages of the Yangtze River and the discharges from its 
five major tributaries (Gan, Xin, Fu, Rao and Xin Rivers). While the annual water level in the 
Poyang Lake has remained stable in the recent years, the area of the lake fluctuates dramatically 
between the wet and dry seasons. In normal years, the average lake area is about 3,200 km2. The 
fluctuations are also affected by severe climate events, e.g., in early 2002, due to serious drought, 
the area of the lake reached a low of 200 km2.   
  
Poyang Lake is also a wetland of national and global importance, which provides a key habitat for 
half a million migratory birds. It is a house for over 95% of world's white crane, 60% of world??s 
white-napped cranes, 55% of world's hooded crane, 60% of world's white storks, and 96% of 
world's swan goose population. Poyang Lake is also a species gene pool with 156 kinds of aquatic 
plants, 136 planktons, 230 kinds of benthic animals, 58 kinds of fishes, 89 kinds of water birds, etc. 
It also plays a significant role in the seasonal flow regulation of the Yangtze River. The average 
amount of lake water entering the Yangtze River is about 150 billion m3, amounting to 15.6% of the 
mean annual runoff of the river.  
 
The water quality of the Lake has been comparatively good (with 83% falling under Class I ~ III, 
13% under Class IV, and 4% under Class V ). However, research results of the World Bank 
supported TCC5 project and the available monitoring data of Ministry of Environmental Protection 
show a concerning trend of water quality deterioration, with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) gradually increasing and dissolved oxygen (DO) gradually decreasing. 
The existing data on COD discharge collected by the local governments in the lake basin show that 
domestic wastewater (about 60%) and solid waste disposal (about 30%) produce the major water 



Page 3 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

pollution. While industrial pollution remains an issue, discharges from industries are gradually 
decreasing. Site visit also found uncontrolled solid waste disposal and insufficient treatment, and 
improper fish feeding and improper habit of farm land fertilizing also lead to severe water pollution. 
By provincial environmental statistics, only 79% of domestic wastewater is treated in urban areas of 
Jiangxi province, which is much lower than the national average of 85%. Similarly, solid waste 
collection and treatment rate in the province is 69% compared to the national average of 80%.   
 
Conclusions from recent studies and discussions with Provincial governments identify the following 
key causes for increase of pollution levels in the waterbodies feeding into Poyang Lake: (a) lack of 
basin wide integrated water/environment management; (b) weak water quality and pollution source 
pollution monitoring and disclosure system; (c) lack of public awareness and incentives in the 
communities on environmental protection; (d) weak enforcement of regulations related to disposal 
of untreated industrial and domestic wastewater directly into water bodies; (e) lack of investment in 
infrastructure for wastewater collection and treatment systems in urban and rural areas as well as for 
solid waste management in the small cities and towns and rural areas; and (f) lack of use of good 
practices on proper domestic solid waste disposal and agriculture practices. 
 
Government of China and Jiangxi Provincial government recognize the needs to protect the Lake. 
Series of measures have been triggered at national, provincial, and county levels to protect the value 
the Poyang Lake as a unique resource and a national heritage, and to control the lake's pollution and 
to restore the vital water quality and its associa ted functions. The Government of China issued the 
Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone Development Plan (PLEDP) in 2009 focusing on 
ecological development of Poyang Lake. Under the PLEDP, there is an implementation plan and 18 
specific sector plans, including water environment management, water resources, five river 
management plan, etc. In 2014, Jiangxi government also issued a plan for establishment of 
ecological and civilization demonstration areas, stating actions and targets for industrial, domestic 
wastewater and solid waste management. Based on the plan, by 2020, COD would be decreased by 
5% compared to the 2015 baseline, wastewater treatment ratio would reach 90% and urban solid 
waste treatment ratio - 85%. The PLEDP together with other relevant sector plans foresee 
significant increase in size of population and economic activity by 2020, with the focus on tourism 
industry. This, together with unresolved improvements in infrastructure, is expected to result in big 
pressure on water quality in the lake basin. 
 
Following the series government plans, the government of Jiangxi has been conducting six major 
ecological environment protection group projects: (a) Poyang Lake wetland and biodiversity 
protection projects; (b) Poyang Lake-rim green belt projects; (c) pollution prevention and control 
projects including wastewater, solid waste and non-point agricultural pollution control; (d) blue sky 
action demonstration projects; (e) circular economy, energy conservation, and emission reduction 
projects; and (f) ecological cultural projects. 
 
In 2013, the World Bank approved the Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone 
Small Town Development Project with the objective to improve key public services in participating 
small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to priority infrastructure. Though overall 
project implementation has been satisfactory, there are a number of challenges including the rapid 
urbanization rendering some of the sub-projects irrelevant/unviable, capacity constraints and issues 
related to O&M for wetland, solid waste and wastewater facilities. The proposed project would 
expand the coverage to include seven additional counties, particularly focusing on water 
environment management and solid waste management infrastructure while taking into account 



Page 4 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

lessons from the Small Town Development Project and incorporating in its design best international 
practices.  
 
Note : Chinese surface water quality standards: Class I is good quality water which with simple 
purification is drinkable (DO>7.5mg/l; COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.15; P<0.02); Class II is good 
quality water which is slightly contaminated, drinkable after normal purification (DO>6mg/l; 
COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.5; P<0.1); Class III contaminated water which could be drinkable 
after treatment (DO>5mg/l; COD<20; BOD5<4; NH3-N<1; P<0.2); Class IV water is not drinkable 
(DO>3mg/l; COD<30; BOD5<6; NH3-N<1.5; P<0.3); and Class V is bad quality water (DO>2mg/
l; COD<40; BOD5<10; NH3-N<2; P<0.4).

Relationship to CAS
The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, specifically the 
objectives set under focus area I --"Supporting greener growth", including Enhancing Urban 
Environmental Services; Promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices; and Demonstrating 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management. The project design is in line with the national strategic 
development plan of China, as envisioned in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone 
Development Plan (2009) and Jiangxi Province implementation plan for establishment of ecological 
and civilization demonstration areas (2014). The project is also in line with 12th Five-year Plans 
and draft 13th Five-year plan at Jiangxi provincial and county levels. 
  
The project is expected to contribute to both China??s national strategy on water security agenda 
and to the World Bank Group twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. 
Water security has become a high priority at highest for decision makers at all levels (central and 
local government). The strategy focuses on applying systematic treatment and combination of 
structural and non-structural measures in water sector to promote ecological safety, economic 
security and the safety of human health and lives. The project would contribute to, through 
integrated and participatory approaches, sustainable water/environment management, improvement 
of ecological condition, promotion of social and economic environment of Poyang Lake Basin, as 
one of the key areas of Chinese water system. 
 
For the contribution to the twin goals, as the poor are known to live relatively closer to degraded 
and polluted areas, and have less access to water and solid waste disposal infrastructure, they are 
expected to directly benefit from the project. The project will aim at addressing specific challenges 
that the poor, vulnerable and women face, as identified through social assessment. The project is 
also expected to boost shared prosperity, as improved water quality and local living conditions will 
likely result in such benefits as increase in land value, access to income earning opportunities etc.     
 
To achieve maximum impact and to address the higher strategic objectives indicated above, the 
project will incorporate an "integrated" approach in the design of the activities in selected counties, 
and focus on enhancement of ecological and institutional sustainability of water/environment and 
strengthening of domestic wastewater and solid waste management system. This will involve 
participation of communities during project preparation and implementation as well as in designing 
long-term operation & maintenance mechanisms to ensure sustainability of the investments. 
Ultimately, successful implementation of the project will help to facilitate the improvement and 
restoration of water quality and ecological environment of the Poyang Lake basin. It would also 
contribute towards the enhancement of water regime in the Yangtze River. 
 



Page 5 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Note :   "Integrated approach" refers to a mechanism whereby structural and non-structural 
measures are fully utilized, as well as whereby management of environmental protection is done in 
a collaborative and coordinated way throughout the project cycle involving all stakeholders (from 
different sectors and disciplines) and based on consensus building to ensure sustainability.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to reduce the pollutant discharge into key selected waterways 
in the Poyang Lake basin and to improve management of water environment.

Key Results (From PCN)
The proposed PDO level results indicators include: (a) Direct project beneficiaries (core sector 
indicator), of which female beneficiaries; (b) Nutrient load reduction (nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus 
(P)) achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (c) Volume (mass) of COD 
pollution load reduction achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (d) domestic 
solid waste reduced or recycled under the project (core sector indicator; tons/year); (e) Increased 
number of counties in full compliance with Provincial Water and Environmental Protection 
Guidelines . 
 
Note :   The guidelines broadly include elements such as citizen participatory engagement and 
institutional capacity to undertake regular water monitoring, reporting and enforcement.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
a. Overview.  
 
The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water 
environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake Basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan, 
Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, Shangli, have been selected for project planning and implementation; total 
population of the seven counties are about 5 million. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern 
of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close proximity to the main Lake, one 
site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the Lake, two sites adjacent to the tributary 
streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of 
Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in 
these contributing catchments, and vice versa.  
 
The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water 
quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste 
management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on 
engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to 
enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, 
urban storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and 
transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.  
 
b. Proposed Project components.  
 



Page 6 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

The proposed project activities consist of four main components as below:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Managing Water Environment in Poyang 
Lake Basin (US$15 million): This component will finance capacity building and awareness raising 
activities to improve participatory wastewater and solid waste management, enforcement of 
environmental regulations and creating pre-conditions for sustainability of project results. The 
component will be structured in two key sub-components: (a) institutional capacity building and 
enforcement and (b) sustainable Poyang Lake basin management.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Capacity Building and Enforcement (USD11 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to: (a) strengthening of the current integrated Poyang Lake 
Basin management institutional architecture (River manager as leader of the party - River 
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and 
guidance, and Poyang Lake water/environment financial and investment mechanism study; (b) 
strengthen Basin-wide water/environment management planning: (i) support an integrated 
vulnerability and sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake (water quality improvement and protection- 
water quantity control - land uses change -biodiversity conservation- urbanization and demographic 
changes- tourism impact and industrialization-basin pollution, and providing comments on 
integrated action plan leading to series of projects with implementation sequencing and synergies in 
line with the long-term commitment) along with resilience and adaptation measures; (ii) promotion 
of integrated basin plans for the five tributaries of the Poyang Lake; (c) strengthening knowledge 
sharing of integrated lake management and establish Lake management advisory platform - with the 
continuous pressure on water resources, the lakes under environmental stress are evidenced across 
China; and (d) strengthening the water/environment monitoring system through upgrade/newly 
installation of water/environment monitoring facilities, enhancement of the integrated monitoring 
information system, early warning system, real-time data disclosure etc. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable Poyang Lake Basin Management (USD4 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to enhancing conditions for lake basin environmental 
management sustainability, including: (a) enhancement of citizen participation and information 
disclosure - translating the high level ownership of the Poyang protection to grassroots level could 
contribute to the rapid and broader success of the Poyang Lake conservation. Building on the 
institutional structure and ecological compensation mechanism, the citizen participation could 
involve labor corporations (fishermen, farmers, factory workers and industries etc.) in having a 
voice in Poyang Lake protection; and (b) ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M 
sustainability¡ª the project will aim to increment the quality of innovation and appropriate 
technology with the economics of their financing for sustainable operation and maintenance 
implementation; and strengthening of incentive mechanisms, i.e., the compensation scheme for 
ecological protection of the Poyang Lake that could be further strengthened building on proven 
incentive mechanisms; 
 
Component 2: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration and Enhancement of 
Domestic Wastewater Management System (US$ 140 million). This component will finance 
activities related to protection and restoration of the water environment of selected rural and urban 
water environments in Poyang Lake basin through collection and treatment of urban and rural 
wastewater; collection and safe disposal of stormwater from both rural and urban watersheds; and 
implementation of integrated engineering and biological as well as Low Impact Development (LID) 
interventions in selected rural and urban waterways.  The aim of the component is to demonstrate an 



Page 7 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

integrated watershed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving 
water quality and environmental protection caused by the municipal wastewater and aquaculture 
sources, and establishing ecological pollution-control zones along the course of pollutant movement.
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration (USD66 million): 
This sub-component will finance implementation of integrated engineering and biological 
mitigation measures and Low Impact Development (LID) in selected small lakes, rivers, and 
catchments in Poyang Lake basin. This will include restoration of water environment in Zhuhu Lake 
in Poyang county, Pipa Lake (river) in Yugan county, and ecological restoration of stream corridor 
of Zoujiazui River in Duchang county. Key activities will include construction of stormwater 
collection and diversion systems from upland watersheds, rural wastewater treatment facilities, 
distributed wastewater collection along lake banks, introduction of good aquaculture practices (for 
fishing farming and pearl culture) and water environment monitoring system.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Enhancement of Domestic Wastewater Management System (USD74 million): 
This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and expansion of urban wastewater collection and 
treatment systems to improve capacity of wastewater collection and treatment of selected counties. 
Main project activities include: construction of wastewater collection networks (including 
household connections); and construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants in 
Duchang, Jiang'an, and Jishui counties.  
 
Component 3: Construction of solid waste collection and transportation system (USD75 million): 
This component is to improve solid waste collection and transportation system in rural and urban 
areas to reduce solid waste disposal to river system of Poyang Lak Basin. This component will 
finance setting up solid waste separation system, construction of solid waste collection stations and 
transportation stations, and establishment of sustainable solid waste collection and transportation 
system, and establishment of monitoring and management systems in Shangli, Duchang, Poyang, 
Yugan, and Jing'an Counties. 
 
Component 4: Project Implementation Support (USD15 million). This component is to support the 
effective and efficient implementation of the project activities. This component will finance project 
management, project implementation supervision, project social, resettlement and environmental 
monitoring, domestic and international training and study tours, and relevant project management 
equipment and facilities. Main project activities will include procurement of office equipment, 
domestic and international training and study tours, procurement of project implementation 
supervisors, procurement of social and resettlement and environmental monitoring services, etc. 
 
d. Gender. 
 
There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-
being, and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty. In water 
supply operations specifically, there has long been an understanding of importance of incorporating 
a gender perspective, because women and girls are most often the primary users, providers and 
managers of water in their households and are the guardians of household hygiene. Limited access 
to water and poor water quality have direct impact on household welfare and health. If a water 
system falls into disrepair, women are the ones forced to travel long distances over many hours to 
meet their families' water needs. Therefore, women and girls benefit most when services are 
improved. Given women's household roles and responsibilities, they are also more likely to impact 



Page 8 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

decisions related to ways to collect and dispose the domestic waste. Finally, women can greatly 
contribute to oversight of a well-functioning community enforcement of environmental reg  ulations 
and also such aspects as decisions related to water and solid waste collection fee levels.  
 
Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a 
gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements; 
and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The 
project will conduct a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects will 
be paid. This will include investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project 
areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and 
explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to 
achieve project objectives. The project design will particularly emphasize female participation in 
project activities, capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's 
participation will be included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during 
project implementation. 
 
e. Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small 
Town Project 
 
There are valuable lessons of Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Zone Small Town Project 
implementation that will be taken into account during further design of the proposed project. The 
on-going project faces challenges in terms of institutional capacity and inter-departmental 
coordination, issue that is also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling 
and reducing substances at their source is the most effective way of keeping pollutants out of the 
lake. This requires clarity of responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet 
the joint objective. While industrial pollution control is under the responsibility of provincial 
Environmental Protection Department (EPD), agricultural land and aquaculture pollution control is 
managed by the provincial Agriculture Department (AD).   
 
To address these problems, it is critical that county Government maintains ownership of the 
proposed sub-projects, even with the change of the county leadership to ensure continued focus on 
initially agreed project activities and development objectives. Similarly, continuity and retention of 
project staff at the county level (including PMOs, PLGs and Expert Groups) is important to ensure 
good capacity developed under the project is maintained. Finally, the project will also raise 
awareness among communities and farmers.  
 
Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination mechanisms, not just for 
project purposes, but also for future management of the Lake. It would be important to assign a 
function of responsibility to review development proposals in the basin with a view on their 
implications on the Lake water quality to one of the institutions that is currently managing Poyang 
Lake, or to establish a Poyang Lake Management Commission. The institution would also be 
responsible to spearhead the improvement/ restoration of the Lake water quality over the long run. 
This entity could include representatives of relevant provincial and county governments, as well as 
concerned citizens and academic or research agencies.  
 
f. Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added 
 
World Bank participation has the added benefit of introducing and replicating, where possible, 



Page 9 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and environmental/
ecological improvement. Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and 
ecological restoration projects (such as Danube Water Program; Iran Northern Cities Water Supply 
and Sanitation Project to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea; Lake Victoria Environmental 
Protection Project; Aral Sea Restoration Project; Integrated Water Management in Metropolitan Sao 
Paulo Project) as well as lessons from other countries' experiences (such as the Great Lakes and 
Chesapeake Bay restoration programs in the US) are being used to inform the key concept of the 
project, and include: (a) investments in infrastructure upgrading needs to be matched consistently 
with required institutional support for appropriate maintenance and management competencies, to 
ensure sustainability of investment; (b) the needs within the basin exceed the current scale of 
investments and therefore (i) investments need to be modelled, targeted and monitored to establish 
the most cost-effective interventions to improve basin health and green resilient growth that 
supports livelihood and maintains the sustainability of economic development; (ii) capacity and 
investments need to be leveraged from a variety of public and private partners; (c) problems related 
to water quality management, pollution control and urban upgrading are complex and require multi-
sectoral and integrated approaches; (d) both the institutional and environmental objectives 
associated with addressing such complex issues should be treated as long-term program goals rather 
than short-to medium-term project objectives; (e) integrated approaches to water quality 
management can enhance additional benefits and contribute to poverty alleviation; (f) participatory 
approach, though time-consuming, is essential for sustainability of project results as it ensures 
consensus building between all stakeholders in reaching agreement on project design and achieving 
institutional and policy reform and public support; and (g) ex-post monitoring of activities to collect 
evidence of costs and benefits help to enhance chances for successful replication. 
 
Specific best practices that will be examined for application of proposed project activities include: 
(a) strengthening of the current institutional architecture - River manager as leader of the party - 
River implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation 
and guidance (the Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO in the USA); the Office of the 
Prime Minister Program for the Lake Balaton (Hungary); and the creation of the Commission and 
Secretariat of the Lake Balaton from above mentioned office); (b) strengthening of incentive 
mechanisms (direct and indirect payment fee mechanism in Biwa Lake (Japan); environmental fee 
on net revenue from chemical factories around Lake Toba (Indonesia); fee grid for water 
consumption in Lake Constance (Germany-Switzerland and Austria) and; the revolving polluter-
payer fee/subsidy mechanism of the Seine Normandy River Basin Agency (France)); (c) citizen 
participation and information disclosure - (Women Association for the Lake Balaton which 
pioneered the lake's protection in earlier 1990; the Lake Naivasha (home of Kenya??s flowers 
export) Riparian Association (LNRA) and Lake Naivasha Growers Group (LNGG)); (d) ensuring 
soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M sustainability (the Chesapeake Bay restoration 
program (USA); Lake Champlain basin program (USA/Canada); the Lake Balaton water quality and 
tourism program; and Danube Water Program); (e) integrated action plan to maximize impact of 
interventions (the Great Lakes restoration program; the lake Ponchartrain restoration plan 
(Louisiana); the Lake Balaton program). 
 
Note:   Proposed project activities have been selected based on the following criteria: (a) cost 
effectiveness - each sub-project should have economic/financial return; (b) sub-projects should not 
cause any negative social and environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated through proper design 
and contract execution; (c) sub-projects must be in compliance with government development plans; 
(d) all land used for construction purposes shall conform to general land utilization plans of the 



Page 10 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

cities and / or townships and their annual land use plans; (e) proposed interventions should solve 
existing problems systematically rather than only solve part of the problem; and (f) sub-projects 
should have demonstration value.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 263.80 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 113.80
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 263.80

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Ximing Zhang
Title: Sr Water Resources Spec.
Tel: 5788+7692
Email: xzhang4@worldbank.org

Contact: Solvita Klapare
Title: Senior Environmental Economist
Tel: 5788+7631 /
Email: sklapare@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: People's Republic of China
Contact: Licheng Yao
Title: Director, International Department, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 86 10 68552064
Email: yaolicheng@sina.com



Page 11 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Implementing Agencies
Name: Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Contact: Jinhua Li
Title: Director
Tel: 0791-88858928
Email: jaffo@163.com

VII. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20468 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 2 of 19  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Argentina P162316  Integrated 
Management of 
Agricultural Risk 
(P162316) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Aug 22, 2017 Oct 03, 2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Argentine Republic, Ministry 
of Finance 

Ministry of Agroindustry  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among the 
most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and exposure 
to climatic and market risk. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   37.50  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  150.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    0.00  

Total Project Cost  187.50  

    
 
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 3 of 19  

     

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. After taking office in December 2015, the new Argentine Government moved with significant speed to 
implement reforms. The Government has rapidly implemented various macroeconomic reforms and initiated a program 
of structural reforms. These include inter alia (a) the elimination of export taxes on major crops, beef, and most 
industrial manufacturing products and the reduction by 5 percent of export taxes on soy; (b) unification of the exchange 
rate, effectively ending most foreign exchange restrictions; (c) moving from a system of discretionary to automatically 
provided import licenses in line with World Trade Organization procedures; (d) resolution of the dispute with holdout 
creditors; and (e)  measures to enhance public transparency and accountability. In addition, the National Institute for 
Statistics launched a new inflation index and improved the overall quality of statistics. Electricity tariffs and transport 
fees were increased to reduce subsidies, while protecting low-income users with a social tariff. Broader efforts to reduce 
energy subsidies (which account for a large portion of fiscal deficit) are under way.  

2. Economic activity contracted in 2016, but growth is expected in 2017. Economic activity contracted 2.3 percent 
during 2016, taking a toll on labor markets, where up to 0.9 percent of formal private sector jobs were lost in the first 
semester

1
. However, GDP expanded in the second half of 2016 (0.6 percent), and employment in the formal private 

sector recovered to its previous peak level (October 2015). The economy is expected to continue to grow in 2017 (+2.7 
percent

2
) on the assumption that the positive impact of recent policy changes kicks in and the global economy recovers. 

Inflation in the city of Buenos Aires was 40 percent in 2016, mostly due to currency depreciation and the reduction of 
energy and transport subsidies. However, inflation is expected to decrease to 21 percent in 2017

3
, despite further 

increases in energy and transport tariffs. The central government primary deficit in 2016 was 4.6 percent of GDP, below 
the official target (4.8 percent). The target primary deficit for 2017 (4.2 percent), though higher than originally planned, 
will require further fiscal consolidation efforts. 

3. The Argentine Government has made important steps to address the key macroeconomic imbalances with the 
objective of creating an environment conducive to economic growth and employment creation.  Argentina offers 
many opportunities in a weak global environment, and there is a strong interest from foreign investors and firms. Going 
forward, Argentina aims to continue building a growth enabling policy framework to enhance credibility and support 
broad based growth and quality employment. In particular, the following policies will be important to permanently 
reduce inflation and put Argentina on a sustainable growth path: (a) increase public spending efficiency as well as its 
efficacy and reduce the fiscal deficit in line with government targets; (b) continue fostering the credibility of the Central 
Bank so that monetary policy can further anchor inflation expectations; (c) strengthen competitiveness and productivity 
through an improved business environment and investments in infrastructure and increasing competition in markets 
and improving the regulatory framework in sectors; (d) continue strengthening the credibility of official statistics; and (e) 
continue improving the provision of public goods (including transportation, health, and education) and reducing regional 
disparities. 

                                            
1
 Source: Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y Seguridad Social  

2
 Source: World Bank Group. 2017. Global Economic Prospects, January 2017 Weak Investment in Uncertain Times. Washington, DC: 

World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1016-9. 
3
 Source: Relevamiento de Expectativas de Mercado (REM), Banco Central de la República Argentina, April 2017.  



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 4 of 19  

     

4. Because of its geographical characteristics, Argentina is exposed to a variety of natural hazards. According to 
the Third National Communication (2015) by the Government of Argentina to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (TNC, 2015)

4
, the projections of climate models during this century generally indicate 

that the extremes of high temperatures and extreme precipitation will continue to increase in most of the country, 
although the precise quantification of this change presents considerable levels of uncertainty.  For example, droughts 
and floods during the last decades have increased due to the influence of stronger El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
events and due to climate change.

5
 The natural disaster loss per capita in Argentina is high and relates predominantly to 

hydro-meteorological hazards, which represent 58 percent of the total economic losses over the last 50 years.
6
 

According to Swiss-Re, Argentina is among the 10 emerging economies with the highest flood hazard exposure, with 
potential losses in excess of US$ 3 billion a year (0.5% of GDP).  Drought, hail, and frosts are other hazards that 
significantly affect the economic performance of the country. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Argentina is one of the world’s leading food exporters, enjoying vast farmlands and favorable natural 
conditions. Despite these advantages, the country’s agricultural sector is at a point of inflection. Over much of the past 
decade, the sector enjoyed high global prices but was buffeted by public policies that narrowed profit margins and 
stifled investment. The new administration made a major shift in taxes and regulation towards supporting economic 
incentives for development and investment, but global commodity prices have weakened over the past two years and 
prospects over the medium term are uncertain (World Bank, 2016). Lower commodity prices and slower growth in 
China, the major commodities consumer, seem to be here to stay.  Argentina and other major agricultural exporters face 
a difficult transition to a new equilibrium, a “new normal.” 

6. Despite a boom in global commodity prices, from 2002 to 2013 investment in agriculture/agribusiness fell and 
the rate of total factor productivity growth slowed compared to its neighbors. The Agriculture Production Index of the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for Paraguay, Brazil and Uruguay was between 20 percent and 
30 percent higher than that of Argentina in 2013. This trend was closely associated with domestic policies that imposed 
export tariffs, quotas and exchange rate controls. In December 2015 the new administration eliminated most of the 
tariffs and quotas, unleashing new potential. Simulations that only look at the potential benefits from the removal and 
lowering of agricultural export tariffs and controls suggest a significant gain in both production and employment. By 
2019 grain and oilseed production may increase to 137 million tons, cattle stocks to 56.8 million head, and employment 
by 500,000 new jobs. 

7. While the sector prognosis is positive, there remain a number of important challenges that will determine the 
quality of sector growth and sustainability going forward. The main challenge the sector faces is the low and volatile 
productivity growth with a yield gap reaching 20 percent in selected crops. Dilapidating infrastructure and inadequate 
transportation and logistics networks further hurt the sector competitiveness, and can account as much as 35 percent of 
the total cost of a ton in the case of soy. Environmental degradation contributes further to significant losses, estimated 
to be in the range of 1 to 8 percent of GDP

7
. Because of these rising costs and accumulating underinvestment, export 

                                            
4
 Its Executive summary is available at: http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-

Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf  
5
 Caprioli (2010): Extreme Hydrologic Events in North Area of Buenos Aires Province (Argentina)  

6
  ‘Staying afloat: Flood Risk in Argentina’, Swiss-Re, 2016, 

http://media.swissre.com/documents/Swiss_Re_Argentina_Flood_Risk_Publ_long.PDF.  
7
 Country Environmental Analysis: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-

ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  

http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf
http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf
http://media.swissre.com/documents/Swiss_Re_Argentina_Flood_Risk_Publ_long.PDF
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 5 of 19  

     

product diversification equivalents fell from 2.1 to 1.7 from 1995 to 2009. Going forward, a key role for public policy will 
be to enable a conducive business environment (both for investments and cost competitiveness) as the private sector 
shifts gears from extensive to intensive production systems, and promote diversification towards higher price and value 
markets. 

8. Furthermore, given that agriculture is one of Argentina’s core economic activities, the country appears to be 
quite vulnerable to risks, in particular to more intense heat and extreme precipitation events.  Given the geographic 
extension of Argentina, the country faces a large set of natural hazards that have adverse economic impacts on a regular 
basis.  The hazards that are most reported to cause systemic losses in the agriculture sector are floods, extreme 
precipitation, droughts, hail, frosts and volcanic eruptions.  These macro and sector-level constraints and the sector risks 
outlined above have led to the Agriculture Sector of Argentina to show a drop in Total Factor Productivity (TFP) in 
relation to neighboring countries in recent years, as well as a drop in the adoption of agriculture technologies (see 
graphs below). These risks will likely intensify with rising climate variability and change.  

  
 
9. Agriculture production losses in Argentina during the past 20 years due to extreme weather events are 
estimated to amount to US$12 billion (current value)

8
.  Extreme losses

9
 in agriculture production between 1993/94 and 

2014/2015 have been estimated at US$8.7 billion for soy, US$2 billion for maize, US$860 million for wheat and US$493 
for sunflower.  The worse years in terms of agriculture production losses in the past two decades have been 2008/9 and 
2011/12 due to an extreme drought in the central “key” agriculture region (zona núcleo) of the country, which reached 
losses of more than US$9 billion.  Unfortunately, farmers in Argentina, especially family farmers, do not have access to 
financial instruments that would allow them to cover themselves against such systemic events.  Agriculture insurance in 
Argentina is concentrated on covering hail, with very few insurance policies being sold to cover for rainfall risks (excess 
rainfall, drought, and floods). 

10. Flood is the hazard that has caused the largest losses to the Argentinean economy historically.  It is 
estimated

10
 that the accumulated losses between 1950 and 2015 from the 10 worst floods were US$8.77 billion 

throughout the entire economy.  Many of these events have been linked to El Niño (ENSO) events, such as the floods of 
1982/83, 1992, 1997/1998, and 2015.  In relation to the most vulnerable areas, the La Plata Basin is one of the most 
affected given its level of exposure.  It is estimated that 80 percent of the Argentinean population lives in this basin, and 
it concentrates the main industrial (including agroindustrial) investments of the country. 

11. Within the Argentinean economy, the agriculture sector is the most susceptible to losses due to flooding.  In 
2000, for example, approximately 1.85 million hectares (4.5% of total cultivated area) were flooded due to extreme 
rainfall.  Losses to the sector amounted to US$187 million.  In 2001, a similar area was affected, producing losses of up 

                                            
8
 Agriculture Risk Management Policy Note for Argentina, World Bank, 2016. 

9
 By extreme we refer to deviations in yields of more than one standard deviation. 

10
 EM-DAT, 2016. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 6 of 19  

     

to 70 percent of pastureland, a 15 percent drop in milk production, and between 50 and 60 percent drop in maize and 
wheat production, respectively

11
. 

12. The second most important hazard in terms of agriculture losses has been extreme drought.  The events of 
2005, and 2007-2009 have been very damaging for the livestock sector.  In 2009 the National Meteorological Service 
(SMN) reported that 90 percent of the national territory was under some type of drought situation; with the most 
severe droughts being recorded in the North of La Pampa and South of Buenos Aires and Cordoba Provinces

12
.  Because 

of these events, the number of cattle dropped considerably from 58.7 million in 2007 to 49.9 million in 2012 (15 
percent)

13
. 

13. Price volatility has also increased for international agriculture commodities since 2006/2007.  This has had a 
negative effect on Argentinean farmers.  From the beginning of the cropping seasons for grains (October), local prices in 
Argentina have had a tendency to drop until harvest, which highlights the need for Argentinean farmers to hedge their 
positions before planting.  Although Argentina has one of the oldest agriculture commodity exchanges globally, with 
futures and options for several grains, family farmers do not have access to such financial instruments to allow them to 
hedge against drastic price movements. 

14. Public policies and programs in Argentina that look towards the management of agriculture risks are 
concentrated in responding to agriculture emergencies.  This is quite different from other countries in the Region and 
other developed economies, which have a wider set of instruments and tools to manage agriculture sector risks in a 
more integrated fashion.  In Argentina, the main public policies and programs for agriculture risk management are in the 
area of agriculture emergency response, agroclimatic information systems (including price), and animal and plant health.  
From the private sector side, the main agriculture risk management instruments are the development and marketing of 
climate smart technologies (improved seeds, fertilizers, software and machinery, etc.), animal and plant health products, 
storage facilities, and agriculture insurance and commodity price derivatives.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
15. The project is fully aligned with the FY2015-18 World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
Argentina. The CPS identifies maintaining Argentina’s position as one of the world’s top food providers through adapting 
to climate change and addressing the needs of small farmers as one of the country’s development challenges for 
sustained poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Argentina’s high potential in agriculture is at risk due to the 
increasing number of severe climate events such as droughts and floods.  

16. The CPS focuses on reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity.
14

 It is organized around nine results 
areas within three broad strategic pillars. The proposed project is aligned with Strategic Pillars I--“Sustaining 
Employment Creation in Farms and Firms”--and III--“Reducing Environmental Risks and Safeguarding Natural 
Resources”. Additionally,  the proposed project is also aligned with the recently widened focus to unlock long-term 
productivity growth and job creation under Pilar I, in response to the reorientation of policies by the new 
Administration.

15
   The project would contribute strongly to “Raising agricultural productivity of small- and medium-size 

farms in low income regions” (Result Area 3 of the CPS). It may also support outcomes included in two other CPS result 
areas: “Reducing exposure to extreme flooding in the Province of Buenos Aires” (Result Area 7), and “Improving natural 

                                            
11

 Occhiuzzi and Mercuri, 2011.   
12

 Sousa, 2009.   
13

 FAOSTAT. 
14

 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 (Report No. 81361-AR). 
15

 Performance Learning Review (PLR) of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 
(Report No. 11546-AR). 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 7 of 19  

     

forest cover in the Chaco Eco Region” through the development of an agriculture and climate change information 
system that facilitates producers’ access to climate-related data.  

17. This project builds on previous work in Argentina and in the region on the improvement of the management 
of agriculture risks.  The Bank has provided support to Argentina in 2016 through the development of an Agriculture 
Risk Management Policy Note (P156197) and a technical assistance program for building the institutional capacity for 
managing agriculture risks and preparing for ENSO events (P159720).  This project also builds on the information 
systems and farm-level climate resilience technology adoption experiences of the ongoing Project for Increasing Climate 
Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province (P125804) funded 
by the Adaptation Fund and executed through the Ministry of Environment, and the study on “Agricultura y ganadería. 
Impacto y vulnerabilidad al cambio climático” (2015)

16
 funded by the GEF Argentina Third National Communication 

UNFCCC (P116974) project.  The project will also work alongside ongoing and future IFC advisory services and 
investments financing green technologies for agribusinesses in Argentina through commercial Banks.  Furthermore, the 
Bank has provided support to the Ministry of Agroindustry in the past years, helping in the design of agriculture risk 
transfer instruments for the livestock sector in Buenos Aires Province and cotton producers in Chaco Province.  Finally, 
this project is based on the Bank’s approach towards an integrated management of agriculture risks, promoting 
resilience and sector competitiveness, focusing on the most vulnerable farmers

17
. 

18. The project would contribute to poverty reduction by ensuring the inclusion of the most vulnerable farm 
households in the risk management strategies and subsequent activities, as these households tend to be among the 
poorest in the country. Reduction of agricultural output volatility and improvements in emergency response times 
would also benefit firms and employees along the value chains benefitting from project interventions, mitigating income 
shocks and variations, which disproportionately affect the poorest sectors of society, and thus contributing to shared 
prosperity. 

19. Climate change co-benefits. By increasing the resilience of the sector, the project would contribute to climate 
change adaptation. While the focus of agriculture risk reduction strategies and plans to be supported by the project is on 
retrospective risk, they will also consider climate change impacts.  Project investments in infrastructure and technology 
adoption can be considered as “no regrets”, given that key future climate change hazards would likely manifest through 
increased frequency and intensity of current trends.

18
 

20. Nutrition co-benefits. The Project is expected to contribute to improvements in food security by its focus on: (i) 
improved information for planning and response to production and climate-related hazards in agriculture; (ii) mitigation 
of risks of vulnerable small farmers, who depend on their output for daily sustenance; (iii) mitigation of risks in high-
value sub-sectors, which provide permanent and temporary employment to significant numbers of people up and 
downstream agriculture value chains; and (iv) improved recovery of agricultural systems and thus reduction of volatility 
of food prices, which affect disproportionately the poor, nationally and globally. 

 
 

                                            
16

 Full document can be found at: http://ambiente.gob.ar/tercera-comunicacion-nacional/   
17

 See Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment Methodology: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-
for-practitioners  
18

 World Bank, Argentina, Cambio climático proyectado y su impacto en la agricultura 2050-2100, Policy Note, 2016. 

http://ambiente.gob.ar/tercera-comunicacion-nacional/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-for-practitioners
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-for-practitioners


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 8 of 19  

     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among 
the most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and 
exposure to climatic and market risk. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
i. Adoption of technologies and/or instruments for increased resilience (measured by number, type and gender 

of farmers; and area that has adopted production/market resilient technologies/instruments). [CORE SD 
INDICATOR: Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology] 

ii. Number of farmers (and/or area cultivated) that are part of an improved agriculture emergency system, by 
type of farmer and segregated by gender. [ CORE SD INDICATOR: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or 
services] 

iii. Number of Provinces that have adopted an integrated agriculture risk management plan. 
iv. Number of farmers participating in international value chains, among beneficiaries, by type and gender.

19
 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
21. Beneficiaries. The project will have as direct beneficiaries the most vulnerable small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises, located in the provinces where activities are 
carried out. It would reach about 70,000 small and medium producers and a number (TBD) of small and medium 
agribusiness firms. Small and medium farms, in particular those outside the main cereal production zones, are among 
the most vulnerable and have the lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts caused by external factors like 
extreme weather or market shocks. Small and medium-sized farmers conform mostly family-based units. Agriculture 
plays a varied role in these households, mostly depending on size and location, along a continuum of situations. 
Agriculture in small farms in marginal areas may function as a safety-net, part of a set of multiple activities in their 
livelihood strategies (close to 70 percent of the family members also work outside the farm, in other farms or sectors

20
). 

Many medium farms are well-integrated into markets, deploying advanced agriculture techniques and using wage labor.  

22. Gender. Women occupy a variety of roles in this continuum, from farm management to farm workers and are 
slightly over-represented in the smallest farms’ workforce. There are important gaps related to gender equality in the 
agroindustrial sector, though data is scant. Migration from poor rural areas may disproportionally affect both single and 
married women. Nevertheless, some young women are changing this trend by deciding to stay in rural areas in order to 
develop opportunities for themselves. Project preparation will explore gender aspects of vulnerability in order to 
determine if there is a need for specific support to women’s livelihood strategies. 

                                            
19

 This indicator would be included if project design incorporates financing for export diversification, to reduce market risks and in 
line with Argentina’s policy to  become one of the world’s “supermarkets”. 
20

 Edith Scheikerman de Obschatko et al.,Los pequeños productores en la república Argentina, PROINDER-SAGPyA/IICA, 2007. Up to 
date information on small and medium-sized producers is scant. The latest agricultural census was carried out in 2002. Argentina 
does not include rural areas and small towns, about 30 percent of the total population, in its regular household survey e ither. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 9 of 19  

     

23. Indirect beneficiaries. Contractors (firms and employees) who provide services to farmers and whose income 
often collapses when disaster strikes agriculture production; firms and their employees, up- and downstream the 
agriculture value chains, who depend on reliable supplies of agricultural products; provincial governments, which 
allocate scarce public funds to attending emergencies and whose revenues suffer when these occur in their jurisdictions. 
In addition, the project will strengthen the institutions responsible for generating and disseminating critical information 
for risk management and the offices responsible for managing responses to agricultural emergencies. 

24. Integrated framework for managing agriculture risks. The implementation of the framework implies a balance 
between existing public policies and programs, available public resources, and existing private sector technologies and 
instruments.  It also requires the development of a robust institutional structure to ensure policy and program 
integration and clear communications across various sector stakeholders.  Interinstitutional coordination to reduce 
response times after an event, improving targeting of risk management programs to the most vulnerable population and 
changing the risk management paradigm from an ex post to an ex ante system are key issues to be tackled by the 
proposed operation.  Thus, this project seeks to provide the public sector with the capacity and strategies for managing 
agriculture sector risks in an integrated fashion, increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable farmers while improving 
the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending.  

25. Components.  In order to contribute to implementing an integrated approach to risk management, the project is 
divided into three components that have been identified as the key areas of improvement within the existing public 
sector policies and programs in Argentina. Component 1 focuses on the provision of agroclimatic information (public 
service) for the management of agriculture risks, while components 2 and 3 focus on bringing integrated management of 
agriculture risks at the farm level, addressing different agriculture risk layers with different risk management strategies 
(risk mitigation, transfer and coping – see risk layering figure below). 

 

 
 
 

26. Component 1 - Strengthening agro-climatic information systems (approximate cost USD 15 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Despite the fact that the GoA has made important progress in facilitating access of agro-climatic 
information and commodity prices for agriculture risk management purposes, there remain important limitations – 
technical and financial – that hinder sustained cooperation among government institutions, and the use of data by the 
private sector and the public. For instance and despite the existence of cooperation agreements among institutions that 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 10 of 19  

     

generate data, heterogeneity of IT infrastructure and information systems still impedes coordination and cooperation. 
These constraints make it difficult to carry out risk monitoring and risk analyses in a timely manner. 

27. Based on an approach that intends to leverage public funds with private assets and participation, the 
component would finance improvements in capacity and interoperability of agroclimatic and price information systems 
operated or disseminated by the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI) and other selected public and private entities linked to 
the agriculture sector. An example of this is the work being done to standardize and disseminate the agroclimatic data 
collected by private networks of meteorological stations with the ones of the National Meteorological Service (SMN) and 
of the National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA).  Another example is the ongoing development of an information 
system that collects and publishes real-time spot prices of basic grains (Operations Information Systems for Grains

21
), 

which is a joint effort between MAI and the Agriculture Commodity Exchanges of Argentina. It would also improve the 
institutional capacity of selected institutions to analyze georeferenced data. The component would finance goods, 
training, consultant services and operational costs for the development or enhancement of agro-ecological data and 
information management systems. The project would also allocate resources to promote private- and public-sector 
development and implementation of IT systems and software solutions that improve access to agro-industrial 
information and enhance the assessment of agricultural risks associated with climate variability, climate change, and 
market price fluctuations. The key expected results from this component are: (i) a well-functioning early-warning system 
for the main hazards that affect agricultural value chains

22
; and (ii) a reliable and easily accessible system for the 

provision of production, price and meteorological information to the public. 

28. Subcomponent 1.1. Development of Tools and Systems. The purpose of this subcomponent is to consolidate 
and integrate production, price and meteorological information generated by a variety of public and private institutions. 
It envisages financing for the following activities: 

a. diagnostic of sector ICT capacities and systems;  
b. diagnostic of existing capacity for generation, transmission, maintenance, quality assurance and security 

of information;  
c. design and implementation of the infrastructure for provision of agro-industrial agro-climatic data, 

including systems for downloading, analyzing, visualizing and consulting data and information;  
d. design of protocols, standards and operation and maintenance manuals for supported tools and 

systems;  
e. integration and strengthening of key price and meteorological networks and data;  
f. development of historical synthetic data series for agroclimatic variables for probabilistic analysis; and 
g. strengthening of provincial and regional spatial data infrastructure selected on the basis of information 

gaps. 

                                            
21

 The real time price information system can be accessed at: www.siogranos.com.ar.  This information system received technical 
assistance from the World Bank in 2015 for its development and it is a unified system for the purchase and sale of grains that make 
up the Physical Market ("disponible", "cash", "forwards" a fijar "," directas ", etc.) and that arises according to the estab lished in the 
CNV - SAGyP Joint Resolution Nº 208 and 628. This system has been developed by the Cereal Stocks exchanges of Bahía Blanca, 
Buenos Aires, Córdoba and Entre Ríos, and the Stock Exchanges of Chaco, Rosario and Santa Fe, the Mercado a Término de Buenos 
Aires SA (MATba) and the Mercado a Término de Rosario S.A. (ROFEX). The products on which the aforementioned operations are to 
be reported are: wheat, corn, sunflower, soybean, soybean oil, forage barley and sorghum. The aim of the joint action is to improve 
transparency in the physical grain market and, in particular, to promote the link between the quality and the price of the products 
traded. 
22

 An example is the linkage and coordination with the Information and Early Warning System (IEWS) established under our 
Argentina Adaptation Fund: Increasing Climate Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the 
Buenos Aires Province (P125804) and coordinated between National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA) and the National 
Meteorological Service (SMN). 

http://www.siogranos.com.ar/


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 11 of 19  

     

 
 
29. Subcomponent 1.2. Institutional Capacity Development. This subcomponent aims at building the capacity of 
selected national and provincial government institutions for the operation of the supported information systems.  It 
would also promote the development of software solutions by the private sector, based on the data generated by the 
improved systems. This subcomponent would finance the following activities: 

a. hardware, software and training required for effective operation of selected national, provincial and 
decentralized entities; 

b. promotion and dissemination of visualization, consultation, analysis and data download tools developed 
by MAI, under an open data approach for private sector developers and use by other institutions; 

c. training of government staff and potential software developers in data management and information for 
agricultural risk management; and 

d. technical assistance for the design of market price references, agro-meteorological indexes and event 
impact analysis. 

 
30. Component 2 – Agriculture risk mitigation investments (approximate cost USD 125 million, of which 80% from 
the Bank). The purpose of the component would be to improve the resilience of agricultural systems prioritized through 
regional-level (inter-provincial) agriculture value-chain risk strategies and provincial-level integrated agriculture sector 
risk-management plans. The component would finance: (i) Rural public Infrastructure works; (ii) Afforestation, 
reforestation and watershed management to protect water sources, reduce flood risks, and as a basis to encourage the 
adoption of good practices and climate smart technologies; and (iii) incentives for the adoption of climate-smart 
agriculture technology and risk management instruments at the farm-level.  These would be financed through two 
subcomponents: 

 
31. Subcomponent 2.1. Infrastructure and natural resources management. This subcomponent aims to reduce the 
impact of climate and production risks events at the sub-regional level, as prioritized by risk management instruments. It 
would finance on-lending to provinces for the execution of risk mitigation subprojects (combinations of works, goods, 
consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs) for:  

a. water for agriculture, including activities destined to capture, collect, store, distribute and use of water for 
agricultural production, as well as improvement in the efficiency in use of water (construction, rehabilitation and 
improvement of irrigation, micro-irrigation, surface and subterranean storage); 

b. natural resources management, including watershed management, drainage, forestation, reforestation and 
protection and recovery of forest, soil and water resources; 

c. other activities (to be defined) that may be prioritized in the risk management plans and which have 
demonstrated impacts on risk reduction. 

 
32. Subcomponent 2.2. Technical assistance to vulnerable producers. The purpose of this subcomponent is to 
promote the farm-level adoption of validated technologies to improve resilience of agricultural production systems. It 
may be deployed in combination with activities financed through subcomponent 2.2., or as standalone programs, all 
within approved risk management plans. The subcomponent would finance training and technical assistance services to 
farmer and farmer groups to:  

a. facilitate the adoption of good practices and climate smart production and storage technologies;  
b. improve the efficiency and sustainable operation of existing or new infrastructure; and 
c. facilitate access and use of agriculture insurance and price hedging instruments, and improve knowledge and 

purchase of such financial risk transfer instruments. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 12 of 19  

     

 
33. The subcomponent may also finance: (i) applied research, piloting and dissemination of promising but un-tested 
climate-smart technologies; (ii) research, piloting and dissemination for technological diversification (e.g. marine and 
aquaculture, agroforestry systems); and (iii) support for the implementation of certification and traceability systems (e.g. 
country-level value chains of global importance). 

34. The project would explore the provision of incentives through financial institutions (such as partial credit 
guarantees, credit lines, etc.) and/or matching grants for poor and vulnerable farmers whenever a public goods element 
is envisaged (effectiveness of regional works, food safety, human nutrition or food security, climate change adaptation 
or mitigation, demonstration effects, etc.), or to mitigate a market failure.  

35. The Project may also work on market risk with a long-term view, and at a high level, supporting a set of (inter-
ministerial) policies and interventions, as well as to their coordination, which aim to reduce Argentina’s heavy 
dependence on undiversified and basic commodity exports, and make Argentinian agriculture more competitive in the 
world stage. This is in line with the Government’s vision to make Argentina the “supermarket of the world”. To this end, 
the Project would support and scale up existing and new measures that aim to improve value-addition, and 
diversify/differentiate exports and markets in agriculture/agribusiness. It would finance, among others, technical 
assistance programs on marketing and standard development, and other private sector development initiatives, to 
accelerate productivity growth and global integration in a strategic set of agricultural value-chains. 

 
36. Component 3 – Agriculture Emergency Response Financing (approximate cost USD 37 million, of which 80% 
from Bank). This component aims to improve the operation of the current agricultural emergency system enacted by 
Law  26.509 (of 2009), in order to increase coverage for vulnerable producers.  This Agriculture Emergency Law (AEL) 
provides the main response mechanism that assists the agricultural sector against extreme events. Nevertheless, the 
National Emergency and Disaster Agricultural Fund, constituted through the AEL, lacks enough resources to implement 
risk preparedness, mitigation and response activities. The AEL does not provide a clear distinction of roles and 
responsibilities between federal and provincial governments in the aftermath of an extreme event, and all farmers are 
entitled to receive the same benefits, irrespective of their characteristics. Allocation of benefits is not governed by clear 
rules and the system lacks transparency.  Most AEL benefits are not able to be used by family farmers because they are 
linked to cancelation or delays in the repayment of formal bank loans, and since most family farmers to do not have 
access to formal credit, they are de facto excluded from this support, although they are the most affected by natural 
disasters. 

37. The component would work in two directions: (i) improving the efficiency, equity and transparency of the 
agriculture emergency system; and (ii) introducing risk mitigation and risk transfer instruments to improve the financial 
sustainability of the agriculture emergency systems, in particular in terms of climate-related events.   The project will 
also improve provincial institutional capacities for the management of agriculture emergencies, promoting the use of a 
more integrated risk financing structure. At the national level, it would support the design, implementation and 
purchase of risk financing instruments (credits, guarantees, insurance, derivatives, etc.) in a pari passu modality with 
selected provincial governments.  The component would finance the following activities: 

a. Technical assistance for MAI’s Agricultural Emergency Subsecretariat in order to strengthen the systems for 
decision making, benefit allocation, and registry and monitoring of beneficiaries; 

b. Development of aggregate (provincial or regional-level) agriculture risk financing instruments (parametric 
insurance, catastrophe bonds, contingent lines of credit, weather derivatives, etc.), as well as training and 
technical assistance for their validation and adoption; and  

c. Payment of premiums and related costs of agriculture risk financing instruments to be piloted under the 
framework of the system of agricultural emergency, on the basis of national and/or provincial demands. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 13 of 19  

     

38. The component may also include support for the design of instruments for price risk transfer for agricultural 
commodities and risks that are covered by current private sector agents. It may also provide support to build capacities 
in the public and private sectors for agricultural risk valuation and analysis. 

 
39. Component 4-- Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (approximate cost USD 10 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Provision of support to MAI, through its Rural Change Unit (UCAR), for carrying out: (a) project 
coordination and management; (b) monitoring, results evaluation and impact assessment of project activities; (c) project 
fiduciary administration, internal controls and audits; (d) project environmental and social risk/safeguards management; 
(e) a citizen’s engagement mechanism; and (vii) project-related studies. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Specific subprojects to be financed under component 2 to strengthen resilience of the agricultural sector will not be 

identified before the project appraisal, and therefore their specific locations and environmental and social conditions are 
not known at the moment. While the project is national in scope, the natural environments of the Argentine provinces 
are very varied, including high diversity of ecosystems ranging from forests to desert and the Andes Mountains. The 
respective social and productive contexts are also diverse, the producer groups varying from large producers to 
subsistence farmers. Due to the national scope of the project, the project addresses potential presence of Indigenous 
Peoples. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), through the Rural Change Unit (Unidad para el 

Cambio Rural-UCAR). The project’s environmental and social risk and safeguards management will be responsibility of 
UCAR’s Environmental and Social Unit, and previous experience has allowed it to enhance its capacity to streamline 
safeguards implementation and monitoring. However, beyond UCAR with previous experience with Bank-financed 
agriculture development projects and its strong commitment and active involvement during implementation of said 
operations, the project’s decentralized implementation approach will involve a number of provinces with uneven 
institutional capacities and diverse regulations, including limited resources to implement the required safeguards 
procedures. Further, despite of UCAR’s wide experience, it has recently faced some challenges regarding implementation 
of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, in particular when addressing existing gaps between national and provincial 
regulatory and institutional frameworks and the OP 4.12 requirements. In conclusion, there is room for safeguards 
related capacity building. UCAR’s and the responsible provincial agencies’ institutional capacity needs will be assessed in 
detail as the project preparation proceeds and the identified actions included in the project design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Lilian Pedersen, Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Claudio Luis Daniele, German Nicolas Freire 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 14 of 19  

     

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will implement an integrated framework 
for managing agriculture risks, including a diverse set 
of investments. It aims to have an overall highly 
positive socioeconomic and environmental impact, 
including improvements in watershed management, 
reforestation, and application of climatic information 
systems to facilitate agricultural production planning 
and decrease climate related income loss. OP/BP 4.01 
is triggered as the physical interventions/subprojects 
under component 2 could have negative 
environmental impacts in case not properly managed. 
However, the majority of project activities are 
expected to have low to moderate impacts that can be 
prevented or mitigated. In socioeconomic terms, 
positive impacts are expected in terms of 
improvement of existing public infrastructure e.g. on 
irrigation.  
 
Negative cumulative impacts are not expected as all 
activities will be implemented in areas already under 
agricultural production. Further, the project will 
promote good environmental practices as a means to 
improved management of agricultural risks and thus 
reduction of producers' vulnerability through exposure 
to climatic and market risks. The project will also 
finance activities to avoid or restore land degradation 
in adjacent watersheds. 
 
As the subprojects will only be defined during project 
implementation, the project requires an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) that UCAR will prepare, including a framework 
level Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). The ESMF will guide identification and 
adoption of measures to mitigate environmental and 
social impacts and good practices to create 
environmental and social value added. The ESMF will 
be structured to prevent, minimize and mitigate 
impacts on forests, water resources, worker and 
community health and safety, as well as public 
infrastructure and services. The ESMF will reference 
the relevant sections of the World Bank Group General 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 15 of 19  

     

Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines e.g. 
on annual crop production, perennial crops and 
related water consumption and management. 
 
As part of the ESMF preparation, UCAR will prepare a 
Social Assessment (SA) that will focus on the analysis 
of the situation of small and medium, indigenous and 
female farmers; in general those that are primarily 
linked to regional economies and thus the most 
vulnerable against climate related risks and with the 
lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts 
caused by external factors like extreme weather or 
market shocks. The scope of the SA will include 
indigenous communities/farmers in order to assess 
whether there are specific challenges they face to 
recover from negative impacts. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will develop capacity of national and local 
institutions for effective environmental planning and 
management in relation to climatic risks and improved 
land use practices. Even though all the productive 
activities financed by the project will be implemented 
in areas already under agricultural production, OP/BP 
4.04 is triggered for precautionary purposes as 
watershed management and flood control 
investments financed by the project may require 
restoration activities e.g. on buffer or adjacent zones 
to protected areas. If such situation is identified at the 
subproject screening stage, the ESMF will require 
identification of support activities to strengthen the 
associated management instruments/practices. 
Triggering OP/BP 4.04 will secure the project is able to 
implement potential restoration activities related to 
any type of natural habitat. The ESMF will include a 
negative list that will exclude any investment that 
might impact negatively any type of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered as project is expected to 
finance forestation, reforestation, and protection and 
recovery of forests, particularly as part of watershed 
management. Only investments with positive impacts 
on forests and/or people dependent on forests will be 
eligible. The project will not intervene in the forest 
value chain. As component 2 will promote 
diversification of agricultural production and finance 
climate-smart technologies (e.g. agroforestry systems 
and agro-silvo-pastoral models), the project is 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 16 of 19  

     

expected to contribute to reducing pressure on forests 
and favor their management and conservation efforts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will finance subprojects in agricultural 
systems that may require use of agrochemicals. By 
project appraisal, a list of agriculture innovations to be 
promoted by the project will be prepared, and some 
of them will most probably include use of agro-
chemicals. Additional technologies might be 
incorporated later on, and support is also envisioned 
to agricultural technology research that may involve 
agrochemicals. In every case, the policy will be applied 
using a negative list on prohibited substances and 
promoting integrated pest management. 
 
The ESMF will guide related screening and preparation 
of an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) for 
each subproject that may require use of 
agrochemicals, including proper management of any 
chemical waste. 
 
A positive list will be prepared to identify relevant 
natural/organic and low toxic pesticides and 
herbicides. Related training and capacity building 
activities will be included in the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project implementation is not expected to have any 
negative impact on identified physical cultural 
resources. However, the OP/BP 4.11 is triggered for 
precautionary purposes. The ESMF will provide 
guidance to address potential chance finds during 
implementation of construction activities and soil 
excavation. The Environmental and Social Unit of 
UCAR has proven experience and appropriate 
procedures in place to address chance finds, aligned 
with Argentina’s well-developed legislative framework 
on the subject. The ESMF will also include reference to 
further guidance in case any subproject would relate 
to landscapes with historical/cultural significance, yet 
that is not envisioned at least at the PCN stage. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.10 due to its national 
scope. Indigenous peoples are present in Argentina 
(about 2.5 percent of the population), and the income 
of several indigenous communities is linked to 
agriculture. As part of the preparation of the social 
assessment, UCAR will prepare an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework (IPPF) to ensure that: (i) 
indigenous peoples' groups are afforded opportunities 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 17 of 19  

     

to participate in planning of project activities that 
affects them; (ii) opportunities to provide such groups 
with culturally appropriate benefits are considered; 
and (iii) any subproject that could have a negative 
impact on indigenous peoples will not be eligible for 
project funding, or otherwise minimized and 
mitigated. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.12 since it includes 
infrastructure works that may imply either physical or 
economic displacement of people and/or business in 
the project area (e.g. activities like irrigation, and flood 
risk reduction may imply involuntary resettlement). 
UCAR will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) that will guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), as required. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The Project will not finance building of any large dam. 
However, OP/BP 4.37 is triggered as it is possible that 
irrigation or water supply may rely on performance of 
an existing dam. The ESMF will guide, when needed, 
the applicable review and evaluation of the operation 
and maintenance procedures of the relevant existing 
dam and presentation of the related report. Said 
report will include findings and recommendations for 
any remedial work or safety measures that, if needed, 
will have to be undertaken before the start of 
operations on the relevant subproject.  
 
Similar procedures have been in use and proven 
satisfactory during the implementation of other Bank-
funded projects with UCAR (e.g.  Second Provincial 
Agricultural Development Project - P106684). UCAR 
has signed an agreement with ORSEP, the Argentine 
Dam Safety Regulatory Agency, which will ensure 
proper dam safety supervision when needed. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The project is not expected to finance activities that 
could adversely affect other riparians, particularly as 
most of them would be upstream. The project will not 
finance large dams, and potential irrigation projects 
are expected to relate with ongoing and/or minor 
schemes that (i) will not adversely change the quality 
or quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and 
(ii) will not be adversely affected by the other 
riparians' possible water use. Triggering and 
addressing of OP/BP 7.50 will be analyzed in further 
detail with UCAR and the World Bank legal specialists 
as the project preparation proceeds. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 18 of 19  

     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as the Project will not finance 
activities in disputed areas as defined in the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jul 31, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
UCAR will prepare, consult and disclose the ESMF, SA, IPPF and RPF with support and respective approvals by the World 

Bank by the project appraisal that is currently scheduled for August 22, 2017. The ESMF will be prepared based on the 
ESMFs of UCAR's earlier projects with World Bank financing, including improvements and adjustments/additions in terms 
of related lessons learnt and the particular features of this new operation, particularly in terms of climate-smart practices. 
 
The criteria and methodology to be used to select project beneficiaries with focus on the most vulnerable producers, as 

well as the mechanisms to be used for project related consultations and grievances will be discussed with UCAR as the 
project preparation proceeds. 
 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

David Tuchschneider, Diego Arias Carballo 

Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Argentine Republic, Ministry of Finance 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agroindustry 

Alejandro Gennari 

Director of UCAR 

agennari@ucar.gob.ar 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 19 of 19  

     

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): David Tuchschneider, Diego Arias Carballo 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager: Garry Charlier 30-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Renato Nardello 12-May-2017 
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19772 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 2 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P159382  Livestock and Fisheries 
Sector Development 
Project (P159382) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 24, 2017 Sep 05, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development, 
Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia 

Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in Ethiopia. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  150.00  

Total Project Cost  150.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

 
SAFEGUARDS_TABLE_OPS Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 3 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country. It is the 11th poorest country in the world by 
income per person, and home to Sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest population of about 92 million people, the 

vast majority of which are rural dwellers. The natural resources base remains the foundation for most 

livelihoods, and is subject to considerable climate risks. Despite past progress, a historic legacy of 

underinvestment still bears its mark as more than half of the adult population is illiterate and the country’s 

infrastructure deficits remains one of the largest in the world. Ethiopia is undergoing a faster demographic 

transition than the rest of Africa and the rapidly rising working-age population presents opportunities as well as 

challenges. 

 

2. Ethiopia has experienced a sustained period of rapid economic growth and progress towards the 
achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDG), however it retains a very high poverty rate, high levels 

of chronic under-nutrition and continued vulnerability of households and communities.  The “development 

state” model, put in place following the overthrow of the repressive military regime in the early 1990s, has seen 

high levels of government-led investment in infrastructure, a commitment to decentralization of service delivery 

and devolution of authority and some liberalization of the economy.  While these reforms have progressed to 

different degrees, the impacts on the economy have been broadly positive, with strong and generally broad-

based economic growth averaging around 10 percent over the past 10 years.  

 

3. The services and agricultural based economy is relatively stable, but the private sector remains nascent. 
Agriculture accounts for most jobs and about 40 percent of output and exports. Services accounts for close to 

half of output and half of exports. Manufacturing shares of output, jobs and exports have remained stagnant at 

around five percent, but the sector holds the promise of a takeoff. The economy is relative stable though high 

inflation presents occasional challenges. Substantial external deficits arise largely as a result of very low exports 

and high public capital imports. Supported by a system of financial repression and other heterodox macro-

financial policies, Ethiopia has the third highest public investment rate in the world, but the sixth lowest private 

investment rate. This reflects a fledgling private sector with state owned enterprises dominating several key 

services sectors. 

 

4. Albeit from a low base, the country has seen solid progress on a range of human development 
indicators. Poverty in both rural and urban areas has been reduced substantially though remains high by 

international standards, with 78 percent of the population living below US$2 per day. Despite high levels of 

public resources channeled to the sector, the MDG targets for universal primary education would likely not be 

met, though gender parity is on course. With respect to health and nutrition, Ethiopia is on track to reach the 

child mortality, HIV-AIDS and malaria MDGs as a result of the expansion of health infrastructure and service 

delivery systems.  Under-nutrition remains a major challenge: despite reductions, levels of underweight and 

stunted children remain very high, and is prevalent in both food secure and food insecure districts and within all 

but the highest wealth quintile.  

 

5. The vision of the country, as expressed in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP, 2009/10 to 
2014/15), and in tvhe Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII, 2015 to 2020) is to reach the level of a 

middle-income economy by 2025.  This is an ambitious goal, and would require the country to move to a higher 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 4 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

growth trajectory and address persistent challenges including ensuring macro-economic stability, the lagging 

quality of social services, the weak capacity of the public sector and encouraging a higher level of private 

investment. Further opening of the economy would be vital to achieve increased productivity and 

competitiveness in the industrial and services sector and to achieve the government’s ambitious plans for 

agricultural transformation.  

 

6. The challenges of moving to higher growth need also to be set in the context of significant external and 
internal risks that may need to be addressed. External economic shocks could impact on growth, including the 

decline in prices for export commodities, while issues with neighboring countries could increase domestic 

instability, including tensions with Eritrea, instability in Somalia and South Sudan, and the on-going water 

related dispute with Egypt.  Internally, vulnerability to natural disasters, mainly drought, would continue to 

undermine development efforts, with trends suggesting an increase in rainfall variability. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. The agricultural sector remains a dominant sector in Ethiopia and contributes significantly to economic 
growth. Although the Ethiopian economy is undergoing a structural transformation, (from agriculture to 

services), agriculture comprises 45 percent of total output and employs 78 percent of its labor force. In addition, 

the sector is a major contributor to export earnings, with over 80 percent of goods exports (including coffee). 

Despite its declining share in the economy, the agriculture sector is growing rapidly. Based on official statistics, 

the sector grew on average by 7 percent per year over the past 15 years. Although there is debate about the 

reliability of these figures, with some studies showing a slower growth rate, there is consensus that the sector 

grew at fast pace over the past decade. The key sources of growth include: (1) increased area under cultivation; 

(2) increased productivity, largely driven by large public investments in agricultural extension and rural roads 

among others, and (3) some advances in public policy including improvements in land tenure security. In 

addition to contributing to economic output and exports, agricultural growth correlates with poverty reduction 

through positive impacts on farming and non-farm rural economies.  

 

8. Livestock (including fisheries) is emerging as a priority focus area for the Government. It is as part of its 
ambitious plans under the GTP2, which would support the country to move towards middle-income status by 

2025. Despite the neglect and lack of attention to date, the livestock sector is seen as significant in achieving 

multiple goals of the government including: (i) contribution to overall economic growth, including an increase 

in the volume and value of exports; (ii) contributing to poverty reduction in both highland and lowland areas; 

(iii) contributing to improved food security and nutritional outcomes for rural and urban households; and 

(iv) supporting the country’s green growth priorities. In this context, the Government has laid the institutional 

and analytical basis for the sector with the creation of the new Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (MoLF) in 

October 2015, and the recent approval of the Livestock Master Plan (LMP) based on a rigorous Livestock 

Sector Analysis.  

 

9. Ethiopia has 55 million head of cattle, 78 million goats and sheep, 28 million chickens and 5 million 
beehives. It has the largest livestock population in Africa and ranks fifth in the world

1
. In addition, there is 

potential to better utilize water resources to develop the fisheries and aquaculture sector. In spite of this 

potential, food, nutrition and livelihood securities remain a challenge for many households. Approximately 44 

                                            
1
 CSA, 2013; FAOSTAT 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 5 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

percent of children under 5 years are stunted
2
.   

 

10. Spurred by population growth, increasing urbanization and incomes, domestic demand for meat and 
dairy products continues to grow. The meat and dairy markets present huge opportunities for business, and 

increasing the availability of animal sourced products can address food and nutrition security challenges in 

Ethiopia. However, key challenges continue to undermine the performance and potential of the livestock sector. 

The sector as a whole is characterized by low production and productivity levels. For example, the average milk 

yield of Ethiopian cows is 1.5 kg per day, which is lower compared to other countries in the region such as 

Kenya (3.6 kg per day) and Rwanda (3.6 kg per day), and significantly lower compared to major milk producing 

countries such as China (7.8 kg per day) and the US (25 kg per day)
3
. Several factors undermine livestock 

productivity and production. Inadequate feeds, poor animal health due to disease prevalence, low livestock 

genetic make-up, weak adoption of improved livestock practices and weak livestock support services are major 

sources of low productivity levels. The public sector dominates livestock support service delivery, and service 

delivery systems for animal health, breeding, feed, finance and extension are weak.   

 

11. Livestock disease incidence is high and to limit its impact, especially economic losses for producers, 
animal health and veterinary services need to work more effectively both in terms of quality of service and 

institutional management. Often rural farmers are underserved -- one health post covers three Kebeles – and 

complain that service provided do not meet their needs. There are over 5000 health staff in the public sector and 

the private sector engagement is limited to urban and peri-urban areas.
4
 There is also dissatisfaction with the 

quality of drugs and vaccines available. The National Veterinary Institute produces 12-17 vaccines for 

transboundary and for some endemic animal diseases. Other vaccines are imported.  Counterfeit and 

substandard drugs are sold next to quality drugs and over 90 percent of animal drugs are imported.
5
 VDFACA is 

responsible for regulation and control of veterinarian vaccines and drugs but is a new agency and building 

capacity.     

 

12. Poor animal nutrition due to feed scarcity, quality and affordability is another key challenge to livestock 
productivity in Ethiopia.  In dairy, only 0.2 percent of cattle holders use improved feed

6
. Limited use of 

improved fodder production and underdeveloped feed preservation practices result in feed shortages in the 

highland mixed crop livestock system, while bush encroachment and rangeland deterioration due to lack of 

sustainable resource management  limit feed availability in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas. Overall, grassland 

coverage of Ethiopian land has been reduced from 30 percent (1980) to 12 percent (2000)
7
. This has 

significantly reduced the amount of roughage available for livestock feed. Extension work in feed has not paid 

significant attention to improved conservation and use of crop residue and by products. In addition, the 

imposition of a 60 percent VAT tax on imported feed pre-mix, concentrates and other inputs combined with 

high custom duties (53 percent) on feed mill ingredients significantly raises the cost of production
8
. These 

factors hinder the use of improved feed and fodder, limiting nutritional health and productivity of livestock.    

 

13. Over 90 percent of Ethiopia’s livestock population is of indigenous breeds (cattle 98 percent and poultry 
95 percent) with low productivity levels. For an average laying period, indigenous chickens lay on average 12 

                                            
2
 Global Nutrition Report: www.Globalnutritionreport.org, 2014  

3
 Various: FAOSTAT, EADD (2009) 

4 CSA 2014 
5
 VDFACA 2015 

6
 Livestock Survey, CSA 2013 

7
 ATA: www.ata.gov.et  

8
 Livestock Master Plan,  Ministry of Agriculture and International Livestock Research Institute, 2015 

http://www.globalnutritionreport.org/


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 6 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

eggs per hen compared to 107 eggs for exotic breeds
9
. Improving the genetic potential through crossbreeding 

and improving indigenous breeds is paramount in raising livestock productivity. The National Artificial 

Insemination Center (NAIC) produces and distributes semen at heavily subsidized cost ($0.23 cents per 

insemination)
10

. However, conception rates remain very low (less than 40 percent on average). AI service 

delivery is weak: producers often do not obtain the service at the right time and the NAIC collects and processes 

inadequate semen. There is a need for policy to encourage competition among alternatives AI service providers, 

while the national breeding policy focuses on guiding the choice of breeds and monitor breeding materials.  

 

14. Markets of livestock products are largely unorganized and fragmented. In dairy, only 2 percent of 
marketed milk supplied from the highlands is handled by the organized sector concentrated in urban areas. The 

rest is sold through informal channels, which are characterized by no licensing requirements, limited 

compliance with safety standards and high risks of contamination. For meats, there is inadequate control and 

inspection of abattoirs. Backyard production characterizes the poultry sector, yet the potential of backyard 

poultry remains untapped. Per capita consumption of milk and poultry in Ethiopia are low, compared to those in 

other East African markets
11

. However, Ethiopians regularly consume dairy products
12

, and the projected 

increase in demand in response to population growth, urbanization presents business opportunities in milk and 

meat markets
13

, especially opportunities that can include more women (e.g. milk and poultry).  

 

15. To increase the potential of the livestock product markets, including export of livestock products, 
several improvements are needed including, strengthening market linkages, increasing per capita consumption 

and greater awareness of the nutritional value of milk and livestock products, increasing value addition, and 

improving food safety and quality measures. Most of all, there is a need to rethink the roles of the public and 

private sectors: there is considerable scope to increase private sector investment in production, processing and 

service provision, while strengthening national programs’ capacity and government’s regulatory roles.   

 

16. The main elements justifying increased investment in the sector are as follows: (i) Ethiopia has the 
largest livestock population in Africa, which can be a major asset for economic growth, poverty reduction, 

improved food security and nutritional outcomes; (ii) the livestock sector is underperforming despite its 

enormous potential; (iii) public services to the agriculture sector have prioritized the crop sector over livestock. 

The main service delivery with respect to the feed, animal health and animal breeding has faced systemic and 

operational challenges limiting the sector to develop; (iv) low participation of the private sector in livestock 

sector limits private investments and opportunities for intensification and commercialization. Weak market 

linkages and high cost of basic inputs and low access to appropriate financial products are major features of the 

smallholder livestock systems; and (v) weak institutional capacity throughout the sector, including in private 

and public organizations is a further hindrance to the growth of the sector.  

17. It is in this context that the Government is now giving greater attention to the sector. The  Government 
of Ethiopia has recently completed the LMP, which provides an ambitious vision for the transformation of the 

sector. In view of this, there is a clear and strong rationale to design a livestock project to address the challenges 

of overall weak performance of the sector, limited access to quality livestock services and markets, limited 

participation of the private sector and institutional and policy gaps and challenges existing in the sector.   

                                            
9
 CSA 2014 

10
 5  ETB per insemination; CSA 2014 

11
 Milk consumption:  Ethiopia 19 liters vs Kenya (100 liters) 

12
 SNV Ethiopia, 2008 

13
Africa Livestock Data: Joint Project (World Bank, FAO, AU-IBAR, ILRI and BMG) www.africalivestockdata.org  



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 7 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

18. Key guiding principles underpinning preparation of the proposed project include: 

a. The needs are long term and require policy and institutional reforms, coupled with public and 
private sector investments. The requested IDA support would therefore need to be positioned in a 

broader, longer term support to the sector. The proposed project, likely to have a six year timeframe, 

would aim to invest in addressing some immediate needs in the sector, while supporting key 

institutional building blocks for the longer term development of the sector. 

b. The team would aim to bring in leading global technical knowledge to the preparation process, 
including a close collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

(FAO), the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) and the World Organization for Animal 

Health (OIE). In this regard, it has been agreed with FAO that its staff would join the preparation 

team and provide substantive inputs for the project design process. 

c. The preparation process would seek to collaborate with IFC, IFAD and on-going WB-financed 
projects to ensure alignment and where appropriate to seek opportunities for more formal 

collaboration and/or co-financing. 

The project would engage with multiple stakeholders in the sector. From the Government side, this would 

stretch beyond the MoLF, and include further relevant Ministries and Agencies, including the Ministry of 

Natural Resource Management (MoNRM), Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, the Agricultural 

Transformation Agency (ATA), etc., at both Federal and Regional levels. It would also include private sector 

participants and associations, and farmer/herder/professional representatives. 
 
Relationship to CPF 
 

19. The Ethiopia Country Partnership Strategy dated August 29, 2012 was completed at the end of FY16 
and the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) is under preparation. It will be based on the Systematic 

Country Diagnostic (SCD), which was completed in March 2016. The SCD identifies the most critical 

constraints and opportunities facing Ethiopia to accelerate progress towards the WBG twin goals. It emphasizes 

the leading role that agricultural growth (including livestock) has had in driving the reduction of poverty. The 

predominance of agriculture as a source of income for the poorer households in Ethiopia suggests that growth in 

the sector will remain important for poverty reduction in the coming years. The SCD identifies eight binding 

constraints to the achievement of the twin goals, including poor market access for farmers and an uncompetitive 

private sector. These resonate with the aims of the LMP, which emphasizes the need for private sector 

investment with approaches that link livestock producers better to markets. Although still in draft, the new CPF 

will likely include objectives to develop the institutions, services and infrastructure to increase private sector 

engagement in the economy, and to increase agricultural and livestock productivity and commercialization. The 

project would be closely aligned to these goals, as it would aim to increase smallholder productivity and for 

selected products to improve the linkages for smallholders to value chains, and would support the improved 

functioning of these value chains. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 8 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Increase livestock and fisheries productivity , commercialization and market access of targeted smallholders in 
Ethiopia. 

 

20. Strategic approach. The principal aim of the project is to support the government’s strategy for livestock 
growth and transformation as articulated in its GTP2 and LMP in adding value to the existing investments in 

support to the sector. It also supports the fisheries sector, not included on the LMP but newly added by the 

government as a clear priority. The proposed project would follow a dual approach of: (i) supporting immediate 

and long-term capacity building of the newly established MoLF and its strategic national programs; and (ii) 

targeting strategic commodity value chains through a comprehensive support to smallholder producers, in line 

with the government cluster approach.   

 
21. Direct beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries of the project would include smallholder farmers 
inclusive of family, traditional and small-scale producers; smallholder farmers with improved husbandry 

practices; and producer organizations. Smallholder producers are being considered around four different levels 

of advancement (para. 23). Other direct beneficiaries would be: (i) livestock farmer’s organizations and their 

apex institutions; (ii) small and medium scale private livestock operators and enterprises; (iii) vulnerable groups, 

particularly women and youths; and (iv) livestock support services institutions, including public livestock 

research and extension services, NGOs, and service providers involved in the targeted livestock value chains in 

the project areas.  

22. Indirect beneficiaries. Secondary beneficiaries would include other livestock producers not directly 
involved with the project activities who would indirectly benefit from the national programs (e.g. improved 

animal diseases service delivery). Value chain actors (buyers, processors, and exporters) would benefit from 

increased provision of livestock products. On the consumption side, consumers in Ethiopia would benefit from 

increased and better quality of national animal sourced products supply. Other indirect beneficiaries would be 

livestock service providers, including private veterinarians, and inputs providers, including feed, veterinary 

medicines, and genetic material suppliers. 

23. Transformation pathway. In order to address the actors in holistic and systematic manner, the 
identification mission developed a transformation pathway for improved livestock productivity and 

commercialization. In this pathway, the project envisions the smallholder farmers to move through stages (Stage 

1: Smallholder farmer, Stage 2: stage 1 with improved husbandry practices, Stage 3: stage 2 organized into 

producer organizations and Stage 4: stage 3 in productive partnerships along the value chain) for them to 

achieve the goals of increased productivity, commercialization, and market access, in an inclusive and 

sustainable manner. Each stage requires a specific set of interventions tailored to the beneficiary present status 

in the transformation pathway. Therefore, the project would simultaneously intervene in all four stages of the 

transformation pathway, but with a differentiated focus: stage 1 and stage 2, where most of the Ethiopian 

smallholders are present, would require fundamental access to quality services, inputs and organization and 

management skills; stage 3 and stage 4, where fewer actors are currently present, would require more 

specialized support. Figure 1 below elaborates about the transformation pathway in more detail.  

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 9 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

Figure 1: Transformation pathway for improved livestock productivity and commercialization 

 

 

24. Target Value Chains. The project would target three priority value chains considered strategic both for 
food security/national supply and for their potential for growth and innovation. The primary target value chains 

are: (i) dairy with small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems in wet highlands and dairy belts, including peri-

urban areas; (ii) poultry with small-scale broilers and layers systems in all highlands, urban and peri-urban 

production zones; and (iii) fish with improved inland fisheries and aquaculture in selected suitable areas. In 

addition, the project would support the red meat value chain nation-wide through its support to the strategic 

national programs on animal health, access to feed and traceability system, as well as through its direct support 

to the dairy value chain in small-scale mixed crop-livestock systems through specific income generating 

activities such as fattening. The latter would be supported through the capacity building of national programs.  

There is a strong rationale for the selection of the dairy, poultry, and fisheries and aquaculture value chains for 

the project. These commodities are important for the food and nutritional security of the country. Milk is a 

remunerative commodity which can have a significant impact on poverty alleviation efforts for the estimated 8 

million households in Mixed Rainfall Sufficient (MRS) and Mixed Rainfall Deficient (MRD) regions that have 

dairy cattle as primary livestock. In addition, improving the productivity of the dairy sector would have positive 

effect in reducing GHG emission intensity and climatic sustainability. Poultry meat and eggs are important 

sources of protein. Successful poultry interventions would enable the sub-sector to move to improved and more 

organized family poultry with semi-scavenging crossbreds, better access to services, inputs and markets, and 

expand its scale of more specialized dual purposes breeds, and layer and broiler operations. Such a 

transformation would contribute considerably to reducing poverty and increase national income. In addition, 

improving the productivity of the poultry sector would have positive effect on the feed conversion ratio (kg feed 

per kg product), and help meet the Climate Resilience Growth Economy target of increasing the share of 

chicken meat to total meat consumption from the current 5% to 27% by 2030, by substituting red meat with the 

chicken meat. This substitution can have environmental benefits as red meat comes from larger high-emitting 

ruminant. Fisheries and aquaculture are important to address the food and nutrition security. Fish is a 

remunerative commodity and can play a significant role in poverty alleviation efforts for the 100,000 

households who largely depend on fishing, with the potential to increase the number of households to half a 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 10 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

million. Sustainable investment in fisheries would enable Ethiopia to exploit the ample potential of its 

renewable fisheries resources found in many lakes, reservoirs and rivers. Investors are eager to enter the 

aquaculture sub-sector. But some major hurdles including high quality fingerling and fish-feed production, need 

to be removed for such investment to actualize. 

 

25. Geographical targeting: The primary geographic focus area of the project would be the rural and peri-
urban areas of the highland regions where the dairy, poultry, fisheries and aquaculture value chains dominate. 

Furthermore, the project would follow the Government cluster approach and intervene in the existing or planned 

clusters of dairy, poultry and fisheries and aquaculture. This would enable the project to benefit from synergistic 

gains which might arise from other investment (infrastructure, private sector, etc.) coming in these clusters. 

Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis 

Ababa, Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
26. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified : 

(i) Number of direct project beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender (core indicator) and age 
group (18-35 yrs., representing the youth); 

(ii) Percentage increase of productivity of targeted small-scale productions (by selected commodity);  

(iii) Percentage increase in the sales of targeted small scale production (by selected commodity); and 

(iv) Beneficiary satisfaction rate with livestock services delivery systems supported by the project 
(disaggregated by gender and age group). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 

27. The project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by an IDA credit for 
US$150 million over six years (to be confirmed). At this stage, it was agreed with the Government to consider 

structuring the project around the following four components: (A) Strengthening National Programs; (B) 

Farmer’s Access to Productive Services, Inputs and Assets; (C) Farmer’s Access to Output Markets; and 

(D) Project management, coordination and monitoring and evaluation. This structure would be further reviewed 

and revised if necessary during the preparation period.    

28. The first component is crosscutting and designed to build immediate and long term human and 
institutional capacity of the key actors in the livestock and fisheries sector, as well as support key Strategic 

National Programs (SNPs), notably on animal health, feed and genetic [in order to improve the delivery of 

livestock services to small scale livestock producers]. The second component is designed to support sustainable 

productivity increase in the selected commodity value chains, through improved smallholders’ access to 

effective livestock and fisheries services, inputs and productive assets. The third component is designed to 

allow better access to markets for smallholders, through collective actions and productive partnerships, by 

supporting business linkages between livestock producer organizations and/or cooperatives, buyers and 

financial institutions and value addition at producer organizations/cooperatives levels where business 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 11 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

opportunities exist. The fourth component would support implementation of the first three components and 

inform the project execution and performance monitoring, reporting and knowledge management. 

 

Component A: Strengthening National Programs.  The first component of the project would be designed to 

building immediate and long-term human and institutional capacity of the livestock and fisheries sector key 

actors, as well as supporting key selected strategic national programs (SNPs). In addition, this component 

could support the development of a contingency emergency response plan, to increase preparedness in the 

event of a crisis affecting the livestock sector (subcomponent A4). 

 

This component would have the following four sub-components:  

 

29. Sub-component A1. Policy development, investment planning and sector coordination. This sub-
component would strengthen staff capacity in the MoLF to carry out its core responsibilities of sector analysis, 

policy preparation and implementation, and sector monitoring and evaluation, and coordination. Activities 

could include: identification of short-and long-term training and education needs, improvement of the MoLF 

information system, development of a communication strategy and implementation plan to improve the relation 

between the ministry and key stakeholders involved in the targeted value chains, including private investors and 

financial institutions, supporting ongoing modernization and implementation of the sector legislation including 

the development of norms, quality and safety standards of inputs and animal sourced products.  

 

30. Sub-component A2. Sustainable animal health and advisory services. Strengthening Veterinary 
Services (VS) would enhance the government long-term capacity to detect and respond quickly to major disease 

outbreaks (PPR, CBPP, FMD, HPAI and NCD to name a few). It would further contribute to the control of 

‘diseases of production’ (parasitic, vector-born or bacteriological diseases) that negatively affect animal 

productivity. This component would build on the recent results from the OIE Performance of Veterinary 

Services pathway. In conjunction with the SNP2, it aims to promote partnership between the public authorities, 

the private veterinarians, and the associative actors, especially through: (1) re-focusing the official VS towards 

its core public functions, (2) scaling up of the sanitary mandate approach (delegating, under the oversight of the 

official VS, public tasks to private veterinarians), (3) progressive transfer of private tasks to the private and 

associative actors, and (4) supporting the veterinary statutory body (auto-control of the veterinary profession).  

 

31.  Strengthening Extension Services (ES), especially animal husbandry management practices, would 
require a transition from a public system of technical subjects delivery to a public-private system of 

comprehensive and adapted (basic or specialized) advisory services. In conjunction with the SNPs, the specific 

path for such a transformation would be defined during project preparation.  

 

32. Strengthening Producer Cooperatives (PCs), would be the necessary complement to the VS and ES, to 
improve the capacity of the smallholders in formulating their needs and evaluate the services they receive. 

Ultimately, the growth and transformation of the livestock and fisheries sector would require a strong and well-

balanced institutional tripartite: the Public, Private, and Cooperative sectors working together to deliver the 

fundamental functions of the sector. Support to the VS, ES and PCs would have a national coverage, although 

specific activities would be targeted towards the selected commodity value chains, in conjunction with 

subcomponent B2.  

   



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 12 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

33. Sub-component A3. Strategic national programs (SNP). Five major national programs were 
considered during identification. They would be further developed during project preparation.  

a. Animal identification, traceability and performance recording (SNP1) 
b. Animal health program

14
 (SNP2) 

c. National forage development (SNP3) 
d. Dairy-meat and poultry breeding program (SNP4) 
e. Sustainable fisheries management and biodiversity conservation (SNP5)  

 

The World Bank Group is supporting b) Animal health and d) Dairy/poultry breeding policy in the L-MIRE 

project. The proposed project will build on this work.   

 

34. Sub-component A4. Contingency emergency response (US$0 million). Following an adverse natural 
event that results in a major natural disaster, the government of Ethiopia may request the Bank to reallocate 

project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the 

unallocated expenditure category and /or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and 

reallocate financing from other Project components to partially cover emergency response and costs. This 

component could also channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an eligible 

emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the bank for their implementation of the Contingency 

Emergency Response Plan, would be prepared during the first year of project implementation. Should this 

component be triggered, all expenditures would be made in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and 

would be reviewed and accepted by the Bank before any disbursement is made. In accordance with paragraphs 

11 and 12 of OP 10.00, this component would provide immediate, rapidly disbursing support to finance goods 

(positive list agreed with governments), works, and services needed for response, mitigation, and recovery and 

reconstruction.  

 

Component B: Farmer’s Access to Services, Inputs and Assets. The project would support smallholders’ 

access to critical knowledge and information, services and inputs, and investments (technologies and 

equipment) focusing on the three targeted commodity value chains of (1) dairy (dairy-meat in mixed crop-

livestock systems), (2) poultry (broilers and layers) and (3) fisheries (cultured-based fisheries and aquaculture). 

The project would link and work with Federal and Regional Agriculture Research Institutes to facilitate access 

to new technologies, innovations and management practices. 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

35. Sub-component B1. Access to knowledge and information. This component would support capacity-
building activities of smallholders and their organizations on good management practices tailored to each 

selected commodity value chain, as well as on organizational skills towards the establishment of future and 

strengthening of existing producer organizations. It would design and pilot an information system accessible by 

smallholders and their organizations for the selected commodity value chain, in conjunction with SNP1.  

 

36. Sub-component B2. Access to services and inputs. This component aims to improve smallholders’ 

                                            
14

 During identification, the following five building blocks were discussed: (i) Creating a conducive and coherent policy environment; (ii) Strengthening diseases 

surveillance capacity; (iii) Strengthening diagnostic capacities and laboratories; (iv) Supporting diseases prevention and control programs; and (v) Including one health 

and food safety considerations. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 13 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

access to advisory services, animal health services, Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) and quality forage and 

feed. While it complements sub-component A2, it focuses on each selected commodity value chain and would 

support the establishment of a public-private collaboration to develop a comprehensive (inclusive of all 

services) and differentiated (tailored to the level of advancement of the smallholder or his/her organization) 

system of service, input and advice delivery.     

     

37. Sub-component B3. Access to productive investments. This component aims to improve the 
smallholders’ access to investments linking smallholders and/or their organizations to public and private 

providers of basic equipment and new technologies, and to financial institutions. Production-oriented 

investments could include: feed production and processing, improved animal husbandry techniques, small-scale 

products’ collection or processing units/equipment, waste management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 

emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens, renewable energy (bio and solar energy) supply. To 

minimize a farmer’s risk of accessing improved technologies, the component would establish a matching grant 

mechanism to co-finance strategic investments, i.e. investment linked with the adoption of new technologies 

and practices associated with the SNP or investments aimed at increasing the participation of women and youth 

in the selected value chains.   

 

Component C: Farmers’ Access to Output Markets.  The project would support smallholders and their 

organizations to improve their access to output markets with a broader engagement of local entrepreneurs in the 

three priority commodity value chains. Depending on the beneficiary level of advancement in the 

transformation pathway, several options for project support would be explored further during preparation. 

Lessons from recent experiences in similar conditions would be considered. These include the existing USAID-

parallel financed AMDe and Livestock Market Development projects, which support improved market linkages, 

and regional initiatives such as the Hub Approach in Milk Collection Centers. The component would establish 

“Productive Partnerships” (PPs) between livestock and fisheries Producer Cooperatives (PC) and buyers (Agri-

Businesses: agro-industries, small and medium enterprises, etc.). These PPs would be supported through the 

provision of matching grants, contingent upon contractual arrangement between producers and buyers, and 

would facilitate access to rural financing for investing in various PC Sub-Projects (SPs). The selection criteria 

and mechanisms for PPs and SPs would be detailed during project preparation. The overall aim of this 

component is to create an enabling environment for direct and sustainable commercial relations between 

producers and buyers of products in the targeted value chains, and with Financial Institutions (FIs). 

 

This component would have the following three sub-components: 

 

38. Sub-component C1. Support to Producer Cooperatives (PCs). The sub-component would support the 
establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted PCs and Financial Institutions (FIs). To 

facilitate the involvement of FIs and the provision of adapted financial services, the subcomponent would 

support capacity building of PCs in the area of preparation of viable Sub-Projects (SPs). Capacity-building 

activities related to PCs’ business and administrative skills could be conducted in partnership with IFC through 

its Business Edge 
TM

 training system. Additional 

activities in support to PCs could include: (i) supporting market studies and surveys to characterize market 

opportunities and product requirements, organizing communication and dissemination campaigns to inform 

stakeholders about the project, and creating an online-based market information system; (ii) the establishment 

of a dialog platform between the government and key stakeholders, and (iii) mobilizing financial institutions 

(FIs) by negotiating a co-financing agreement for the SPs, and providing technical assistance on the design of 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 14 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

tailored financial services and products to meet the financing needs of eligible SPs.  

 

39. Sub-component C2. Establishment of Productive Partnerships (PPs). This sub-component would 
promote partnerships between PCs and buyers of selected commodities (milk, poultry meat and eggs, fish). 

Financial Institutions (FIs) would be included in the PPs as they are expected to co-finance the sub-projects to 

be developed by the PCs. The partnerships would be based on the following principles: (a) agreement on 

product quality and characteristics; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c) modalities of delivery; (d) 

payment modalities and price; and (e) buyer’s contribution, such as Technical Assistance (TA), specific inputs, 

and arrangements for input reimbursement. 

 

40. Sub-component C3. Access to Financial Institutions (FIs). This sub-component would finance SPs, 
which have been developed by PCs under the Productive Partnerships established under sub-component C2. 

Based on a PC’s business plan, investment would cover collective investments through a Matching Grant aimed 

at improving the market reliability (commercial and safety standards) of the selected commodities. Collective 

investments would include post-productive investments (including processing technologies and facilities), as 

well as the associated technical assistance and training. A conditionality mechanism would be built into the 

Matching Grant to ensure that the Sub-Projects promote health and environmental services or at least do not 

generate negative externalities, and would be screened for potential adverse effects on the environment and 

public health. Selected SPs could be financed through a combination of an IDA-financing, a contribution from 

PCs, and short to medium-term credit provided by participating FIs. 

 

Component D: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation. The component 

would support project management at federal, regional, zonal and woreda level. In addition to routine 

functions, emphasis would be placed on a number of critical cross-cutting issues: 

 

41. Gender. The project would support the Government’s policy to mainstream the participation of women 
(both female headed households and women in male headed households) and youth into the livestock and 

fisheries sectors. This would include both targeted interventions (including support to women groups for 

appropriate enterprises) and ensuring inclusion in all project activities, backed up with an M&E system with 

disaggregated data.  

 

42. Nutrition. Although improved nutrition is not an explicit or measurable outcome of the proposed 
project, there would be many activities that would support aspects of the National Nutrition Program. For 

example, the support to the three selected commodity value chains would be coupled with extension/advisory 

services to increase households understanding of the high nutritional value and best uses of animal sourced 

foods (milk, meat, eggs and fish).  

 

43. Greenhouse gas emissions / Climate smart livestock (CSL). Livestock production critically 
contributes to the 3 outcomes of CSL: (i) it contributes directly and indirectly to food production and food 

security, (ii) it offers adaptation strategies, through assets diversification, coping mechanisms and water 

management, and (iii) it offers great potential for GHG emission intensity reduction and carbon sequestration. 

In terms of livestock production systems, Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) translates into four essential 

objectives: resource use efficiency, reduced conversion of natural habitats into agriculture, buffering and 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 15 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

connection to markets. Most technical and institutional interventions would have effects on more than one of 

the CSA outcomes. 

44. Capacity building. The design of the proposed project would include capacity building for a range of 
actors and organizations and through a number of approaches, including training. In a recent project (e.g. AGP 

1), the effectiveness of training was found to be relatively weak. A more focused and structured approach to 

capacity building would be developed for the project, drawing upon both good experience in Ethiopia (such as 

under the Productive Safety Nets Program or the Farmer’s Filed School in the Integrated Pest Management and 

forage development Programs) and international experience. This would emphasize strengthening core skills for 

delivering training and stronger processes for training needs assessment, continual training where appropriate 

and adequate follow up.  

 

45. Linkages and Coordination. The project would be one of the primary government program to support 
investments to achieve the strategic goals set out by the LMP. However, it would not function in isolation and 

coordination and complementarity with other initiatives would provide opportunities for increased impact. This 

is particularly important because Ethiopia is hosting a number of active projects in the sector –implemented by 

various ministries- that the new MoLF would have to monitor. Coordination mechanisms would need to be 

strengthened with a number of other on-going and planned programs, including the following IDA-financed 

projects and programs: Agriculture Growth Project 2, Productive Safety Net Program, Sustainable Land 

Management Program, and Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (RPLRP) and the WBG’s Ethiopia 

Livestock-MIRA project. 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Tentatively, the project might be implemented in the following regions/places in Ethiopia: Amhara, Addis Ababa, 

Oromiya, SNNR, Tigray, Harari, Benishangul Gumuz, Dire Dawa and Gambella 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The MoLF is a new ministry with a significant capacity weakness. Therefore, efforts would be required throughout the 

project, in particular in the areas of safeguards due diligence. Given the institutional and management innovations that is 
expected from the project, three distinct value chains are targeted, including the newly supported fisheries sector, and 
the multiplicity of actors involved from the public, private and associative sectors, capacity constraints are likely to 
represent the biggest challenge of the project. To address these gaps, it has been proposed to formulate a capacity 
building strategy for the MoLF during the preparation phase. The Bank would undertake a safeguards capacity 
assessment as part of the project preparation, which would outline the detailed risks and mitigating measures. The 
project would further explore to provide systematic and regular training to targeted the Regions and Woredas as well as 
undertake regular supervision to ensure that challenges with regards to environmental and social safeguards are 
identified and addressed in a timely manner. Overall, the project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, 
land and other economic resources and on livelihoods; will prepare both a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 16 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address potential scope of impacts, since the project sites 
are not known. The ESMF and RPF will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project appraisal. Site specific Resettlement Action Plan and ESMPs, will be 
prepared, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, as needed based on the guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, 
prior to implementation of any compensation actions or civil works. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as a Category B project, given 
that it would finance activities, especially those related 
to veterinary services to detect and respond quickly to 
major disease outbreaks, improved animal health 
services, production of quality forage and feed, 
including feed production and processing, small scale- 
products’ collection/ processing units, waste 
management systems to minimize greenhouse gas 
emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens. 
Since the scope and nature of the sub-projects and 
their site-specific locations are not known at this time 
of preparation, the specific instrument proposed for 
analyzing potential environmental risks is an ESMF. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Project funds may be used to purchase and distribute 
pesticides for control of vectors of livestock /animal 
diseases and agrochemicals for improved production 
of forage and feed, and it is likely that more generally 
support through the Project will encourage small 
holder farmers, and veterinary service providers to use 
more pesticides and chemicals. The ESMF will contain 
a section on PMP/IPMP that would elaborate on what 
actions need to be undertaken to minimize 
environmental, health and safety impacts. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority of 
people in the lowland area of the project area meet 
the criteria for the Indigenous People or underserved 
groups.  The project will conduct Social Assessment 
and enhanced public Consultation with the affected 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 17 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

persons and communities to reflect the policy 
requirements. The key findings of the social 
assessment including the process used to foster free, 
prior, and informed consultations and broad 
community support for the project, including the 
provision of grievance redress, and benefit sharing 
issues; and the identified mitigating measures will be 
incorporated in the design of the project and 
summarized in the PAD. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Since the project sites are not known, therefore, to 
address potential scope of impacts on loss of 
economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation, 
the project will avoid adverse impacts on people, land 
and other economic resources and on livelihoods by 
preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
RPF will be consulted upon and reviewed and cleared 
by the World Bank before it is disclosed publicly in 
Ethiopia and the Bank’s Info shop prior to project 
appraisal. In cases where impacts are known, the 
project will Resettlement Action Plan, based on the 
guidance and standards set forth in the RPF, and the 
RAP will also be reviewed and cleared by the World 
Bank prior to implementation of any compensation 
actions or civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 24, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project’s safeguards instruments (ESMF, PMP, and RPF) will be prepared, reviewed and approved by the World Bank and 

disclosed in Ethiopia by the GoE and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Info Shop 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 18 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Francois G. Le Gall, Assaye Legesse, Benjamin Billard 

Adviser 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Federal Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries 

Thomas Sherenet 

Policy and Research Adviser for the Minister 

thomassherenet@gmail.com 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Francois G. Le Gall, Assaye Legesse, Benjamin Billard 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Nathalie S. Munzberg 01-Nov-2016 

Practice Manager/Manager: Mark E. Cackler 01-Nov-2016 

Country Director:   
    

 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project (P159382) 

 
 

  
Nov 08, 2016 Page 19 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18646 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 2 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cote d'Ivoire P158810  Cashew Value-Chain 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158810) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Mar 01, 2017 Jun 22, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of 
Agriculture,Ministry of 
Mines and Industry 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  175.00  

Total Project Cost  175.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A-Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Following its independence, Côte d’Ivoire occupied a unique place in Africa. For two decades, the country experienced political stability, high 

growth and sustained poverty reduction.  Ample natural resources and favorable terms of trade for its main agricultural exports helped the 

country achieve a strong economic performance which, by the end of the 1970s made Côte d’Ivoire the major player of the West African 

Monetary and Economic Union. By 1980 the country was the world's leading exporter of cocoa and Africa's leading exporter of pineapples, 

palm oil, rubber and bananas. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew steadily during that period at average 6 percent per year. The surpluses 

generated by agriculture alone have enabled the country to have a relatively large industry, whose contribution to GDP reached 23 percent in 

1982. It is also principally due to agriculture that Ivoirians enjoyed the highest annual per capita income in the West African sub-region, 

including Nigeria. A sharp reversal began in 1980 as terms of trade deteriorated precipitously and the CFAF became increasingly overvalued. 

From 1981 to 1992, annual GDP growth averaged -0.2 percent and Côte d’Ivoire slipped from the rank of middle income countries into the low 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 3 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

income group. The devaluation of the CFAF in 1994 triggered an economic rebound, but this was soon undermined by the political crisis which 

began in 1999
1
. During this period which lasted until 2011, the increase in the depth and severity of poverty was dramatic all over the country. 

Côte d’Ivoire’s economic performance over the past four years has been impressive. Renewed political stability, concurrently with structural 

reforms
2
 to improve the business climate

3
 and supportive fiscal policy enabled a strong pickup in economic activity. Over the last 4 years, 

economic activity expanded by 9 percent a year on average translating, into an increase in real per capita income of more than 20 percent. In 

2015, real GDP grew by 8.6 percent driven by strong investment and private consumption. Inflation remained subdued, reflecting ample 

domestic food production and imported consumer products. In response to the rebound of economic growth, the poverty incidence in the 
country slightly diminished from an estimated 51 percent in 2011 to 46 percent in 2015

4
, but other human development indicators have been 

slow to improve. Efforts were made during the period 2012–15 to make growth more inclusive by increasing the farm price for coffee and 

cocoa and other agriculture products and improving basic infrastructure in rural areas. Nevertheless, the country is still facing several 

challenges, including significant disparities across the country in terms of education attainment, heath services, employment, and income.  

Challenges ahead – poverty and inequality. Poverty continues to be overwhelmingly rural with disparities in access to basic services, and 

gender disparities across wealth and urban-rural groups. People living below the poverty line tend to be unemployed and are from large 

households, the agricultural sector, and weak educational background. Poverty is also found to be more common among the young: 51.4 

percent of Ivoirians younger than 25 years are classified as poor, while poverty rates in other age groups vary from 35 to 39 percent. The 

recently concluded Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) shows that poverty is significantly concentrated in rural areas and in the 

Northern parts of the country (where the potential for agriculture has not yet been realized), while greater Abidjan is becoming ever more 

dominant in the country’s economy. Poverty rates are 69 percent in North versus 25 percent in the South (within the southern regions, poverty 

rates tend to increase from East to West). While spatial inequality worsened during most of the crisis period, the rural-urban divide continued 

to grow even during the recent recovery. Such unbalanced - mostly Abidjan centric - development is unsustainable; both economically, because 

it relies on too few sectoral and regional drivers and socially, because it does not tackle the roots of fragility in the cou ntry. The 2015 Human 

Development Report ranked Côte d’Ivoire at 172 out of 188 countries (far below neighboring Ghana in 140
th

 place), with an overall Human 

Development Index below the average for sub-Saharan Africa. 

Côte d’Ivoire ambitious development agenda - making the country an emerging market economy. Following last October’s peaceful 

presidential elections, political uncertainties have diminished, paving the way for continued economic progress. The medium-term outlook is 

favorable. Economic activity is projected to remain strong at 8.5 percent in 2016, and 7.4 percent per year on average in 2017–20. The 

Government has recently adopted a new 2016–20 National Development Plan (NDP)
5
 aimed at achieving strong and inclusive growth - halving 

poverty and fostering structural transformation. To support the structural transformation foreseen under the NDP, the Government intends to 

pursue further reforms to improve the business climate and strengthen the private sector contribution in the economy, including in the form of 

a public-private partnership. This will involve creating new opportunities for diversification based on the country’s comparative advantages and 

fostering sustainable integration into regional and global value chains. A greater impetus will be given to stimulating industrial production - 

moving to higher domestic value-added products through the local transformation of a larger share of agricultural products (especially cocoa 

and cashew). The Government has set a target of at least fifty percent of cacao beans domestically processed and eventually more for cashew 

nuts by 2020. In attaining this targeted, the Government is also seeking to increase the participation of nationally domiciled entities in cacao 

and cashew processing, and is assessing options regarding policies that could encourage growth of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 

in both sectors. Successful NDP implementation will depend on the pace at which the main structural barriers are removed and productivity-

enhancing reforms are carried out, as well as on financing conditions and how domestic and external risks are addressed.  The authorities have 

expressed an interest in a new Fund arrangement to support the NDP objectives, including the IBRD-Enclave financing mechanism.  

 

                                            
1
 Between 1985 and 2008, the estimated share of the population living below the poverty line increased from around 10 percent to about 49 percent. 

2
 The Government has undertaken a number of important economic reforms and reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries completion point in June 2012. 

3
 According to the World Bank “Doing Business Index”, Cote d’Ivoire has gained some 25 places in the world ranking, from 2011 to 2016 and ranked among the 10 best 

reformers in 2014 and 2015. Côte d’Ivoire was also ranked among the fastest improving countries on Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index, rising 
from 154

th
 in 2011 to 115

th
 in 2014. Comparing the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, the country has shown the largest improvements in overall governance 

on the continent over the last four years. 
4
 2015 Living Standards Monitoring Survey (LSMS – ENV2015). 

5
 The NDP is based on four strategic pillars: (i) enhancing the quality of institutions and governance; (ii) stepping-up the development of human capital and promoting 

social well-being; (iii) speeding up structural transformation and industrialization; and (iv) strengthening the infrastructure base while preserving the environment.  



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 4 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Cote d’Ivoire’s economy and growth have been driven by commodity-based exports and this will remain the key in the medium-term. The 

most important export crops – cocoa, rubber, palm oil, cotton and cashew – are also the main sources for smallholders’ income as well as the 

center-piece of the country’s major farming systems. Cocoa, rubber and oil palm are at the center of the forest zone’s diversified production 

mix with smallholders generally maintaining a wide variety of cash and food crops (rice, cassava, plantain). Cotton and cashew are the main 

cash crops and drivers of the savanna economy and farming systems (which include maize, rice and livestock), where cotton in particular has 

important spill-over effects on food crop productivity through the use of improved technology.  

The agricultural sector currently accounts for 22 percent of GDP, over three-quarters of non-oil exports, and provides employment and 

income to two-thirds of all households. Côte d’Ivoire is the world’s largest producer of cacao and has become the largest producer and 

exporter of raw cashew nuts (RCN). The country remains also the largest exporter of rubber, oil palm, bananas, pineapples and copra in Africa 

and is self-sufficient in a variety of staple foods – maize, sorghum, millet, yam, cassava, plantain banana – with some small exports to the sub-

region. The impact of production of export commodities extend to several other sectors through forward and backward linkages - inputs, 

processing, transport, financial services, taxes, energy and final consumption and therefore play a key role in the country for the creation of job 

opportunities and poverty reduction. In fact, the domestic trade and transport industry (trucking and port) depends to a large extend on 

agriculture for its business. Similarly, agro-processing industries such as cotton ginneries, rubber, palm oil and sugar factories provide the base 

for rural industry, while an important component of urban industry is made up of cocoa processing plants, textile cottonseed oil operations, 

packaging materials, second stage transformation of oil palm into soaps, cosmetics, etc.  

While significant results have been achieved in improving the agriculture sector’s performance in recent years, it is facing several constraints 

that negatively impact its sustainable development. These include a range of technical and circumstantial issues, such as limited access to 

inputs; weak extension services; considerable post-harvest handling, transportation and storage losses; inadequate exposure to modern 

farming techniques, and aging and poor maintenance of existing plantations. These limitations are compounded by structural economic factors, 

such as access to finance (in particular for SMEs), deteriorating physical infrastructure, and limited public goods, all of which have contributed 

to the long-term stagnation of productivity and low value addition. Tackling these constraints can unleash the agricultural sector potential and 

increase its participation into global value chains involving many agro-food items and agro-industries in high demand regionally and/or 

worldwide - attracting major investments which can stimulate economic growth along with creating value, scaling-up innovation, and achieving 

the country’s overarching objective to ensure the population’s wellbeing by reducing poverty and inequality, through structural transformation 

of the economy. 

THE CASHEW SECTOR: COTE D’IVOIRE – AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ORIGIN FOR RCN AND PROCESSING. In 2015, Côte d’Ivoire became 

the world’s largest producer of RCN, with a production of 702,000 tons, or 21 percent of the world’s total production. The value of 2015 

cashew exports is estimated at over US$ 650 million, which makes cashew the third most important export commodity after cacao and refined 

petroleum products, but ahead of rubber, cotton and coffee
6
. The importance of cashew production is even more critical when viewed in a 

regional and poverty reduction context. It is grown by about 250,000 households (about 1.5 million persons) in the poorer, northern half of the 

country, where cashew has become the most important source of rural cash income. It is clearly an exciting source of growth with the added 

advantage of having the potential to generate better and inclusive rural employment through farming and rural industrialization. Provided that 

a comprehensive strategy addressing the Ivoirian cashew value chain competitiveness constraints is put in place, overall growth in the value of 

cashew exports by 15 percent p.a. over the next decade seems feasible
7
.  

However, the cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire faces several constraints hindering its development. Figure 1 below summarizes these 

constraints and their level of intensity. They concern: (i) the governance of the value-chain; (ii) the quality of the nuts that are heterogeneous in 

size and often of bad quality due to inadequate harvesting and post-harvesting methods; (iii) the high investment cost, including equipment 

and spare parts; (iv) the lack of technical and managerial skills and the low productivity of the labor force; (v) the difficulty in accessing credit, 

for both investments and working capital, and the high cost of this credit when available; (vi) the international buyers’ perceived risk of 

sourcing kernel supply from African processors; (vii) the investor’s perception of a relatively unfriendly sector policies and business 

environment; and (viii) the poorly developed rural infrastructure. 

 

                                            
6
 Gross farmer receipts in 2015 are estimated at US$ 400 million (CFAF 250 billion), now way ahead of those of cotton (US$ 180 million), the traditional cash crop of 

the north. A comparison in terms of net farmer receipts would be even more favorable, since cotton involves much higher input costs (about 1/3 of gross receipts). 
7
 World Bank, 2012. Côte d’Ivoire, The Growth Agenda: Building on Natural Resources and Exports. Report No. 62572-CI.   



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 5 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

Fig. 1 Cashew value chain competitiveness main constraints in Cote d’Ivoire 

 

                             (Source: Adapted from Technoserve, 2010) 

 

The past expansion of Cote d’Ivoire cashew production has been extraordinary. Production has been growing by over 20 percent per annum 

over the last two decades (from 6000 tons in 1990 to 63,000 tons in 2000 to over 702,000 tons in 2015). However, this rapid increase in RCN 

production has been largely driven by an expansion in the planted area rather than by productivity gains. Although plantations are in general 

relatively young (66 percent less than 25 years old), they have been established with low-productivity planting material (unimproved tree 

varieties from home saved seeds) and farmers tend to apply virtually no inputs apart from family labor. Treatment for disease and insects is 

rare, harvesting practices leave much to be desired, and drying and storage are poorly done. As a result, productivity is low (300kg/ha) 

compared with other producers in South and South-East Asia (India 850kg/ha and Vietnam 1,000kg/ha) and Ivoirian cashew nuts suffer an 

average price discount of about 15 percent compared to the average price for African cashew exports to India. While this low intensity 

approach is well suited to low income, risk adverse decision making processes, there is clearly room for significant improvement in productivity 

as knowledge is shared and internal market linkages strengthen. In addition, low productivity at the production base increases aggregation 

costs over poor road networks. Low levels of pruning and tree maintenance increase harvesting time and negatively impact nut size and 

quality.  

Despite being a major producer of RCN, Cote d’Ivoire only processes around 5 to 7 percent of its production. The vast majority of RCN 

exported goes to India and Vietnam with 85 percent exported by foreign owned companies based in India, Singapore and Vietnam. The balance 

is traded by 10 domestic cooperatives/enterprises who in turn have pre-finance links with foreign companies
8
. While some competition 

between buyers may exist, there are also suspicions of anti-competitive practices, and this dependence on two countries could be a problem. 

The existing installed processing capacity of RCN in Cote d’Ivoire is estimated at 75,000Mt (with an actual use of only 50 percent). Moreover, 

nearly all processed cashew in 2015 came from two factories with a combined capacity of 42,000Mt. These numbers highlight not only the 

huge imbalance between RCN exports and processed quantities but, the socio-economic losses to the Ivorian economy. If only 50 percent of 

the harvest was processed locally, over 100,000 jobs could be created (of which at least 60 percent women), delivering more than $100 million 

                                            
8
 The dominance of foreign based companies is explained by the historical significance of India as a processor of RCN from origins worldwide. Foreign processors and 

trading companies are often multi-commodity and spread trading/market risk and overheads over a number of value chains. Larger companies have international 
credit lines that underwrite borrowing from local banks for working capital needs through the buying season. Companies trading into India have established links to 
large domestic consumer markets as well as developed trading relationships with roasters and retailers in the US and Europe.   



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 6 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

in wage per years to the local economy and primarily in the impoverished north
9
. Other gains will be obtained for the country in the form of 

foreign exchange value of exports
10

 and the cashew shells could be processed into biofuel and used for electricity generation in rural areas.  

It is time to move from raw cashew exports to domestic processing. Clearly there are solid socio-economic reasons for expanding the 
processing sector in Cote d’Ivoire on a number of fronts, including a vibrant market and a strategic cashew supply chain context: (i) The high 

dependence on Vietnam (70 percent) is seen as a risk factor for international buyers of cashew kernels
11

. An alternative is needed accentuated 

by the loss of supply from India (exports falling as domestic consumption grows) and Brazil (falling production); (ii) the growing weight of Cote 

d’Ivoire in the overall supply of the market and its proximity from both the European and US markets, are focusing the attention of processors 

and end-users on Ivoirian producers; (iii) the possibility to create shorter, more traceable value chains, is a very powerful incentive for 

consumers to source their kernels directly in Cote d’Ivoire. Currently, kernels processed in India and Vietnam come from a variety of sources 

and reach the European and US markets indirectly, after a long and largely untraceable chain. Local processing means a significant cut in 

transport costs by eliminating the shipping of raw cashews to Asia for processing and shipping the kernels back to the European and US market. 

The more direct route, and the sourcing from a unique producer also permit to better meet the European market’s increasing emphasis on 

traceability from farm to fork. Downstream in the supply chain, food manufacturers and retailers are generally shortening their chains as well 

(in terms of supply networks and relations), thus operating increasingly with a limited number of preferred suppliers (importers and producers) 

to which they transfer the responsibility for traceability and product safety and quality
12

. In addition, shorter transportation lines diminish the 

carbon footprint of the cashew value chain, which is an interesting environmentally-friendly proposition and a definite competitive advantage 

of Ivoirian processors; and (iv) there is yet an untapped potential opportunity in organic cashew certified production. The current lack of use of 

chemical inputs would facilitate a fast transition to organic production and make Cote d’Ivoire unique in the World with premium product at 

lower cost.  Finally, in term of RCN production, future impact of climate change on crops such as cacao is expected to lead to a reduction of the 

areas suitable for cocoa which will then become suitable for cashews as it is drought and wind resistant. 

However, even with an abundance of raw material, levels of investment in processing have been very low and existing capacity 

underutilized. The debate about the competitiveness of the processing cashew in Cote d’Ivoire has evolved over the past 10 years. The broad 

conclusion drawn by sector experts is that processing locally could be competitive provided a number of key criteria are met. These include: 

selection and use of efficient semi-mechanized processing equipment, management by experienced and specialized staff and a well-trained, 

disciplined workforce. Studies also highlight potential competitive risks to a domestic processing sector in the form of high labor costs, lower 

productivity, access to and cost of capital, food safety and traceability standards, constantly evolving improvements in technology at processing 

centers of India and Vietnam driving competitive advantage and un-hedged risks in differentials between RCN and processed kernel prices
13

. 

Promoting domestic processing will therefore require implementing a comprehensive value-chain development approach with some 

incentives, carefully managed to avoid penalizing the farmers or protecting inefficient enterprises. If an export tax is used, its proceeds should 

be channeled into a program not only to promote domestic processing, but also to raise crop yields which are far below those of competing 

Asian countries. Public research and extension should be strengthened as well as the regulatory framework which is needed to improve 

coordination without hampering the dynamism of the private sector.  

THE CASHEW WORLD MARKET CONTEXT. The international global trade in both raw and processed cashew nuts has evolved greatly over the 

last 15 years.  Trade in processed nuts (kernels) has grown from around 234,000Mt in 2000 to over 680,000Mt in 2015. This represents an 

annual growth rate of 9.3 percent over the period. The main consumption markets are India, the USA and Europe that account for 75 percent 

of total consumption.  Demand is driven by a combination income-economic growth and dietary trends related to health and lifestyle. Global 

kernel demand is predicted to increase over the following decade, albeit at lower rates than the recent past. The US and European markets 

where cashew is essentially a snack food are price sensitive and are substituted with nuts such as almonds. Indian consumption is largely as a 

cooked food ingredient where broken nuts are widely used and increasingly as a festival related gifts. Demand in East Asia is predicted to 

remain strong as a growing middle class consumes higher value food products. Raw cashew nuts are produced in four main geographical 

regions: South East Asia, West Africa, East Africa and Brazil. World production reached an estimated 3.5 million Mt in 2015 with around 45 

percent originating in Asia, 45 percent in West Africa and the balance from East Africa and Brazil. Global RCN production is estimated to grow 

                                            
9
 Calculation based on 350,000 MT of RCN. It is estimated that RCN processing creates around one full time job per 3-4Mt of nuts processed.   

10
 The raw cashew nut accounts for 34 percent of the final product value, while shelling adds another 8 percent and roasting and salting an additional 16 percent. 

11
 Today Vietnam depends on imports for 70 percent of its needs of RCN. There is a highly risky chain where the US for example buys 70 percent of its needs from 

Vietnam which in turn buys 70 percent of its needs in West Africa. The US buyer depends on the West African farmer but has no influence in that market.   
12

 Although they don’t require full traceability, EU buyers expect suppliers to know and document their own buyers and suppliers (one step forward and one step back 
in the chain), which products are used during production process, and to label final products for traceability in case of a food safety problem. 
13

 Increasing quality and traceability demands are not being met by Vietnamese processors. There are multiple quality problems and food safety issues (especially 
foreign matter) and much confidence has been lost among buyers. In addition, labor conditions in Vietnamese factories constitute a risk for buyers. 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 7 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

to around 4.5 million Mt by the year 2020.  RCN production has been growing at an annual rate of around 5.7 percent per annum, noticeably 

slower than that for processed kernels.   

Future predictions of supply and demand suggest continued growth in both parameters.  However, two key factors are likely to impact 

significantly on Ivorian (and West African) growers and processors. Firstly, it is expected that demand for processed kernels will out-strip supply 

of RCN globally. This will continue to drive RCN prices higher with increased volatility as the gap widens. Secondly, production of RCN is either 

flat or declining in other origins with the result that Africa, and in particular Cote d’Ivoire, will become increasingly a dominant player in RCN 

production. West Africa RCN production is rising in response to higher prices internationally although will inevitably lag behind due to the four-

year establishment period of the crop.  

The international price for cashew kernels (quotes in USD/Lb) is a “spot price” derived through open market negotiations between buyers 

and sellers. There is no formally quoted futures market contract and there no derivative or proxy hedges available. International prices have 

been stable over extended periods but with two significant upward spikes in 2008 and 2011. The first spike was brought to an end due to the 

turmoil in financial markets worldwide and the second resulted from concern about RCN availability due to poor crops in east and west Africa. 

In 2011 prices peaked at over $4.00/Lb ($8,800 per Mt) only to fall back to the current range of $3.50-3.90/Lb or $7,700-8580 Mt for 

benchmark grade WW320. The international kernel price in processing countries is translated back to a farm gate RCN price at origin though a 

series of complex interactions. The current supply/demand situation appears to be driving up RCN prices to levels where highly efficient 

processors in India and Vietnam can make adequate profit margins. Processors at origin in West Africa operating at lower processing efficiency 

and poorly developed relationships with consuming markets, claim to be in negative gross margin territory when RCN prices reach 500 CFAF 

per kg (or $841 Mt).   

CASHEW SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT. The Government of Cote d’Ivoire has recognized the potential for job creation and value addition 

through expansion of domestic cashew processing. It has included the development of the cashew sector, and cashew processing in particular, 

as a national priority in its NDP 2016-20 and its National Agricultural Investment Plan (NAIP). In 2013, the authorities has adopted a reform of 

the sector and the main lines of a strategy for the promotion of domestic cashew processing (prepared jointly by the Ministry of Industry and 

Mines, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Environment).  

The 2013 reform focuses on improving on-farm productivity, marketing of RCN and strengthening the management of the value chain. It 

includes the following main pillars: (i) The establishment of a public Agency “Council for Cotton and Cashew - CCA”
14

  in charge of coordinating 

and promoting the development of the cashew (and cotton) sector, by providing the necessary regulations of all activities in the sector, 

organizing the provision of  critical services, supporting the strengthening of producer associations and the creation of a strong 

Interprofessional body for the management of the value chain; (ii) Programs for strengthening research, the production and distribution of 

improved planting material, the improvement of advisory services for providing technical support to farmers on good agricultural practices and 

harvest/post-harvest methods to improve quality of RCN; (iii) The establishment of efficient quality control and traceability mechanisms; (iv) 

The establishment of a new producer price mechanism guaranteeing a farm-gate price of at least 60 percent of the CIF
15

 price of RCN; (v) The 

rationalization of domestic marketing through the establishment of a network of licensed warehouses; and (vi) The rehabilitation of rural roads 

in the main producing areas. Most of these activities are already under implementation, financed by the levies imposed on the value chain (and 

with the support of the IDA-financed PSAC
16

 and IFC). However, the implementation of these activities remain unfunded and should be 

accelerated to be able to respond to the Government’s objective of increasing the percentage of domestically processed RCN by 2020. 

Especially attention must also be paid to building the capacity of the CCA and improving the governance of producers’ organizations. There are 

many cooperatives and other village-level groups, but they are mainly focused on collecting the harvest. They offer few other services, have 

little knowledge of the market, and are generally poorly governed. There are also several federations of producers’ organizations but they do 

not do much better, so that producers’ interests are poorly represented in the inter-profession. A considerable effort will be needed to build a 

legitimate structure to support improved practices and to speak on behalf of farmers, starting with a census of sector. 

The Ministry of Industry and Mines is implementing a parallel set of reforms and policies aimed at developing the processing sector.  These 

include clarification of the regulatory framework, public infrastructure development, assistance in processing technology procurement and 

                                            
14

 The CCA was created in 2013 to take over the functions of two previous bodies: The Autorité de Regulation du Coton et de l’Anacarde, created in 2002 as the sector 
regulatory body, and Intercajou, the value chain Interprofessional body responsible for the management and coordination of value chain private actors.  The CCA has 
the mission of developing the productivity of the entire value chain from production to the processing sector. It plays a regulatory role in the sector, in addition to its 
development and price stabilization mandates. 
15

 CIF: Cost Insurance and Freight - Seller must pay the costs and freight includes insurance to bring the goods to the port of destination. However, risk is transferred to 
the buyer once the goods are loaded on the ship. 
16

 Agricultural Development Support Project (P119308) 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 8 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

facilitating access to finance. Specific measure taken include reduction of duty on imported capital equipment and spare parts, exemption from 

“Benefice Industrial et Commercial – BCI” and land acquisition taxes, reduced costs of environmental and social impact assessment studies, 

plans for the creation of agro-industrial parks in Yamoussoukro, Bouake and other regional centers, developing a cooperative research Centre 

with FHB Technical Institute and Ho Chi Minh University for the transfer of technologies, technical staff training and technical assistance to 

private sector investors. Furthermore, CCA and the Ministry of Industry and Mines are working with commercial banks and IFC to establish a 

“Risk-Sharing” guarantee fund to provide working capital to processors primarily for RCN purchase and inventory funding. IFC and WB are also 

working with Government Agencies to finalize laws regulating the issue of warehouse receipts that will lower the cost of holding processing 

inventory.   

The need for additional incentives and reforms. The measures already taken to improve the incentives in favor of cashew processing, although 
a necessary and significant first step, may not be sufficient to mobilize the volume of private investments necessary to achieve Government’s 
very ambitious objective. At the present time, Côte d’Ivoire is not competitive with India and Vietnam in the processing of raw cashew nuts. 
Operating large processors in the country, although using the most efficient technology, are facing difficulties to make a profit at the price they 
have to pay in order to be competitive with raw nut exporters. Lack of technical and managerial skills, labor productivity, building and utility 
costs, interest rates, and taxes (official and unofficial) provide part of the explanation. But a bigger problem is the need to constitute a large 
stock of raw material, and finance it at prevailing high interest rates, in order to keep the factory running during the eight months between the 
end of one harvest and the start of the next one. Indian firms can avoid most of this expense by purchasing from different regions of the world 
at different times.  
 
Promoting more processing of raw cashew nuts in Cote d’Ivoire - the way forward. The Government has reviewed what other measures may 
be taken to spur the development of the Ivorian processing industry, on the basis of the lessons learned from other cashew processing 
countries. It is a fact that all other countries with a significant processing capacity have provided some protection in order to promote value 
addition. Brazil has adopted a ban on the export of raw cashew nuts while India, Vietnam, and Mozambique have relied on export taxes on raw 
cashew nuts in the range of 18 to 40 percent, combined with other fiscal incentives. Once such reforms and policies are in place in Cote 
d’Ivoire, a number of significant barriers to entry will be removed. However, some of the main issues causing a lack of competitiveness such as 
labor cost and productivity, technological/processing efficiency and inventory management will take time to overcome. To address these 
issues, CCA is proposing a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels of 80CFA per kg ($135 per Mt) to generate sufficient margins to 
bridge the competitiveness gap and provide a return on invested capital. This processing subsidy is to be funded from a 30 CFA per kg tax on 
RCN exports (about 4 percent of 2016 CFR prices

17
) which will be passed down the value chain to the farm gate. As a result, it will be RCN 

growers who are in effect funding the establishment of the processing sector. There are equity issues associated with this transfer of value 
between a large number of poor rural families to factory owners and their workforce that policy will need to balance. It would thus be 
necessary to use part of these proceeds for the benefit of the producers (who are financing them) to mitigate the negative impact of the levy 
on farm-gate prices and rural incomes. Factories located in the production areas may well employ family members of producing households. 
Higher disposable income from processing workers will also increase other economic activities in the immediate rural economy. But, additional 
investments in the value chain should be considered such as:  (i) boosting agricultural productivity by distributing improved planting material 
and promoting GAPs; and (ii) reducing marketing/transport costs by rehabilitating/constructing rural roads and/or financing other rural 
infrastructure (storage, access to water, etc.)

18
. These investments will increase producer’s productivity (yields and quality) and will lower 

transaction costs in aggregation. This assumes an institutional structure capable of managing significant sums in a transparent matter and 
accountable to the farmers, avoiding the neglects experienced in the coffee-cocoa sector. The industry should be also monitored closely to 
ensure that firms are becoming competitive and that the tax is not serving to protect inefficiency. Ideally, this form of infant-industry 
protection should decline over time to keep the pressure on its beneficiaries to improve their productivity. This principle should be retained, 
especially as the investment climate improves and the profitability of this activity is confirmed.  
 
Ultimately, the development of a processing industry through limited protection and support may be justified as a risk-mitigation measure 
in view of the fact that the alternative is continued dependence on two importing countries. Not to build up local processing capacity could 
mean jeopardizing the entire sector, a sector in which Côte d’Ivoire has proven its comparative advantage in producing the raw material, and 
where it should be competitive in processing under the right conditions and with appropriate incentives in place. Against this background, the 
proposed World Bank loan aims to support the Ivorian Government’s plan to expand RCN processing in Cote d’Ivoire from the current estimate 
of 5-7 percent of production to over 30 percent. Crop production estimates foresee the national crop levelling at around 1.2m Mt of RCN per 
year which implies domestic processing of 400,000 Mt RCN or about 80,000-96,000 Mt of processed kernels depending on the outturn of 
cashew nut kernels

19
.  

                                            
17

 Cost and freight (CFR) is a trade term requiring the seller to arrange for the carriage of goods by sea to a port of destination, and provide the buyer with the 
documents necessary to obtain the goods from the carrier. 
18

 This practice is already being implemented in the case in the cacao, the rubber and the oil palm sectors.  
19

 The outturn of cashew nut kernels is equal to the amount of usable kernels after shelling the cashew nuts. Generally, outturn ranges between 20 and 24%, but can 
be much higher as well 

http://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/seller.asp


 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 9 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

Succeeding on achieving the Government objective of enhanced value-added transformation will depend not only on increased domestic 

processing, but most importantly on improving the whole cashew value-chain performance and competitiveness. This will entail priority 

setting and funding to increase on-farm yields that remain low, continued strengthening of sector institutions, modernization of marketing, and 

prepare and adapt cashew processing industries and their environment to the requirements of the international markets. Specifically, the 

following key factors will need to be taken into account: (i)  Supply of cashew nuts to processing at competitive costs and adequate quality 

which will depend on overcoming on-farm production challenges and developing basic rural and post-harvest/marketing infrastructure; (ii) For 

domestic processors (and for exporters), clarity of vision on how on-farm productivity will evolve – geographically and with what pace - impacts 

the efficiency of subsequent value chain activities and the profitability of investment decisions. Scale and location of additional processing 

facilities, and building of input supply networks, depend on whether farm production remains low productivity and dispersed, or will begin to 

concentrate geographically and amongst fewer, more professional farmers. Bringing the current spectrum of views closer together therefore 

offers the potential for lower risks and higher interest in additional processing investment, or at the least, lower risks of inefficiently placed 

investment (in space and time); (iii) Local processing industries and enterprises will require to be modernized with the aim to improve their 

competitiveness in terms of price, quality and innovation and also their ability to follow and assimilate the development of technologies and 

markets. This will involve promoting a process of upgrading, modernizing of production tools and industrial subsystems, strengthening 

managerial capacities, developing quality and adopting international standards; (iv) Support measures tailored to SMEs (including taxes and 

other policy adjustments) will have be promoted to enhance their contribution to domestic processing and to boost the creation of jobs for 

young people. Innovation and skill development will contribute significantly to this process by making the most of the demographic dividend; 

and (v) Support in the improvement of other essential infrastructure for industrial activity (access to energy, roads networks, technology 

centers, etc.) is also essential, particularly in disadvantaged regions in northern Cote d’Ivoire. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed Cashew Value Chain Competitiveness Project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Cote 

d’Ivoire and supports the achievement of the WBG’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Côte d’Ivoire 

wants to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work in agriculture, 

manufacturing and selected services. To help the country reach its potential as world‐class agricultural commodity producer, the CPF program 

FY16-FY19 proposes to address low productivity and jobs in the agriculture, agribusiness and manufacturing value chains, among other within 

the cashew value-chain, which offers high potentials for economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction.  

In this respect, the proposed project supports the CPF main Focus Area 1 “Accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth in Cote d’Ivoire” 

and its Strategic Objective 1 “Improve productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness value chains” to achieve inclusive growth and reduce poverty. 

It supports also the Strategic Objective 3 “Improve business regulatory framework and access to finance” to promote investment in 

agriculture/agribusiness, help spur entrepreneurship and growth opportunities, especially for SMEs.  

The proposed project addresses also the World Bank Africa Region priorities of Agri-business and is well aligned with the Agriculture Global 

Practice’s key priorities areas of inclusive value chains, jobs and partnership with the private sector. It is also consistent with the IFC‐WB Joint 

Agribusiness Strategy, which supports agriculture and agri‐business competitiveness in selected value chains, by improving access to markets, 

provision of technology and training of smallholders, and sector governance reforms.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
To increase cashew productivity, quality and value-added focusing on small farmers and SMEs in producing areas of 
Cote d'Ivoire. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

PDO-level expected outcome indicators are: 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 10 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

• Increased cashew productivity (kg per hectare) in the project area. 

• Improved storage practices and technology adopted at cooperatives and warehouses. 

• Increased volume of domestically processed raw cashew nuts (MT). 

• Direct beneficiaries reached, of which female beneficiaries (Percentage) (Core). 

• Targeted beneficiaries are satisfied with specific project intervention (desegregated by gender) 

 

Intermediate Output (results) indicators for the project include: 

 

• Number of farmers trained in GAPs, harvest and post-harvest best practices. 

• Quality criteria and standards applied in production and processing. 

• Increased quality, as measured by the price premium of RCN sold by beneficiary farmers. 

• Km of roads constructed/rehabilitated.  

• Number of loans and volume of finance to cashew industry supported by the facility. 

• Number of jobs created within the cashew processing industry. 

• Improved business environment indicators as measured by the ease of access to finance by the cashew industry (survey), percentage of 

cashew processing industries that have an internationally-recognized quality certification, and streamlining administrative procedures for SMEs 

in the value-chain (taxation, licensing and regulations). 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
Cote d’Ivoire is the largest exporter of RCN in the world but only process 5-7 percent of this volume into higher value edible nuts. The Ivorian 

processing sector has remained small in the face of intense competition for RCN supply from established processors in India and Vietnam. This 

processing competitive disadvantage is compounded by the presence of internationally financed foreign trading companies who are deeply 

integrated into to processing sector in Asia. The proposed interventions under this loan aim at reversing the current situation by achieving 

transformational changes in the whole Ivoirian cashew value chain in a manner that accelerate its development and performance with a focus 

on increased domestic processing and added-value.  

The Government of Cote d’Ivoire recognizes that expansion in processing capacity will be driven by private sector investment facilitated by a 

clearly defined enabling environment. Key steps have already been put in place to achieve this in the form of an export tax on RCN to fund 

investments in the value chain, a processing subsidy on exported processed kernels that addresses immediate factors of low competitiveness, 

laws and regulations to facilitate working capital requirements and numerous fiscal incentives to reduce investment costs – for instance, the 

WRS regulations adopted recently by the council of Ministers (decrees specifying the terms of application of Law No. 2015-538 of 20 July 2015). 

This Concept Note proposes interventions complementing existing sector policies that tends to lower the barriers to investment in new 

processing capacity and enhance the competitiveness of existing processing capacity. It supports additional investments at critical point along 

the value chain that will: (i) increase RCN productivity on-farm, improve quality and lower aggregation costs; (ii) accelerate private investment 

in new processing capacity through the provision carefully designed and located physical infrastructure that increases operational efficiency 

and significantly lowers the initial cost of investment; (iii) improve the policy and regulatory framework for the sustainable development of the 

cashew value chain in Cote d’Ivoire, including build capacity in all functions along the value chain (technical and managerial skills, knowledge 

and innovation); and (iv) facilitating market development and trade. It is taking into consideration the lessons learned from the WBG 

agriculture portfolio experience and analytical work recently completed in Cote d’Ivoire. These include: (i) learning from the PSAC/IFC and 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 11 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

related analytical work; (ii) the findings of the study “Overview of the cashew sector in Cote d’Ivoire:  Current situation and development 

potential” which provided critical insights and inputs for the preparation of the proposed project; and (iii) other key analytical work carried-out 

by development partners and the Government related to the sector diagnostic, reform and development strategy (see Annex 2 of list of 

references).  

COMPONENT 1: IMPROVING THE ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNANCE OF THE CASHEW VALUE CHAIN ($14.5 MILLION). This component aims 

at improving the organization and governance of the value chain to be able to reduce costs of marketing (from producer to port and to 

consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This also includes the strengthening of the various organizations that are 

engaged in the governance of the chain. Building on PSAC/IFC on-going program, the main investments under this component will include the 

following:  

(i) The assessment of existing capacity for public/private sector dialogue (PPD) on the cashew sector, contribution to/co-funding of 

relevant discussion fora, and capacity building of value-chain actors in advocacy for improved business environment. A particular focus will be 

on strengthening: (a) the capacities of the CCA in managing the cashew sector. This would involve measures of organizational development, 

capacity building on leading and managing stakeholder processes, lobbying for a better endowment with staff and financial resources, and 

training on quality control and marketing so staff is able to provide better services to producers, processors and traders. Emphasis should be 

less on control and regulation and more on guidance, advisory services and support; (b) the Ivoirian cashew interprofession, including the 

Union of Cashew Processors
20

. This would also engage measures of organizational development, promotion of benefits to members (e.g. 

political lobbying, service provision and sourcing of equipment in bulk), and capacity building in administration; and (c) the cashew 

cooperatives and their unions and enable them to provide more effectively services and benefits to their members. This involves capacity-

building in all aspects of technical and managerial skills - from good governance, the structure and principles of a cooperative, operational 

management, financial and auditing techniques, business development, marketing plans, and creditworthiness (so that participants can more 

easily obtain loans).  

 

(ii) Promoting an improvement of the relationships between producers/cooperatives/groups and processors/buyers through the 

introduction of more elaborated contracting. This would require sensitization of all actors about the benefits of such contracts, the 

development of contract documents fitted to the conditions in the chain, and support in monitoring compliance. 

 

(iii) Exploring options for combined finance of production and processing. This would involve setting up contractual relationships between 

producers and processors, use of the warehouse receipts as collateral, and educating bankers on the nature of the businesses in the value 

chain. 

 

(iv) Promoting the provision of value chain support services such as technical and business advice and R&D with a focus on cashew 

processing and value-added. Measures to improve such services include fostering the setting up of a network of private service providers, their 

training and their accreditation. 

 

(v) Establishing a geo-referenced information system for the sector to allow for better planning and management of the value-chain - 

collection of reliable information on the number of producers, number of trees/age, volume of production, market evolution and other socio-

economic and ecological factors to facilitate decision-making). 

The actors to be engaged in the implementation of this component include the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Industry and Mines, CCA, 

the Union of Cashew Processors, cooperatives, potential private training and advisory service providers, and the Banks. 

COMPONENT 2: PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT AND IMPROVED MARKET ACCESS TO RCN PRODUCERS (US$48.5 MILLION). This component 

intents to boost cashew farmers’ productivity on an economically and environmentally sustainable basis. Main outcomes here are in the form 

of an increase in volume and quality of marketable produce in the project areas so as to increase incomes and employment and reduce 

poverty. Direct beneficiaries of the component are 250,000 smallholder cashew producers, mainly in the northern impoverished regions of 

Cote d’Ivoire. To this end, the project will support investments focusing on: (i) support to smallholder production; and (ii) improvement of 

feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure. Specific interventions will include the following: 

Sub-component 2.1: Support to smallholder production (US$28.5 million). This sub-component will aim at increasing the production (including 

quality) and productivity of cashew producers in the project areas. This will primarily be achieved by facilitating access to: (i) improved planting 

                                            
20

 Syndicat de transformateurs d’anacarde. 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 12 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

materials, fertilizers and agro-chemicals; (ii) training in good agricultural practices; and (iii) extension services to advise on harvest and post-

harvest practices. The following major activities will be implemented: (a) providing support to the national research institutes and nurseries for 

preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties and production of new higher yielding varieties for replacement of old plantations and the 

establishment of new acreage. This will include facilitating access to equipment and inputs, and building the capacity of the national 

agronomists in preliminary selection of improved cashew varieties, handling, storage and distribution; (b) capacity building and training of 

extension staff and cashew producers on improved on-farm practices such as establishment techniques, plant nutrition, planting densities, 

ideal inter-cropping combinations, pruning plans, harvesting, post-harvest storage and quality control, pest and disease management, soil 

conservation/mulching/green residues, book keeping/farm accounts; and (c) launching a fertilizer and phytosanitary treatment program. Given 

the considerable area to be covered by the project, an efficient training scheme across a large population of farmers will need to be 

established. While emphasizing the importance of skills development and capacity building for increased agricultural productivity, the project 

will identify and strengthen potential training and advisory service providers. Capacities among trainers will be also strengthened and these will 

be motivated and equipped to reach farmers. The training content will feature good agricultural practices and environmentally safe use of 

pesticides and will be adapted to local needs, and farmers will be encouraged to organize field days and training events.  

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, CCA, farmers, cooperatives, agricultural development 

officers on the district and village level, potential private training and advisory service providers, research institutions, seed and plant 
multipliers, and input providers.  

Sub-component 2.2: Improvement of feeder roads and post-harvest infrastructure (US$20 million). This sub-component will aim at improving 
the connection of the main cashew production areas to markets and promote forms of improved storage technology and management of 

stocks based on the Warehouse Receipt System (WRS) being implemented under the PSAC/IFC. Activities related to the feeder roads 

rehabilitation/construction will take into account the national strategy for roads maintenance which includes a partnership between the State 

and private operators (Inter-professional bodies) for the selection of priority roads for rehabilitation/maintenance or construction and the 

parallel co-financing of these activities. Following an inventory of the existing network of rural roads in project areas, a rural road improvement 

program will be developed jointly with the CCA and AGEROUTE (the roads management national agency). The Project will rehabilitate/maintain 

around 1000 km of existing feeder roads and eventually construct about 200 km of new roads. It will also rehabilitate/construct required 

infrastructure representing a critical bottleneck in selected spots (small bridges and culverts). A community-based road maintenance strategy 

will be developed and related road maintenance associations strengthened/formed at community level. In addition, low-cost hand tools and 

equipment will be provided to the community to undertake routine maintenance. The project will learn from the outcome of the joint WB-AFD 

project (PSAC) implementing similar activities in the project areas.  

Activities related to post-harvest technologies will involves an assessment of existing storage facilities
21

, identification of best practices and 

development of a store keeping manual for practitioners, and upgrading and/or developing new storage facilities. To the extent possible, the 

rehabilitation of existing “public” warehouses will reply on public-private-partnership business models. 

COMPONENT 3: SUPPORT TO PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN PROCESSING CAPACITY AND MARKET LINKAGES (US$95 MILLION). This component 

aims at increasing the volume and value-addition of RCN locally processed. Project interventions consist of an integrated mix of activities at 

four different levels: (i) improving the business environment; (ii) facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to 

producers and domestic processors; (iii) supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the establishment of the cashew 

industry; and (iv) market development and trade.  

Sub-component 3.1: Improving the business environment (US$10 million). The cashew industry operating in Cote d’Ivoire faces market failures 

that need to be addressed if this “nascent” industry is to develop and contribute to economic growth, jobs creation and poverty reduction. 

Cooperatives and SMEs are affected more than large firms are by regulation and transaction burdens (business environment constraints), have 

little access to credit (finance constraints), and have limited access to information, advisory services, technology, and innovation (knowledge 

constraints). Under this subcomponent, the project will:  

(i) Revise the existing regulations on cashew nut levies so that their distribution could strengthen CCA and be reinvested into the 

development of the processing sector - for example in capacity strengthening of processors and R&D on technical solutions. 

 

(ii) Assess the regulations and licenses that are required to sell, buy and trade cashew products with the objective to reduce the costs of 
marketing (from producer to port and to consumer) and make the value chain ultimately more competitive. This involves a revision of the 

                                            
21

 Updating the inventory of warehouses and of storage facilities needs which was carried-out under the PSAC/Veritas in 2015.  



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 13 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

current procedures in relation to other sectors and practices in other countries, the identification of opportunities for simplification, 

digitalization and streamlining and the testing and implementation of such measures. The project will also support the implementation of the 

new WRS regulations recently adopted through capacity-building benefiting the WRS Regulatory Authority.  
 

(iii) Promote other improvement in the business environment such as: (a) fiscal incentives defined in terms of duration, duty exemptions on 

processing CAPEX, and duty exemption on spare parts and consumable; (b) regional payroll tax exemptions to lower employment costs in 

production zones; (c) subsidy based on kernels produced/exported which should be clarified and defined in terms of duration (currently set by 

the CCA at 80 CFA per kg of RCN processed); and (d) a Fast-track “window” for processing investment incentives. 

 

(iv) Support the creation of new and/or improvement of existing business development services and technology centers that are targeted 

at cashew ago-enterprises for the provision of services such as technical and business advice, R&D, etc. In particular, the project will strengthen 

the Cashew Technology Center currently being established in Yamoussoukro, in partnership with the FHB Technical Institute and the Ho Chi 

Minh University, for the transfer of technologies, the training of the labor force and the provision of technical assistance to private investors. 

The actors to be engaged in this sub-component include the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Industry and Mines, Ministry of Commerce, 

CCA, Union of cashew processors, the Warehouse Regulatory Authority and national technology centres and business development services.   

Sub-component 3.2. Facilitating access to investment capital and risk management instruments to domestic processors  (US$33 million). This 

sub-component will aim at improving access to term finance for investments as well as working capital for the cashew domestic industry and 

will consist of a Financing (line of credit) and a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). Targeted end-beneficiaries will include new and domestic cashew 

enterprises in need of financing to upgrade/modernize their technology or establish new processing plants (including financing for capital 

investment, capacity expansion and working capital). Selection of PFIs for the line of credit and RSF would be based on clearly defined eligibility 

criteria that would ensure minimum performance and capital, profitability and portfolio quality standards of the PFIs and their ability to 

promote cashew industry development at national level. The volume, lending rates and arrangements of the line of credit and RSF will be set 

appropriately to minimize any potential market distortion, and in compliance with OP requirements for lines of credit. 

 

The project will combine the provision of appropriate financing instruments to banks (line of credit and risk sharing facility) with commitments 

from participating banks to strengthen their lending capability over time to the cashew processing industry. A technical assistance will be 

available under both facilities to support: (i) training for the banks that will benefit from the credit line or RSF, in order to help build capacity in 

lending services to the cashew industry (and agro-industry in general) and ensure that benefiting industry has sufficient capacity to effectively 

utilize loans from the banks for the growth of their businesses; and (ii) advisory services at the industry level to increase their “bankability” – 

preparation of sound business plans (including choice of technology and support for procurement) and loan applications.  

 

Based on preliminary discussions with the stakeholders (government officials, local banks and cashew industry) as well as prior studies, there is 

an acute shortage of financing availability; and the volume of the proposed line of credit as well as RSF is relatively modest yet adequate to 

have meaningful impact and create momentum for Cote d’Ivoire to move up the cashew nut value-chain.  Access, modalities and financial 

terms would include features such as competitive interest rates and maturities in line with on–going commercial practices and consistent with 

the OP10 guideline for LOCs, to ensure that no market distortions are created. The availability period of the LOC as well as RSF would be [5] 

years, and the maturity of loans would be set accordingly, based on further consultation with the stakeholders, to address the shortage of 

financing in particular for investments in the sector and the current gap in the financing offered in Cote d’Ivoire. The RSF will be used to reduce 

the banks’ risk of lending to cashew industry borrowers.  There are other past cases in the region where RSF was deployed effectively in 

agriculture sector (e.g., Mali) and the project will also draw lessons from these experiences.  

 

Sub-component 3.3. Supporting for the development of an adequate infrastructure for the cashew industry (US$42 million). This sub-

component aims at addressing important lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment and hinder the development of competitive and 

inclusive cashew processing industry in the country. It will complement on the forthcoming PIDUCAS project
22

 which plan investments in key 

economic and social infrastructure in Bouaké and San Pedro. It will particularly support the development of a concentrated agro-industrial zone 

in the main producing area of northern Cote d’Ivoire, mainly focused on value addition/agro-processing services of cashew products and by-

products (cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL)
23

, juice, biofuel, etc.). The zone will be developed based on a public-private partnership scheme aiming 

                                            
22

 Infrastructure for Urban Development and Competitiveness of Secondary Cities Project (P151324). 
23

 The cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL) has important properties which make it valuable for automobile brake linings and paint and varnishes. These by-products are fully 

used in the main processing countries (Brazil, India) and can bring as much revenue as the cashew nut itself. 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 14 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

at facilitating:  (i) access to basic infrastructure; (ii) shared common services and facilities and creation of economies of scale in service 

provision, including storage facilities, transport, quality control services, waste management, etc.; (iii) improved access to technical support and 

information and management services; and (iv) a platform for business linkages between and within value-chain actors through effective 

network between primary producers, agro-processors, traders, retailers and end markets.  

 

Under this sub-component, the project will finance the agro-industrial zone site development and promotion which will include the following 

investments: (i) site identification and assessment based on specific criteria including access roads, site-specific risks, key cost factors, private 

sector interest, etc.; (ii) in-depth technical and economic feasibility studies for the zone development, including a market demand assessment, 

sizing of necessary industrial land, master planning and development, business development plan, environmental and social safeguards, etc.; 

(iii) the construction of the zone’s critical infrastructure (access and internal road network, electricity, communications, and water supply) and 

common services (such administration building, storage facilities, workshop, quality control laboratory, waste disposal, etc.); (iv) investment 

promotion campaign for the site; (v) establishment of its management structure; and (vi) a network of linked sub-regional storage and primary 

processing satellite centres feeding into the agro-industrial zone. 

 
Sub-Component 3.4. Market development and trade (US$10 million). A sustainable outlet for RCN and kernels is a prerequisite to the 
realization of growth potentials in production and processing. Therefore, this component aims at an effective development of domestic, 

regional and international markets for cashew products, particularly kernels. The following interventions are planned: (i) A study related to the 

opportunities for marketing of cashew products (and by-products) locally and internationally. This would engage in a detailed analysis of 

existing domestic and international marketing channels and a projection on most viable options for marketing cashew products with the 

associated standards and quality requirements. Quality control needs to be introduced to the purchase of processed products for local and 

international markets; (ii) Launching a branding and marketing campaign through various channels of mass media (telephone, television, radio, 

billboards, newspapers) to promote cashew consumption among consumers in Cote d’Ivoire. An Ivoirian brand of kernels, eventually to be 

issued by the CCA, will also be promoted on international trade fairs; (iii) Introducing and promoting the application of principles of quality 

control and food safety into processing and marketing of cashew nuts including Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good Hygienic 

Practices (GHP) as well as food safety standards such as Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP). This implies promotion of and training 

in good practices in cashew nut production and processing and enforcement of application of quality criteria at the buyer’s level (warehouse 

and retailers); (iv) establishing a market information system that provides efficiently information on prices for raw and processed cashew nuts 

to all stakeholders. This will involve the collection of price data at farm gates, factory gates, warehouse gates, at ports, at major trading places 

(e.g. India), and setting up of a price information service reachable by everybody via telephone and internet, and the continuous analysis and 

publishing of market intelligence; and (v) improving the efficiency in marketing/auctioning raw cashew nuts. This would require working out 

modalities to enable producers and processors getting more direct access to international buyers for raw nuts and kernels and vice versa.  

 

COMPONENT 4: PROGRAM COORDINATION, MONITORING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (US$17.5 MILLION). This component will 

facilitate: (i) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; (ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure 

efficient flow of information and support to all value chain actors, in particular the small cashew growers and the processing industry; (iii) 

effective contractual arrangements with key implementing partners (CCA, CNRA, etc.) and other private sector operators; (iv) monitoring and 

evaluation of the performance and the financial, environmental, and social impact of the project; and (v) development of communication 

activities to publicize and disseminate the project results, best practices and success stories. 

 

                                                                                                                                                                  
 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 15 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
The project main interventions will be mostly located in the Northern regions of Cote d'Ivoire, where cashew has 
become the most important source of rural cash income. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects. There are 
considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards 
policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Ministry of Environment, and Sustainable Development 
(MINEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with national 
environmental standards. It has different departments among which the National Agency of Environment (ANDE, 
Agence Nationale de l’Environnement) in charge of safeguards compliance of all projects in the country. The unit is 
well staffed and its capacities are acceptable. With regard to the PCU, capacity building efforts to support project 
implementation will be done by implementing recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared 
for the project. The project will also receive guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the 
Project team. 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team       

 
Abdoul Wahabi Seini, Abdoulaye Gadiere 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This project is planning to finance roads 
rehabilitation/construction with the aim to establish 
the connection of the main cashew production areas 
to markets. For instance, about 200 km of new roads 
will be built and other 1000 km will be rehabilitated 
(see sub-component 2.2). Besides, the project is 
going to support the development of a concentrated 
agro-industrial zone including basic infrastructures 
and storage facilities as well as waste management 
(sub-component 3.3). Based on all potential adverse 
impacts which may be significant and irreversible, the 
project is rated as a category A project. 
 
While the exact locations of these investments are 
not yet known, the proper safeguard instrument to 
be prepared in compliance with this policy is an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 16 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

(ESMF). This ESMF will be reviewed, consulted upon 
and disclosed both in Cote d’Ivoire and at the 
Infoshop at least 120 days before the board 
presentation. 
 
In addition, the project aims at addressing important 
lacks of infrastructure that limit private investment 
and hinder the development of competitive and 
inclusive cashew processing industry in the country 
through the development of agro-industrial zone 
based on a public-private partnership scheme. 
Regarding potential environmental and social adverse 
impacts associated with such an investment, the 
appropriate safeguard instrument to develop is a 
sectoral Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA). The terms of reference for such a 
SESA will be developed, consulted upon and disclosed 
within Cote d’Ivoire and at the Infoshop at least 
120days prior to the board date. But the sectoral 
assessment itself will be carried out as part of the 
project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will be implemented on areas where 
forests still exist. This kind of environment 
concentrates various insects and others types of 
animals, whose natural habitat could potentially be 
affected by the project’s activities mainly with the 
opening of new road (200 km). However, there is no 
specific safeguard instrument to be prepared. This 
issue will be taken into account by the ESMF. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Areas where the project’s activities will be 
implemented comprise forested areas. That factor 
could possibly impact the health and quality of 
forests or the rights and welfare of people and their 
level of dependence upon the interaction with 
forests, and it may lead to changes in the 
management, protection or utilization of natural 
forests or plantations. So, special attention may be 
paid in order to avoid or unless minimize adverse 
impacts on forests resources. The ESMF that will be 
prepared in accordance with OP4.01 will provide 
guidance to address matters related to forests 
protection. During the implementation phase, a 
management plan will be prepared if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 
The sub-component 2.1 will aim at increasing the 
production (including quality) and productivity of 
cashew producers in the project areas. That means 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 17 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

even if the project does not purchase fertilizers and 
agro-chemicals directly, It will induce the use of those 
chemical products by cashew producers for pest and 
disease management. Furthermore, the project 
intends to launch a fertilizer and phytosanitary 
treatment program. Consequently an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) will be prepared, reviewed, 
consulted upon, approved and disclosed in the 
targeted areas, mainly in the north of Cote d’Ivoire 
and at the Infoshop at least 120 days before board 
date. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Activities supported by the ongoing bank’s funded 
operation such as roads construction/rehabilitation; 
agro-industrial zone, water supply facilities will 
unquestionably involve excavations with possibilities 
to underscore Physical cultural resources. However, 
the triggering of this policy does not entail the 
preparation of a specific safeguard instrument. Only a 
specific chapter will be included in the ESMF to 
provide guidance in case physical cultural resources 
will be discovered. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no indigenous people as defined by the 
policy in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The planned interventions such as rural roads, agro-
industrial parks, storage facilities are expected to lead 
to land acquisition or restriction of access to sources 
of livelihood. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared for the activities 
triggered by the OP 4.12 as a due diligence given that 
the specific sites or impacts of planned physical 
investments are not known. The RPF will be prepared 
by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the team 
and disclosed in country and at Bank InfoShop prior 
to appraisal. The RPF will be used as a guide to 
conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as 
needed, as well as compensation measures to 
minimize negative impacts on Project Affected 
People (PAPs).The RAPs will be submitted to the Bank 
for approval prior to the commencement of the civil 
works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project is not expected to affect international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be located in a Disputed Area. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 18 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        
 

Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

Dec 30, 2016 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: (i) an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), (iii) an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP) and (iv) a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework (PCRMF) . All these safeguard 
documents will be reviewed consulted upon and disclosed by the Government of the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, and by 
the World Bank’s Infoshop  at least 120 days prior to presentation of the Project to the Board. 

 

  CONTACT POINT 
      
 

World Bank 

Chakib Jenane, Juvenal Nzambimana 

Senior Agribusiness Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Emmanuel Ahoutou 

Director-Deputy Chief of Staff 

emmahoutou@gmail.com 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture 

Mamadou Sangafowa  Coulibaly 

Minister 

sangafowa1@gmail.com 
  

Ministry of Mines and Industry 

Jean Claude  BROU 

Minister 

minindustrie@gmail.com 
 
 

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 



 
The World Bank  
Cashew Value-Chain Competitiveness Project (P158810) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2016 Page 19 of 19  

     

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 O

n
ly

 

 

The InfoShop 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 458-4500 

Fax: (202) 522-1500 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 

 

 

  APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Chakib Jenane, Juvenal Nzambimana 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Maman-Sani Issa 31-Aug-2016 

Practice Manager/Manager: Christian Berger 31-Aug-2016 

Country Director: Pierre Frank Laporte 14-Sep-2016 
   
 

http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC3519

Project Name Nigeria Staple Crop Processing Zones Support Project (P148616)
Region AFRICA
Country Nigeria
Sector(s) Crops (35%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Transmission 

and Distribution of Electricity (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Ro ads and 
Highways (15%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry 
(10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural 
policies and institutions (25%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148616
Borrower(s) Federal Republic of Nigeria
Implementing Agency Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Jul-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

14-Jul-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

08-Oct-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

18-Dec-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Since 2003, Nigeria has continued to record high, sustained economic growth driven by non-oil 
sector, whereas the performance of the oil sector has slowed down.  Over the last decade, reported 
GDP growth rate has consistently remained between 6 to 8 percent. Key drivers of this strong 
growth are trade (retail and wholesale), agriculture, and telecommunications sectors.  These three 
sectors alone accounted for about 80 percent of GDP growth during 2009-2012. However, annual 
GDP growth rate declined from 7 percent in 2011 to 6.6 and 6.4 percent in 2012 and in the first half 
of 2013 respectively.  Growth has slowed in oil and gas, agriculture and trade but growth in the oil 
sector is slower than in agriculture.  The slowdown in agriculture and trade is related to the impact 
of 2012 flooding which disrupted crop production calendar and growing security problems in some 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

parts of the country that continues to restrict flows of trade. Oil production has stagnated or declined 
since 2010 due to increasing oil theft in the Niger Delta, and destruction of pipeline infrastructure. 
As a result, oil output in the first half of 2013 was about 10% lower than during the same period of 
2012.   
Rising oil prices ushered in surplus Balance of Payments (BoP) since 2011.  Reserves declined 
however to US$45 billion between April and early October, 2013, reflecting lower oil output,  
weaker oil prices, and more cautious attitudes of investors. While these inflows have strengthened 
Nigeria’s balance of payment and reserve position, they also pose major risk because of its 
vulnerability to shocks or swings in oil prices. Therefore, diversification of the economy is critical if 
Nigeria is to sustain a strong balance of payment position. The Nigerian Government has achieved 
significant budget consolidation since 2011, but dwindling oil production outlook presents fiscal 
uncertainties.   Government fiscal consolidation program is yielding results. Government  deficit 
reduced from an estimated 5.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 1.9 percent in 2012.  While oil output 
appears poised to recover somewhat in the second half of 2013, Nigeria faces an important 
challenge in that oil revenues are not expected to increase in the medium term at the nearly the pace 
of GDP or the population of the country, reinforcing the need to deepen  significantly other sources 
of Government revenues. 
Nigeria needs effective institutions and good governance to achieve sustainable and inclusive 
growth.  Good governance is critical for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public 
expenditures and services. Although, some pockets of effectiveness and capability in actually 
implementing reform have emerged, as reflected, for example, in the macroeconomic consolidation, 
consolidation of the banking sector after 2009 crisis, progress in implementing the power sector and 
the agricultural reforms. Important weaknesses and risks that still need to be addressed include the 
enforcement of regulations, inter-agency coordination and supervisory capacity.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The competitiveness of the agriculture value chains and diversification of the productive base of the 
economy away from oil is a key pillar of the Federal Government’s Agricultural Transformation 
Agenda (ATA). The ATA represents the Government’s renewed focus on value addition to targeted 
commodities for enhanced food security, employment creation and sourcing of raw materials for 
industries and generally for agriculture to serve as engine for a broad-based economic development 
in Nigeria. The ATA is designed to focus on self-sufficiency via import substitution, lowering of 
food costs, increasing real wages and driving down inflation, engendering a rapid transition to an 
export-oriented agricultural economy. It is also to diversify the economy thereby increasing foreign 
exchange reserves, stabilizing the exchange rate and significantly increase the level of foreign direct 
investment (FDI). Key policies and institutional reforms are aimed at: (a) broadening the reach of 
the fertilizer subsidy program and making it more efficient and business oriented; (b) improving the 
investment framework through the development of Staple Crop Processing Zones (SCPZs); (c) 
improving the marketing of agricultural products; (d) promoting investment in productivity-
enhancing technologies. In parallel, the Government seeks to expand and improve large-scale dam 
and irrigation infrastructure which has significant deficiencies that negatively impact agricultural 
productivity, notably in the North where the bulk of Nigeria’s dam and irrigation infrastructure is 
located. 
The agricultural sector is considered an engine of growth capable of generating broad-based 
development outcomes needed for rapid economic transformation. The sector has been central to 
Nigeria’s poverty reduction and employment generation efforts, and retained this importance in 
recent times as the largest contributor to  non-oil growth (40.2% and 34.5%  of GDP in 2011 and in 
the first quarter of 2012 respectively) and important in overall economic growth as well. Self-



Page 3 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

sufficiency and import substitution are explicit policy goals of agricultural development strategies in 
Nigeria, resulting from the growing and substantial food import bills  (US$ 2 billion) and policy 
responses (export bans) from a number of exporting countries witnessed during the recent global 
financial and food price crisis.    
The agriculture sector has been growing over the last decade, but not fast enough to meet the food 
security, employment and poverty challenges. Indeed, in recent years, food imports have been 
growing at a faster pace than the population growth (about 11% against,  2.8%) , and though the 
country has met the MDG1 on hunger, still 8.5% of total population were leaving below the  
minimum level of dietary energy consumption in 2011. Low productivity of major staple crops  – 
measured as average yield per hectare - as a result of  very low use of improved inputs , limited 
access to extension services by farmers) and limited investment by the private sector confine the 
sector well below its potential for growth. Power and road infrastructure, low-cost and long term 
financing, access to competitive inputs and supplies, as well as inconsistent policy environment are 
consistently identified by the private sector  as major challenges to their engagement in the sector. 
Rather than trying to drive the entire agricultural sector forward at the same time as in many past 
strategy documents, the ATA focuses on a few key first moves - priority food staples and traditional 
export crops, and intends to develop these for growth and employment creation, with the 
expectation that the rest of the sector will subsequently follow. Within agriculture, a major driver of 
growth is staple food crops, which contributed 35.8 percent to the agricultural GDP in 2011. 
Although in Asia irrigated agriculture was more prominent than in Nigeria, the ATA approach is 
similar to the Asian Green Revolution (GR) strategy, where an initial focus on import substitution 
for wheat and rice in high potential irrigated areas led the successful rural transformation that 
followed. Like the Asian model, the ATA assigns a lead role to the state in driving and orchestrating 
the strategy within each of the selected value chains, and in using financial incentives and import 
charges to encourage this growth. Unlike Asia, however, the ATA aggressively promotes private 
sector-led growth and is relying on public-priva te partnerships rather than state run marketing and 
financial institutions.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed SCPZ Support Project is fully aligned with the World Bank group Agricultural Action 
Plan 2013-2014, and features in the mix of instruments proposed under the New CPS (2014-
FY2017). Indeed the WBG new Agricultural Action identifies agricultural productivity, linking 
farmers to markets, and increasing non-farm income as key areas to put emphasis in order to help 
countries meet the MDG1, in one hand. in the other hand, the overarching objective of the Bank 
new CPS is to support the Government's Visions 20:2020 and Transformation Agenda for inclusive 
economic growth,  through a strategic focus on energy and agriculture sectors as cornerstone to help 
the country reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity. More specifically,  and under the first 
pillar (Federally led structural reforms for growth and jobs), the new CPS aims inter alia at boosting 
agricultural productivity, improving farmers' linkages with agro-processors, and scaling up Nigeria's 
resilience to current and future climate variability. 
The proposed SCPZ support project would contribute to the achievement of Pillar I of the new 
Country Partnership Strategy on growth and competitiveness. The CPS recognized that diversified 
growth and increased productivity is a prerequisite for accelerated poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity. With the dwindling fortune of the oil sector in Nigeria, agriculture offers a sure pathway 
to a diversified and sustained economic growth. However, low productivity and lack of 
competitiveness of the agriculture sector is inextricably linked to poor infrastructure and limited 
access to the market that increases transaction cost and limit margin to the farmers. This project 
would therefore contribute to laying foundation for diversified growth by providing critical public 



Page 4 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

infrastructure necessary for improved market access and to attract private sector investment in 
agribusiness; a subsector that can offer inclusive and broad development impact. 
The Proposed SCPZ support project will be complemented by ongoing and upcoming operations in 
the World Bank portfolio such as Fadama III/Additional Financing, CADP, WAAPP, RAMP, the 
irrigation project (TRMING), the Development Financing support project, as well as non-Bank-
funded projects supporting  ATA (AfDB-ATASP2, IFAD- Cassava and Value chains support 
project). Those operations are mostly oriented toward improving productivity and ramping up 
production in the SCPZ catchment areas, critical to improving competitiveness of the processing 
segment of the value chains, recognizing that addressing the challenge of low productivity in the 
agriculture sector requires targeted investments in technology, irrigation, rural roads, market 
information, and increasing access to finance. It will also take advantage of sector reforms initiated 
under the series of DPOs; with the second operation focusing inter alia on improving the 
institutional framework and business environment for SCPZ through the preparation of SCZP 
Policy, legal and Institutional framework to foster a predictable business environment for the private 
sector. 
An effective institution is necessary for managing sustainable and inclusive growth and 
competitiveness. Governance represented by deficient institutions can explain the under-
performance of agriculture sector, and its lack of competitiveness. Governance represents the 
foundation for the two pillar of the CPS. The CPS emphasized the fact that the ways in which public 
functions are carried out, public resources are managed and regulatory powers are exercised 
strongly influence the performance of the main sector actors, the focus of sector policies and their 
concrete outcomes. The SCPZ project would support an aspect of this by providing institutional 
development as part of the project design.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The Project development objective (PDO) is to increase market linkages for farmers and strengthen 
the institutional framework for inclusive public and private investment in selected agribusiness 
clusters. 
 
The Project will contribute to the broader objectives of the FGN’s SCPZ Program consisting of 
‘increasing food production and reducing the demand for imports, adding value through processing, 
reducing cost of doing business for processors, and attracting new investment to create jobs, 
especially in rural areas, and to drive the economy’.  The expansion of the agribusiness- farmer 
linkage models under the SCPZ program through the right mix of public and private investments 
will ultimately, improve agricultural productivity, generate shared growth and substantially reduce 
poverty in rural areas.

Key Results (From PCN)
The mandatory corporate indicator on beneficiaries is as follow: Number of direct beneficiaries 
(directs: benefiting farmers, workers in the SCPZ processing area, and  holders of small and 
medium businesses along value chains in the SCPZ; disaggregated by gender). Indirect beneficiaries 
include family members of and beneficiaries from ancillary activities, estimated as the total 
population in hosting communities.   
PDO level results and indicators 
i. Total amount of  investment financing brought by private sector into the  SCPZ (NGN, $);  
ii. Increase in sales of agricultural products by project supported farmers within the SCPZ area 



Page 5 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

(disaggregated by gender). 
Intermediate results and indicators (disaggregated by gender as relevant) 
i. Units measurement of infrastructure  (power generated, roads constructed, water supplied) 
constructed or rehabilitated in the SCPZ area; 
ii. Number of agricultural businesses  established and operating in with project support ; 
iii. Number of farmers groups with off-take agreement in project intervention areas; 
iv. Number of  businesses successfully implemented in the SCPZ with Project support (with 
the aim at strengthening agribusiness-farmers linkages and creating economic opportunities for the 
communities along the value chains, disaggregated by gender).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The concept of the Staple Crop Processing Zones under ATA as proposed by the Federal 
Government of Nigeria  is based on the following three guiding principles: (i) take an integrated 
approach to the value chain by addressing critical upstream and downstream bottlenecks and 
facilitating market linkages; (ii) offer a superior operating environment that reduces the cost of 
doing business, and iii) take a private sector-led approach. The Operating Principles are the 
following; (i) investment-driven strategic partnerships with the private sector; (ii) integrated value 
chain approach; (iii) Self-sustaining, government-support and private sector managed. 
  
The SCPZ program aims to channel infrastructure investments to facilitate efficient value chain 
linkages and reduce the cost of doing business, and improve the competitiveness of Nigeria’s agro-
industrial production. By creating an enabling business environment around selected value chains 
clusters, the FGN and State Governments seek to attract private sector investors to set up processing 
plants in high food production areas, in order to boost import substitution, create wealth 
opportunities for farming communities, reduce post-harvest losses, create sustainable employment 
in agro-production, processing and related activities, and drive rapid rural development.  
 
The proposed Project will support the FGN to implement the first model SCPZ and assist in 
building blocks for its sustainable expansion. The project approach to the Government's SCPZs 
Program consists of test running the concept gradually in limited number of sites, as an integrated 
agribusiness supply chain project, with strong farmers –agribusiness linkages aim to overcome the 
multiple, interlocking constraints in infrastructure provision and productivity growth along 
agricultural supply chains. Project will focus its support on Cassava supply value chain in Kogi 
State (at least 70% of project funding), with an open window for limited support in the form of 
technical assistance for up to three other sites/States with strong business case, and  based one 
following minimum criteria :  alignment with Government priority value chains and located in one 
of the SCPZ sites, existing or ready-to-implement  private investment project(s) with sizable 
financing,  high potential for improving agricultural productivity and  generating benefits for 
farmers,  strong support of state Government and local communities, existence of other Bank 
assisted project or partnership with other Donors funded project, and possible IFC intervention. 
 
Project activities will be clustered around the following areas of intervention :  
 
(a) Support to public infrastructure development for the model SCPZ in Kogi State (around 
75% of project total cost) :  consists of  support to Government to develop off-site infrastructure and 
subsequently identify and attract private sector investors willing to invest in on-site development, 



Page 6 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

operations and maintenance of the zone. The Project is also considering  to  support part of the on-
site infrastructure to guarantee minimum utility services (internal roads, water, gas, power) for up to 
3 private investment projects (covering up to 40% of the 250 hectares of the core zones).  
 
(b) Support to farmers-agribusiness linkage and to economic opportunities along the value 
chains (around 15% of total project cost). In coordination with FADAMA III Additional Financing 
( FADAMA III AF) and other relevant operations in the portfolio, the project will provide support 
to link  farmers, SMEs and communities in the catchment areas with the processing units as  
follows: (i) Improving Farmers productivity: the project will work with agro-processors to 
develop off-take agreements with farmers , aimed at structuring their organizations, and facilitating 
their access to inputs and services, such as  financing, extension, mechanization, land clearing, 
equipment and small scale production and marketing infrastructures,  grading, quality and standards, 
as well as skills development. Project will partner with Fadama III Additional Financing which will 
provide on-farm support to assist farmers deliver on the contracts; (ii) Promotion of economic 
opportunities for the community: The Project will establish a matching grants scheme to support 
activities aim at strengthening agribusiness farmers linkages which could  create jobs and increase 
income for the communities, thus contributing to reducing poverty in the project intervention areas. 
This will include support to women and youths and their groups, promoting development of 
mechanization services, transport, application of chemicals, business planning for SMEs, training , 
financial literacy, and ancillary activities of the value chains. 
 
(c) Institutional development in SCPZ (around 10% of total project cost): (i) Structuring of PPP 
for zone development, operation and maintenance: project will provide support for the 
establishment of a Specific Purpose vehicle (SPV) with a Board inclusive of all relevant 
stakeholders (Federal Government, State Government, Local Government, Developer, and Tenants). 
It is envisioned that the PPP transactions will result in specific contracts between the SPV and 
private investors; (ii) Land and safeguards management: for appropriate management of farm land 
allocation to the nucleus farms and for coordinated implementation of the SCPZ Master Plan in the 
catchment areas, the project will assist the State Government in developing responsible land 
allocation and management procedures following World Bank and international guidelines and 
standards, as well as adequate instruments and M&E system for environmental and social 
safeguards; (iii) Technical assistance to FMARD: The proposed Project will provide institutional 
support to FMARD and the SCPZ-Authority being established to regulate the SCPZS, in terms of 
technical assistance (TA), training, and experience sharing of best practices from across the world, 
and for scaling up the program to other sites based on lessons learnt from the pilot SCPZ in Kogi 
State; (iv) Technical assistance selected States for development of agribusiness clusters: 
Specific TA might include market assessment, SCPZ detailed feasibility studies, attracting private 
investor and structuring PPP, promotion of the program within the country and abroad, etc. The 
project will also support FMARD to support selected States, and upon their request, in developing 
their SCPZ projects. 
 
(d)  Project coordination: dedicated project management and coordination structure will set up 
and early as before negotiations, to initiate the implementation of the project and until the SCPZ 
institutional framework is established and fully operational.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD



Page 7 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 300.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 165.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 35.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
 Total 135.00

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: El Hadj Adama Toure
Title: Lead Agriculture Economist
Tel: 5359+298
Email: etoure@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Federal Republic of Nigeria
Contact: Ministry of Finance
Title:
Tel:
Email:

Implementing Agencies
Name: Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Contact: Dr. Niyi Ondulami
Title: Sr. Advisor/HMA
Tel: 23408075005555
Email: todunlami@yahoo.com



Page 8 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

VII. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17290

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya Project ID: P154784
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Oct-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): The National  Treasury
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 29.70
International Development Association (IDA) 250.00
Total Project Cost 279.70

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1. Kenya's economy is larger and growing faster than previously estimated. Rebasing of its 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reveals that Kenya?s economy is the ninth largest in Africa and 
fifth largest in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, and Sudan)  . Kenya?s 
growth compares favorably with other countries. It no longer lags behind its regional peers or 
other lower-middle-income countries. Average growth between 2010 and 2013 was 6.2 percent?
significantly higher than the 5.3 percent average for Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya?s 2013 growth 
rate of 5.7 percent was above the 5.0 percent average growth rate for lower-middle income 
countries.  In December 2014, Kenya?s GDP was estimated at US$55.2 billion (up from US$44.1 
billion before rebasing), with GDP per capita standing at US$1,246 (up from US$994). Kenya is 
now a lower-middle-income country, according to the World Bank classification, with Gross 
National Income (GNI) per capita of US$1,160 in 2013.   The economy was estimated to have 
grown 5.4 percent in 2014 and expected to grow by 6 percent in 2015 on the backdrop of 
significant improvement in external and internal balances, such as falling oil prices; and public 
investment, mainly in infrastructure (energy and the standard gauge railway). The World Bank 
projects that Kenya?s GDP will grow 6.6 percent in 2016, and 7.0 percent in 2017. 
 
2. Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing 
poverty and increasing shared prosperity, in particular in rural areas, remain. Poverty reduction 
has been driven by solid growth across most sectors of the economy. But improvements in 
income are not evenly shared amongst people and inequality appears to be rising among regions.  
According to the World Bank Group Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2014-2018), 
Kenya?s poverty rate has been falling?from 47 percent in 2005/06 to about 39 percent based on 
best estimates in 2012/13. But in the remote, arid, sparsely populated north-eastern parts of the 
country (Turkana, Mandera, and Wajir), poverty rates are above 80 percent.  The scale of 
consumption poverty in Kenya is staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas. Based on the last 
national household budget survey, close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was 
poor in 2005. The vast majority of the poor lived in rural areas and were more likely to depend on 
income and consumption from crops and livestock, as their main source of livelihood. Revised 
poverty estimates indicate that in 2013 nearly 4 in 10 Kenyans continue to live in extreme 
poverty.  
 
3. As the roles of national and county governments are restructured, and new county 
institutions are created, a fundamental challenge is to maintain the delivery of agricultural 
services. Under the new constitution adopted in 2010, the central government is devolving 
responsibility for multiple functions to 47 elected county governments and providing a minimum 
of 15 percent of national revenues to counties to carry out those functions. The main functions for 
agriculture (crop and animal husbandry services, extension, agricultural marketing and other 
related services) were transferred in August 2013 (the national government remains in charge of 
policy and research). With some exceptions, County agricultural services are in an embryonic 
state, with limited and in some cases no technical and/or operational capacity.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. In Kenya, agriculture remains one of the most important sectors of the economy. But 
about 83 percent of Kenya?s land area is in the Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs), which are 
mainly pastoral areas and the remaining 17 percent (where 80 percent of population lives) is 
classified as medium to high agricultural potential zone. In 2013, the sector contributed almost 27 
percent to the national GDP . The crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors contributed 
approximately 78, 20 and 2 percent to agricultural GDP respectively. The sector employs more 
than 75 percent of the workforce (also accounts for more than one-fifth of formal employment), 
generates most of the country?s food requirements, and plays a key role in poverty reduction. It 



Page 3 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

also generates nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of merchandise exports and roughly 60 percent of 
foreign exchange earnings.  
 
5. Overall, Kenya?s agricultural sector performance has been highly volatile with growth 
rates dipping into negative territory in nine years between 1980 and 2012 (Figure 1 below). 
Kenya?s agricultural growth rate has averaged between 3.4 percent during 1995-2003 and 
decreased to an average of 2.1 percent in 2003-2011 period. Recent years have witnessed 
increased volatility in agricultural growth rates with debilitating impacts on rural households 
incomes and employment; urban and rural food security, poverty reduction and the country?s 
overall economic growth. The sector?s growth in real gross value-added decelerated in 2013 to 
2.9 percent from a revised growth of 4.2 percent in 2012. The lowest agricultural GDP growth 
rate and value-added was noted in 2008, during a period which Kenya experienced the post-
election violence following the country?s 2007 general elections. 
   
6. Extreme weather events, largely droughts and to a lesser extent floods, have been the 
principal driver behind the volatility in the agricultural sector?s performance in Kenya.  The 
frequency and intensity of severe weather events have increased and this trend will be further 
amplified in the future as temperatures rise due to climate change . The World Bank?s agricultural 
sector risk assessment (2014) highlighted that recurring drought has profound effects on the 
agricultural sector, particularly in maize (main staple food) and livestock (in pastoral systems) 
production. Frequent drought events resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock deaths, spikes in 
food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor and led to rural population 
displacement (temporary migrations).  
 
7. Kenya?s strong reliance on rain fed maize production system in meeting its food needs 
and growing consolidation of production toward maize (and dry beans) has rendered the country 
increasingly vulnerable to supply disruptions and food shortages. Amid declining yields, 
productivity gains have come largely through land expansion into marginal areas that receive 
lower and more variable rainfall. This trend, coupled with Kenya? increasingly erratic rainfall, 
has made the country?s maize production more susceptible to moisture stress and year-on-year 
yield variability, with significant implications for national food security.  This has contributed to a 
growing structural deficit in maize/food production, a gap currently filled by rising imports, 
aggravating the country?s exposure to globally-driven commodity price shocks. Emergency food 
aid and other ex-post responses has helped fuel growing dependency and declining resilience, 
particularly among the poorest and especially those in the ASALs. 
 
8. Livestock production plays an important socio-economic role in many areas across 
Kenya, particularly in the ASALs where it accounts for as much as nine-tenths of employment 
and family income. Extensive livestock systems and pastoralists in Kenya?s northern rangelands 
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of drought. Estimated losses to livestock populations 
from droughts that have occurred within the most recent decade amount to more than US$1.08 
billion. Ancillary losses related to production assets and future income and the costs of ex-post 
response measures are likely several times that figure. The increased incidence of droughts across 
the ASALs in recent years means that affected communities have less time to recover and rebuild 
their assets. This has weakened traditional coping mechanisms and handicapped household 
resilience against future shocks. 
 
9. Climate variability is already having an impact on agriculture and food security in Kenya, 



Page 4 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

as a result of increased prevalence of extreme events (especially droughts) and increased 
unpredictability of weather patterns.  For example, severe droughts that occurred in 1991/92, 
1995/96, 1998/2000, 2004/2005, and 2008-11, resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock 
deaths, spikes in food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor, and led to 
rural population displacement (temporary migrations). Two noteworthy extreme climate events 
are the 1998 El Nino and the 2009 drought, which resulted in a combined total cost of US$2.8 
billion (about 7 percent of the 2010 GDP equivalent).   Frequent droughts also make Kenya 
significantly food insecure.  In 2015, it ranked 83rd of 109 countries, on the Global Food Security 
Index (GFSI).   Kenya is also highly vulnerable to climate change risks. The Center for Global 
Development ranks Kenya 13th out of 233 countries globally for ?direct risks? due to ?extreme 
weather? and 71st out of 233 for ?overall vulnerability? to climate change, even when adjusted 
for coping ability.  
 
10. Kenya?s average annual temperatures increased by 1Â°C between 1960 and 2003 , and 
by 1.5Â°C in the country?s drier regions.   Climate change is projected to reduce agricultural 
yields and livestock productivity, worsening the effect of climate shocks on the food system. 
Agriculture in Kenya is largely (98 percent) rain fed and thus extremely vulnerable to increasing 
temperatures and droughts.  Estimates of crop yield and livestock losses will vary greatly, but 
most global climate models project severe and adverse consequences, especially for the most 
food-insecure regions.  In Kenya, studies also show that by 2030, under a business as usual 
scenario, climate change will most likely reduce yields of staple crops (by 12 percent in maize, 23 
percent in rice, and 13 percent in wheat).  Crop land suitability is also expected to change, 
especially in wheat and maize. Depending on the region and types of production systems, water 
scarcity will result in less productive pastures, lower dairy yields, and higher risk of the spread of 
diseases.   
 
11. Climate change will exacerbate the vulnerability of Kenya?s agricultural sector as 
projections show increases in mean annual temperature of 1Â°C to 1.5Â°C by 2030. 
Consequently, changes in rainfall distribution and more frequent extreme events, such as 
prolonged drought and floods are predicted to result in more water shortages, especially in ASAL 
regions. While precipitation is projected to increase between 0.2 and 0.4 percent per year in 
Kenya, the direction and magnitude of change will vary considerably across regions, and 
warming-induced increases in evaporation rates are likely to offset the benefits of precipitation 
increases in some regions. Meeting this challenge will require both investments in building 
resilience to near-term shocks and in adapting to long-term climate change. In this context, 
climate smart agriculture (CSA) offers an appropriate strategic framework for responding to and 
reducing the adverse effects of climate change.  
 
12. Agriculture is the largest source of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in Kenya, 
contributing about 58.6 percent to total GHG emissions. Contributions of other sectors to national 
GHG emissions are: energy (25.3 percent), industry (3.2 percent) and waste management (1.2 
percent).   The agricultural sector is also a key driver of deforestation and land degradation, which 
account for an additional 32 percent of national GHG emissions.  Agricultural emissions are 
likely to increase from 20 MtCO2e in 2010 to 27 MtCO2e in 2030, largely driven by livestock 
methane emissions, which account for 96.2 percent of agricultural emissions. Agriculture, 
therefore, needs to reduce its GHG emissions and become part of the solution to tackle climate 
change. The sector plays an important role in sequestering carbon in soil and trees on farms.  It 
has the biophysical potential to offset and sequester about 20 percent of total annual emissions 



Page 5 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

through improved soil management techniques.   Currently, the world?s soils hold three times 
more carbon than the atmosphere. Soils also have significant potential to absorb a larger amount 
of carbon from the atmosphere than they currently do.  Restoring this carbon to the soil will not 
only sequester carbon from the atmosphere, but also boost productivity, increase water retention 
(leading to greater resilience when droughts occur), bring land back into production (thereby 
reducing pressure on biodiversity and forests), and boost incomes (thereby benefiting the rural 
poor). Similarly, Kenya?s livestock GHG emission intensities (i.e. amount of GHGs emitted per 
unit of product) amongst the highest in the world; this is mainly due to low livestock productivity. 
With the continuing rising demand for livestock products this threatens to become a growing 
problem.  Increasing livestock productivity (e.g., through improved forages and providing 
adequate year-round feed resources) would increase incomes, protect people?s asset base, as well 
as reduce GHG e/unit of product.  
 
13. The proposed CSA project can help Kenya meet the rising demand for food; and attain 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of ending poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), and 
combating climate change and its impacts (SDG13). But this would require investing in 
agricultural technologies, innovations and management practices (TIMPs) that would lead into 
CSA?s triple-win: increased agricultural productivity, enhanced resilience to climate change, and 
reduced GHG emissions. 
 
14. Kenya has a wide spectrum of CSA policies, strategies and plans that would help secure 
the triple-win. The Vision 2030 recognizes the significance of agriculture to its goal of achieving 
an average GDP growth rate of 10 percent per year up to the year 2030. This level of growth will 
be crucial for attaining the SDGs 1 and 2 of ending poverty and hunger, respectively.  Kenya?s 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS, 2010?2020) operationalizes the Vision 2030 
by focusing on transforming smallholder agriculture from low-productivity subsistence activities 
to more innovative, agri-business oriented agriculture. Regarding adaptation to climate change, 
ASDS prioritizes investments in weather information systems, research on drought tolerant crop 
varieties, soil and water conservation, water harvesting, and strengthening integrated pest 
management systems. For livestock, it prioritizes improved management of grazing systems, 
biogas, livestock diversification, and improved breeding of animals.  
 
15. Kenya also has a National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2010) that 
provides a framework for integrating climate change into development priorities. The National 
Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP, 2012)  operationalizes the NCCRS, and emphasizes low-
carbon, climate-resilient development pathway for the economy that is critical for achieving SDG 
13 of combating climate change and its impacts.  In the NCCAP, Kenya planned for a low-carbon 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) pathway for six sectors, namely energy, 
transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management.  The first activity undertaken 
under the NAMAs process was the analysis of emissions from the forestry and agriculture sectors. 
Selected practices for mitigation in the NCCAP included restoration of forest on degraded lands; 
REDD+; agroforestry; increase tree cover to 10 percent of total land area; conservation tillage; 
limiting use of fire in cropland; rangeland management; improved cook stoves; biogas; and 
management of agricultural wastes. The proposed Project will support these interventions, which 
are aimed at achieving the CSA triple-win of increasing productivity, building resilience to 
climate change, and reducing GHG emissions. 
 
16. The Kenya Climate Change Bill (2014) is about to be approved by the President, after 



Page 6 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

undergoing a public hearing and passing through the Senate. More recently, Kenya has developed 
a Climate-Smart Agriculture Program (CSAP, 2015?2030), that will be jointly implemented by 
MoALF, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and the Ministry of Water 
and Irrigation (MoWI). The Vision for the CSAP is a ?climate resilient and low carbon growth 
sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and contributes to national development goals in 
line with Kenya Vision 2030.?  In addition, Kenya has a National Policy on Climate Finance 
(2015) that seeks to position Kenya to better access climate finance through a variety of 
mechanisms. With support from the World Bank, the International Center for Tropical 
Agricultural (CIAT) recently developed a Kenya CSA Country Profile. The Profile systematically 
assesses the state of CSA nationally, including agricultural practices that deliver higher 
productivity, improved resilience, and lower emissions. It also assesses the institutional, policy, 
and finance entry points for taking CSA options to scale. The Profile will be an important 
mechanism for building awareness of country options, facilitating dialogue, and helping identify 
high-interest CSA options and opportunities for investments to deliver on the triple win. The 
Profiles coupled with prioritization tools  can provide in depth analyses of agricultural practices, 
detailed assessments of their ?climate-smartness?, and costs and benefits of various investments. 
The ongoing development of County-level CSA risk profiles and prioritization of interventions 
would bring this information to the relevant level of devolved governance in Kenya. 
 
17. At the international level, Kenya has been actively engaged in dialogue on mainstreaming 
climate change into agricultural policies, plans, and actions. The country is a signatory to the 
United Nations Conventions on Combating Desertification (UNCCD), Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Conservation of Biological Diversity (UNCBD). Regionally, 
Kenya is implementing the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(CAADP) Framework (2010) and the East African Community Climate Change Policy 
(EACCCP). Both of these frameworks emphasize sustainable land and water management for 
improved agricultural productivity through research, technology adoption and dissemination; and 
agricultural GHG emissions reduction. In July 2015, Kenya declared its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC) to UNFCCC that by 2030, the country seeks to abate its total 
GHG emissions by 30 percent relative to the ?business as usual? scenario of 143 MtCO2-e. It is 
suggested that US$40 billion would be required to finance the mitigation and adaptation efforts 
across six key sectors until 2030.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
18. The Kenya CPS (2014-2018) highlights achieving rapid and uninterrupted growth over a 
decade or more as the foundational challenge for Kenya. The CPS indicate that for Kenya to make 
a huge dent on poverty, support for the growth and realization of people?s potential must focus on 
sectors and locations where the majority of the poor can benefit. In rural areas, the single most 
sustainable impact would be to improve agricultural performance, both in terms of increased 
productivity and resilience to shocks, including climate change risks. The proposed KCSAP aims 
at fulfilling two priority domains of the CPS: (i) Domain 2 ? ?Protection and potential for shared 
prosperity?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 4 (Greater agricultural productivity), and 
Outcome 6 (Improved capacity to manage risks from Climate Change); and (ii) Domain 3 ? ?
Consistency and equity in delivering a devolution dividend?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 
8 (Better provision of agricultural extension services by counties) and Outcome 9 (Adequate 
systems to monitor performance of services delivery by counties). The proposed project is also 
well aligned with current GoK policies and priorities as articulated above.  
 
19. The proposed Project is also in line with the Africa Climate Business Plan: Accelerating 



Page 7 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Climate Resilience and Low-Carbon Development. The Plan aims at boosting the region?s ability 
to adapt to the changing climate while reducing GHG emissions through a number of concrete 
actions in various sectors. For agricultural sector, the Plan is focusing on promoting climate-smart 
agriculture, creating climate-resilient landscapes, and promoting integrated watershed 
management. It underscores that there is a range of agricultural management solutions, which can 
improve crop productivity, enhance resilience to climate shocks and reduce carbon emissions.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
20. The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and build 
resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in 
Kenya. 
 
21. The PDO is informed by the CSA concept; one that ambitiously aims to integrate climate 
change risks responsiveness into agricultural development activities. The CSA outcomes are 
increased productivity, enhanced resilience, and reduced GHG emissions. While the concept is 
new and still evolving, many of the practices that make up CSA already exist worldwide and are 
used by farmers to cope with various production risks – particularly droughts and floods. The 
utility of CSA then comes in as a way of explicitly integrating productivity, adaptation, and 
mitigation planning, often done in isolation; and understanding of expected outcomes of CSA 
investments on different users and locations over time.

Key Results (From PCN)
22. Achievement of the proposed PDO will be measured using the following outcome 
indicators: (i) Increased yields of selected crop and livestock value chains (percent); (ii) Direct 
project beneficiaries adopting TIMPs leading to CSA triple-win (percent);  (iii) Increased land 
covered due to adoption of agro-forestry and sustainable land management (SLM)  practices 
(percent); (iv) Improved access to agro-weather, technical and market information by direct 
beneficiaries(percent);  and (v) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percent).  
A detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation, and enhanced by quantitative modeling of uncertainties along the impact pathway .

D.  Concept Description

A. Concept  
 
23. Climate resilient agriculture that increases productivity requires a major shift in the way 
land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that they are used more 
efficiently, effectively and equitably. Making such a shift requires considerable investments in 
ongoing and new technologies, rural/production infrastructure, financing/credit mechanisms, as 
well as improving farmers? access to climatic information and markets. Actions to build climate 
resilience can, in many cases, also mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions or 
increasing carbon sinks.  
 
24. Kenya has three main agricultural production systems. The smallholder mixed crop-
livestock system found in areas that receive more than 1,000 mm of rainfall annually (high 
potential zones), spreading from central Kenya, through the central Rift Valley to western Kenya 
and the coastal strip. This system takes the form of a maize-based, dairy production system with 
or without cash crops, such as coffee, tea and horticulture. The crop-livestock-tree production 



Page 8 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

(Agro-silvo-pastoral) system found in areas that receive between 750 and 1,000 mm of rainfall 
annually (medium potential zones). This system focuses on integration of livestock and crops, soil 
and water conservation, and growing drought tolerant and early maturing crops. In some areas, 
irrigation schemes have also been set up to enhance crop production. The pastoral/extensive 
livestock production system  found in areas receiving 200?750 mm of rainfall annually (low 
potential zones), stretching from north and north-eastern Kenya to the southern parts bordering 
Tanzania. Livestock production, mainly beef animals and small ruminants, are the major 
enterprises under small-scale, but also some large scale ranches 
 
25. KCSAP will primarily focus on supporting interventions aimed at increasing productivity 
and building resilience to climate change, with reduction of GHG emissions as a potential co-
benefit , where possible and appropriate, through: (a) Promoting sustainable, community?driven 
rangeland management and improved access to quality livestock services in ASALs (i.e. in 
pastoral/extensive livestock production systems); (b) Improving water/soil management, 
especially within smallholder maize systems in the marginal rainfall zones (i.e. in smallholder 
mixed crop-livestock, crop-livestock-tree production (Agro-silvo-pastoral systems), and crop-
forest production (agro-forestry)); (c) Supporting the generation and dissemination of improved 
agricultural technologies,  innovations, and management practices, and building a sustainable 
seed system; and (d) Enhancing access to quality climate/agro-weather, advisory services, and 
market information among farmers/herders for improved decision making. 
 
26. KCSAP interventions will be concentrated in selected counties within the crop-livestock-
tree production system and pastoral/extensive livestock production system (mainly in ASALs), 
with high potential for increasing production, but ones that are also prone to droughts. To 
maximize the impact of project interventions, about 15 - 20 counties will be selected using these 
criteria: (a) vulnerability to climate change, extreme weather events, and variable rainfall; (b) 
potential for increasing agricultural and livestock production; (c) current share in national 
agricultural production; (d) climate change projections; and (e) poverty distribution and rates. The 
project design would be informed by the following seven main principles:   
 
(i) Prioritization of promising TIMPs: CSA is very context specific?what is CSA in one 
place is not necessarily CSA in another place?so there is a need to prioritize technologies that are 
most promising for specific places and provide the best value for money. The CCAFS-CIAT CSA 
Prioritization Framework is one such approach that entails a series of activities to filter a long list 
of possible CSA options into a set of best-bet practices and services for an area ;   
 
(ii) Scaling-up promising TIMPs: The Bank and other donor-funded projects in Kenya, such 
as the Kenya Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (KACCAL) and Kenya 
Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land Management Project (KAPSLMP) have used 
participatory and community-driven development (CDD) approaches to pilot a number of 
adaptation and mitigation TIMPs including financing options, such as the Payment for Ecosystem 
Services (PES). While existing TIMPs are a good starting point and their broader application 
needs to be scaled up, new technologies must be developed to achieve the CSA triple-win;  
 
(iii) Value chain (VC) approach:  An approach that focuses on developing priority, promising 
agricultural and livestock commodities in the respective counties, through interventions covering 
production, value addition and links to markets will be taken. This approach will look at supply 
chains, delivery channels, and enabling environment issues, to identify and address bottlenecks 



Page 9 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

and leverage points in the chains. Innovation platforms and methodologies, such as LINK  
developed by CIAT provides approaches for developing innovative business models that take a 
value chain approach and link smallholder farmers to markets; and IFC can finance private sector 
investments, such as in animal health services, commercial-scale bio digesters, solar-pumps, 
micro-and-drip irrigation, seed production and distribution, on-farm storage, weather info/
advisory/climate services, rural credit, and processing facilities; 
 
(iv) Gender sensitivity: Looking at various interventions through a gender lens to ensure that 
the project benefits women as much as possible. Alternative livelihood interventions would be 
primarily geared for women participants. Special care would be paid to ensure that intervention 
do not contribute to increased drudgery and burden for women; 
 
(v) Nutrition informed: Favoring those interventions and leveraging activities that have a 
direct and indirect links with improving the nutritional outcome (dietary/nutrients diversification 
using fruit tree and vegetables ) of the project beneficiaries, particularly women and children 
under the age of five;  
 
(vi) Collaboration with other World Bank Group Agencies: The VC development approach 
will require a close collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the 
Multilateral International Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which have greater roles to play in 
agricultural value addition, linking smallholder farmers to markets (i.e. inputs, outputs and 
financial markets); and abating political risk for local and international private investors, 
respectively; and 
 
(vii) Complementarity with other interventions: Ensuring that synergies and alignment with 
other Bank-funded projects, such as the National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project 
(NARIGP), and the Rural Roads Project (RRP), given that could be operating in the same 
counties, will allow for greater complementarity and impact. 
 
27. Although reduced GHG emissions might be co-benefits, these will nonetheless be 
measured. At appraisal stage, the project will undertake GHG accounting to estimate the impact 
of project interventions against a baseline. It is expected that by improving per unit efficiency, the 
project will have a positive impact on GHG net emissions.  
 
Project Components  
 
28. The proposed project will comprise four components briefly presented below: 
 
Component 1: Upscaling Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (US$100 million) 
 
29. This component aims at supporting and incentivizing smallholder farmers to implement 
TIMPs that provide triple-wins: increased productivity, stronger resilience and reductions in GHG 
emissions, as co-benefits. It will comprise two subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting Pastoral/Extensive Livestock Production Systems (US$40 
million) 
 
30. Livestock production is a key contributor to CSA?s three strategic outcomes: (i) 



Page 10 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

agricultural productivity and food security - animals contribute directly (through meat and milk 
output) and indirectly (through fertilization, draft power) to food production and also to income 
diversification; (ii) adaptation to climate change - livestock represents a diversification asset, a 
coping mechanism for households (risk management tool, that contributes to household 
resilience), and a contributor to the management of organic matter in soils (through manure), 
which improves water retention and drought resistance; and (iii) mitigation - there is typically a 
great potential for reducing GHG emission intensity among low productivity ruminant systems, 
and carbon sequestration in pastures.  
 
31. This subcomponent will therefore support interventions aimed at: (a) increasing 
productivity of livestock (e.g. feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-take 
rates); (b) promoting integrated soil fertility and SLM practices based on crop-livestock 
integration (e.g., manure management, biogas production, use of crop residues and food products) 
and modern inputs; and (c) supporting market access (e.g., stock routes/migratory corridors, 
watering points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets). 
 
32.  In the arid lands, ensuring that pastoralists can access feed and water resources at critical 
times is essential to resilience. Demography and increased pressure on land and water are greatly 
challenging the traditional arrangements through which sedentary and mobile populations have 
managed resources. The project will thus support the development of new management practices 
and institutional arrangements that can secure pastoralists? access to resources, especially during 
drought and the dry season. In the semi-arid lands, interventions may aim at increasing the 
efficiency of animal production (e.g., feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-
take rates), increasing crop-livestock integration (e.g., manure management, use of crop residues 
and food by-products), and increasing institutional mechanisms and markets for resilience.  
 
33. Interventions inter alia could promote: (i) innovative rangeland co-management (state and 
local community) approaches that leverage customary forms of collective action and economic 
instruments to reward sound pasture management; (ii) development of fodder production, storage 
and marketing; (iii) small-scale fattening operations managed by pastoral communities, to which 
young animals from mobile herds could be sent for fattening before commercialization; and (iv) 
sustainable resource use practices, including  contour ridges and barriers, cisterns for storing 
rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources 
during drought. ILRI has relevant research outputs to contribute to these interventions.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Smallholder Mixed Crop-Livestock-Tree Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
34. The smallholder mixed crop-livestock-tree systems account for more than 70 percent of 
total maize output in Kenya. Characterized by low productivity, these systems are increasingly 
vulnerable to extreme and variable weather. Thus, achieving national food security will require 
concerted efforts and targeted investments to improve yields and strengthen their resilience. 
 
35. This subcomponent will therefore focus on: (a) improving water and soil management; 
(b) promo ting livelihoods and crop diversification, including drought-tolerant crops (e.g., 
legumes - beans, cowpeas, pigeon pea etc.,), intensive dairy production and agro-forestry systems; 
(c) investing in small-scale irrigation development; and climate risk mitigation initiatives, 



Page 11 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

including exploring the smallholder adapted crop insurance options.  
 
36. KCSAP support under this component will aim at promoting sustainable intensification 
and increasing climate resilience of Kenya?s small-scale, rain fed production systems. This will 
be achieved through myriad, yet mutually-supportive interventions designed to improve crop 
yields and reduce losses (pre-and post-harvest) in the near-term, and to mitigate climate change 
impacts via adaptation over the long-term. Project interventions will focus on, inter alia, curbing 
rainfall run-off, improving soil nutrition and moisture holding capacity, and strengthening 
fertilizer- and water-use efficiency. This will be achieved via incentivizing broad farmer adoption 
of improved water, soil and land resource TIMPs. To promote income diversification, the project 
will promote take-up of animal husbandry, micro-gardening, agro-forestry and other income 
generating activities less dependent on rainfall. 
 
37. KCSAP investments will be guided by County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs)  
and community priorities. Integrating project activities within the CIDPs will ensure alignment, 
sustainability and optimization of outcomes. In the case of high agricultural (medium-to high 
rainfall) potential areas in the central and western highlands, interventions will broadly focus on 
improving maize yields and farm-gate prices via quality, drying and storage upgrades. In more 
marginal, more variable rainfall zones, greater emphasis will be placed on stimulating farmers? 
uptake of more robust, drought-tolerant crops (e.g., cowpeas, cassava, millet and sorghum). 
Project interventions will also aim to enhance risk-sharing and strengthen smallholder access to 
markets across target food commodity chains via catalyzing upgrades (i.e. product, process) and 
downstream linkages (horizontal and vertical).   
 
38. Matching grants will be provided to common interest groups (CIGs) organized along the 
VCs to finance community micro-projects. The grants will enable smallholder farmers adopt 
TIMPs developed under Component 2. Making direct payments to farmers conditional on 
adoption of climate adaptation and mitigation practices will lead to better CSA triple-win 
outcomes.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Seed Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
39. Building strong research capacity and seed systems at the national level is critical for 
achieving the CSA triple-win: increasing productivity, building resilience and reducing GHG 
emissions. Strong and sustained support to agricultural research and development (R&D) can 
have large payoffs as evidenced by R&D?s significant contribution to the impressive agricultural 
growth achieved in Brazil, China and India. More broadly, returns to investment in agricultural 
research have been high and the benefits will only rise as the losses from climate-induced crop 
and livestock systems failure increase. Investments in seed and animal breeds research and their 
market-driven distribution systems will better equip farmers and livestock keepers with timely 
access to quality, affordable seeds (also for forage crops - grasses, legumes, herbage, fodder trees 
and regeneration practices) and planting materials; and animal breeds that respond to their 
specific needs (e.g., higher-yielding, fast maturing, drought resistant, and heat tolerant breeds) 
and that would help them better manage growing climate change risks. This component will have 
two subcomponents ? supporting CSA research and innovations, and building competitive and 
sustainable seed system. 
 



Page 12 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Subcomponent 2.1: Supporting Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Innovations (US$40 
million) 
 
40. A renewed urgency, and international and national commitment, is needed to sustain CSA 
research to deliver needed science-based solutions. Kenya should act now given that developing 
improved TIMPs can take many years. Developing improved seeds, planting materials and 
livestock breeds that are more adapted to changing climates to meet rising food demand, while at 
the same time reducing GHG emissions will need significantly more investment in agricultural 
research and development.  It also requires commitment to strengthen the Kenya Agricultural and 
Livestock Research Organization (KALRO); build partnerships with international research 
institutes (e.g., CGIAR institutes, such as the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), International Center for Tropical Agriculture 
(CIAT), ICRISAT, which operate in Kenya) and local universities (e.g., University of Nairobi, 
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT), Moi and Egerton); and 
engage the private sector (contracted extension services delivery model) to facilitate the uptake of 
TIMPs at local levels.  But agricultural research and innovation processes require long-term 
political commitment, financial stability, human resources, and institutional strength. Thus this 
subcomponent would finance activities aimed at strengthening national agricultural research 
system (NARS) and competitive collaborative research grants focusing on CSA research and 
innovations. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Building a Competitive and Sustainable Seed Systems (US$20 million) 
 
41. Kenya has one of the more developed cereal (maize and wheat) seed systems in Africa 
with over 70 registered seed merchants. But legume seed systems are poorly developed. Highly 
regulated, the formal cereal seed system produces over 30,000 tons of seed per annum. But only 
supplies about one-quarter of the country?s total seed needs. The remaining supply mostly comes 
from recycled seeds. While robust seed research by KALRO and CIMMYT, among others, have 
resulted in the release of dozens of improved maize and other varietals (e.g., drought-tolerant, 
high-yielding, disease-resistant, and short-season) that can help farmers better respond to climate 
and market signals and manage uncertainty, adoption among smallholders remains low. Even in 
ASAL regions that receive less than 500 mm of rainfall per annum, farmers continue to grow 
maize rather than drought-tolerant crops, such as sorghum and millet.  Such areas could benefit 
more from short duration legumes, such as beans, cowpea and pigeon pea. As a result, the 
productivity of many staple crops (e.g., wheat and maize) remains below regional averages.  
 
42. The project will promote pluralistic seed systems model depending on level of crop 
development. Working with KEPHIS , Kenya Seed Company (KSC), KALRO, CIMMYT , 
ICRAF  and other stakeholders, KCSAP will finance activities geared towards strengthening seed 
research (e.g., seed production and processing equipment, TA and training, grants for community-
level seed multiplication, etc.,), as well as promoting commercially viable multiplication and 
distribution systems to ensure that farmers and pastoralists have access to the right seeds at the 
right time. Specifically, KCSAP will finance interventions related t o: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of KALRO?s research centers/institutes in the production of foundation seed; (ii) 
supporting private sector companies involved in the commercial seed production and community-
based seed multiplication systems; (iii) promoting the use of selected drought-resistant seeds; (iv) 
strengthening seed associations and inter-professional organizations; (v) supporting innovative 
mechanisms of seed marketing; and (vi) strengthening seed policy, production and distribution 



Page 13 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

strategies and institution al support to the national seed control and certification agency.  
 
Component 3: Supporting Agro-weather, Market, Climate and Advisory Services (US$30 million)
 
43. Improving productivity and resilience of smallholder farmers requires access to timely, 
cost-effective, and personally relevant information on improved agricultural practices, markets, 
prices, inputs, weather?and news of impending disasters. Integrating information on weather and 
markets into planning for CSA interventions and sustainable agriculture development entails: (a) 
use of modern tools for climate data sourcing and analysis, including automatic meteorological 
measurements and satellite data products on a near real-time basis; (b) analysis of weather risks 
and assessment of impacts using advanced crop?weather interactions modeling; (c) formulation of 
highly practical advice that farmers can apply directly to their operations; and (d) dissemination 
of weather and market advisories to farmers using modern information and communication 
technologies (ICT). 
 
44. The quality of these climate and market information services are critically low or non-
existent in many parts of Kenya. Under this component, KCSAP will address this obstacle by 
developing modern agro-weather forecasting and dissemination tools, as well as marketing 
information system to help farmers address the challenges of climate variability and change and 
enhance their resilience. 
 
45. Building on infrastructure already provided to KALRO under the Kenya Agricultural 
Productivity and Agribusiness Project (KAPAP), as well as experiences of BNPP-funded Agro-
weather Tools for Climate Smart Agriculture pilots in Embu, Kenya,  this component will finance 
interventions related to the following: (i) improving agro-meteorological forecasting and 
monitoring; (ii) developing climate-smart, location-specific agro-weather and market information 
system and advisories using ?big data?; and (iii) building institutional and technical capacity for 
agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and market advisory dissemination.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Agro-meteorological Forecasting and Monitoring (US$15 million) 
 
46. One of the main obstacles to effective meteorological forecasting is Kenya?s limited 
agro-meteorological observation network. To improve data collection and geographic coverage, 
existing agro-meteorological and hydro logical stations will be upgraded, whilst modern, near real 
time automated weather stations (AWS) will be installed in areas lacking the facilities. KCSAP 
will work with other initiatives that are already in-place to expand the country?s agro-
meteorological and hydrological network to meet international standards. This subcomponent will 
therefore finance the following investments: (a) installation of new AWS, hydrometric stations 
and rain gauges to complement existing weather infrastructure; (b) upgrade and modernization of 
the existing agro-meteorological network and priority hydrological stations country-wide; (c) 
establishment of agro-meteorological centers in targeted counties to improve drought and flood 
forecasts; and (d) development of the Kenya Meteorological Services (KMS) early warning 
system (EWS), and building institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and mitigation.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Developing Integrated Weather and Market Information System (US$5 
million) 
 
47. Systems that integrate agro-weather and market information are either non-existent or 



Page 14 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

rudimentary in Kenya. KCSAP will address this problem under this subcomponent by financing 
activities related to: (a) developing ?big data? for CSA; (b) developing Market Information 
Systems (MIS) and services; and (c) delivering integrated weather and market advisory services 
using ICT.  Big data  crop-weather analytics help farmers in making decisions on what, when, and 
where to plant. Using advanced statistical and data mining/machine learning algorithms,  time 
series data of crop yields will be combined with weather observations at daily resolution  from 
agro-meteorological stations and satellite data,  soil and management factors to reveal climate and 
weather patterns, and detect the limiting factors for crop production. This would subsequently be 
used to generate timely and site-specific recommendations on crop cultivars, soil preparation, 
sowing rate and time, fertilization, irrigation, pest and diseases control, harvest time, and storage 
options. Access to reliable market information from the MIS using ICT empowers farmers to 
obtain and negotiate fair market prices for their crops subsequently improving their income and 
livelihoods. It also reduces their overall risk and results in greater price stability in supply and 
demand, in addition to improving overall market transparency. Using multiple ICT channel to 
reach target users will allow bi-directional information exchange - allowing the collection of data 
from farmers, as well as information delivery to farmers. Rapid and geographically targeted agro-
weather information will be disseminated using SMS and smart phone applications, and through 
more conventional radio, television, bulletins and print messages. Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) systems that render weather conditions into human speech will also be incorporated. 
 
Subcomponent 3.3: Building Institutional and Technical Capacity (US$10 million) 
 
48. The capacity for agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and advisory dissemination 
needs to be strengthened at the MoALF, KMS, KALRO, and at county governments. KCSAP will 
finance activities related to human and institutional capacity building at these agencies. This will 
include: (a) defining proper configuration of the main elements of the system; including 
automated monitoring, new forecast techniques, big data analytics and modernization of 
management; (b) analyzing and utilizing big data for various purposes; and (c) providing the 
hardware and software needed for interaction of data from a variety of sources in a way that is 
efficient and scalable. Capacity of scientists at national and county levels will be strengthened in 
the area of crop modeling, using both deterministic and statistical models of different complexity 
levels. KCSAP will partner with national and international research and academic institutions to 
provide state-of-art training in agro-meteorology, climate science, including downscaling and 
weather predictions, artificial neural network and machine learning applications, seasonal 
forecasting, ICT, GIS and remote sensing. KALRO?s capacity to implement a national soil 
information service based on soil spectroscopy and remote sensing technology to help target 
interventions and monitor impacts on soil health will be further enhanced . 
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$20 million) 
 
49. The Project will be implemented by MoALF with close collaboration with MENR and 
MoWI at the national level and county governments at subnational level. Activities financed 
under this component will comprise coordination, fiduciary aspects, M&E, safeguards monitoring 
and compliance, and day-to-day implementation of the project; and consists of three 
subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Project Coordination (US$15 million) 
 



Page 15 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

50. The purpose of this subcomponent is to ensure that the project is implemented in 
accordance with the Financing Agreement. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and a small team 
of experts located at the national and participating county levels will be established. Costs related 
to national and county level project coordination (i.e., salaries of the contract staff, operations and 
maintenance (O&M), office space rental, fuel and spare parts of vehicles, office equipment, 
furniture and tools, among others) will be financed. Safeguards monitoring and compliance will 
be carried out under this subcomponent.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
51. An M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate information, to 
verify the output, effects and eventually the impacts of project activities over time. Baseline 
information for M&E will be collected as part of the preparation process. In addition to the 
routine M&E functions (e.g., data collection, analysis and reporting), it will also finance the 
baseline, mid-point and end of project impact evaluation of the project; and the development and 
operation of the ICT-based Climate Smart Agriculture Information System. Where possible, 
M&E approaches will be harmonized with continental and global efforts (e.g., Global Alliance for 
CSA and the Alliance for CSA in Africa) to build robust and harmonized evidence of the impacts 
of TIMPs supported by the project to achieve CSA triple-win.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 
 
52. This subcomponent will finance natural disasters risk management (DRM) activities in 
the agriculture sector. The contingency emergence response financing will be triggered through 
formal declaration of a national emergency and upon a formal request from the GoK.  In such 
cases, funds from unallocated category and other project components could be reallocated to 
finance emergency response expenditures and meet crises and emergency needs.  
 
53. The subcomponent will finance the training and capacity building for disaster risk 
management (DRM); community-managed disaster risk reduction (CMDRR) interventions; 
development of an EWS; and response, mitigation, recovery and reconstruction following 
climate-induced natural disasters. Implementation of this subcomponent will follow the 
provisions of the DRM Manual. 
 
54. Annex 3 outlines in more detail some key interventions envisioned under each project 
component.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
29. The project will be implemented at selected locations on a national scale. The activities will 
be implemented in the rural areas and will include projects in rural infrastructure, such as watering 
points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets of fodder production, storage and 
marketing sustainable resource use practices, including  contour erosion and barriers, cisterns for 
storing rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources during 
drought, agro-forestry projects and hydromet systems/stations.



Page 16 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
30. The MoALF will the implementing agency of KCSAP. MoALF will work closely with 
MoENR and MoWI. These ministries have adequate capacity and experience of implementing Bank-
funded projects, including knowledge for implementing World Bank safeguards in the devolved 
context. However, the implementation of previous projects identified a number of significant 
capacity issues in monitoring and enforcement of environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
KCSAP will allocate resources to build the counties’ capacity in for safeguards implementation, 
based on institutional capacity assessment that would be carried out at the project preparation stage.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The initial scoping of the proposed project 
interventions suggests that due to the nature of 
proposed activities, the potential environmental and 
social impacts will be moderate, largely reversible 
and site-specific. The identification mission noted 
that the potential project investments in rural 
infrastructure and agriculture VCs will trigger the 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). 
 
Given that specific micro-project designs and 
locations would not be known at the time of project 
preparation, the project will take framework 
approach to managing safeguards. There are three 
framework reports that will need to be developed by 
GoK: (a) Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF); (b) Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and (c) Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Group Framework (VMGF). These 
frameworks will need to cover the types of activities 
envisioned; identify potential impacts of these 
activities; propose screening mechanisms and 
processes of assessing their impacts; and designing 
mitigation measures. The scope of these frameworks, 
the exact implementation arrangements and costs 
will be identified during project preparation. The 
preparation of ESMF, RPF and the VMGF will 
include wide public consultations and will be 
disclosed prior to project appraisal. During project 
implementation, based on the screening, an 
Environmental Assessment (EA)/ Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Action 



Page 17 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Plans (RAPs) and Vulnerable and Marginalized 
Group Plans (VMGPs) will be developed for 
individual subprojects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project is envisioned use of agrochemicals to 
implement activities such as fodder production and 
agro-forestry projects. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) will be prepared to promote the adoption of 
an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach, 
which stresses non-chemical pest management 
methods as much as possible, with use of 
agrochemicals only as a “last resort” when  
other methods are not sufficiently effective. The 
PMP would describe specific actions needed to be 
implemented, timeframes, estimated costs, 
monitoring indicators, institutional and beneficiary 
roles and responsibilities etc.).

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions. Should it be confirmed during 
the project preparation that the implementation will 
cover the areas where vulnerable and marginalized 
groups are present, the project will prepare the 
VMGF, which will then guide the preparation of 
VMGPs, where required.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project activities may require land acquisition 
and may result in the loss of community resources. 
To guide the process of compensation, the project 
will prepare the RPF and publicly disclose it in 
Kenya and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to 
project appraisal.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

TBD



Page 18 of 18

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
26-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The ESMF, RPF and VMGF will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed before project 
appraisal in November 14, 2016.

III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Ladisy Komba Chengula
Title: Lead Agriculture Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: The National  Treasury
Contact: Dr. Thugge Kamau
Title: Principal Secretary
Email: ps@treasury.go.ke

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries
Contact: Dr. Richard Lesiyampe
Title: Principal Secretary
Email: ps@agriculture.go.ke

IV. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ladisy Komba Chengula
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA) Date: 13-Dec-2016
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR) Date: 13-Dec-2016

Country Director: Name: Thomas O'Brien (CD) Date: 21-Dec-2016

1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons. 

















































World Bank Document


1 

 

 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0128822  

 

Program Name Strengthening Markets For Agriculture And Rural 

Transformation In Punjab (Smart Punjab) 

Region SAR 

Country Pakistan 

Sector Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P162446 

Parent Program ID  

Borrower(s) Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan 

Implementing Agency Planning & Development Department, Government of Punjab 

Date PID Prepared October 1, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

October 23, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 19, 2017 

 

 Country Context 

1. Pakistan has achieved continued GDP growth and substantially reduced poverty. 
GDP growth was 5.3% in FY16/17, largely owing to gains in the agricultural and services 

sectors. The national poverty headcount declined from 64.3% in FY02 to 29.5% in FY14.  

 

2. Amid these gains, evidence is emerging that Punjab—a major driver of the national 
economy and an agricultural stronghold—is experiencing rising inequality. Punjab accounts 

for more than half of Pakistan’s GDP, and the majority (63%) of Punjab’s population of 110 

million is rural. Although poverty declined even more within Punjab than nationwide over 2002–

14 (from 61% to 25%), Punjab is the most unequal province in Pakistan, with a Gini coefficient 

of 29.7 in FY14. Four out of five of Punjab’s poor live in rural areas, where 8.7 million 

households earn an average of PKR 28,517 per month through farming alone (35%), a mix of 

farm and non-farm employment (31%), and non-farm employment (34%). The average rural 

household has 6.49 individuals but merely 1.66 income earners. Farm size continues to decline. 

Two-thirds of farms were smaller than 2 hectares in 2010 (versus less than half in 1990). 

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

3. Agriculture is a key contributor to the economy in Pakistan in general and Punjab 
in particular, yet agricultural growth is languishing. Nationally, agriculture—crops, 

livestock, fisheries, forestry—accounts for 21% of GDP, employs 44% of the labor force, and 

directly and indirectly delivers nearly 80% of the total value of Pakistan’s exports (worth about 

US$ 12 billion). Growth is evaporating in the sector; it was 3.3% over the last decade but nearly 

zero in FY16 (0.3%). Crop and livestock productivity are lower than in other Asian countries. 

Except for maize, crop yields have barely risen in decades. In Punjab, where agriculture 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



2 

 

contributes 26% of GDP and provides 40% of employment, growth in agriculture has been 

highly erratic as well as low, although the livestock subsector has exhibited encouraging signs. 

Punjab encompasses 72.6% of national cropped area and 77.7% of national irrigated area. 

Approximately 62% of Punjab’s area (20.63 million hectares) is cultivated, and about 60% of 

cultivated area lies within the Indus Basin Water System. The province provides large shares of 

the country’s primary crops: maize (78%), wheat (77%), cotton (73%), sugarcane (63%), and 

rice (52%). The factors limiting agricultural growth include poor adoption of modern 

technologies, poor service delivery, and poorly functioning agricultural markets.  

 

4. Above all, however, flagging agricultural and economic growth in Punjab can be 
traced to current agricultural and irrigation policies. Ample evidence confirms that 

subsidies, agricultural support prices, caps on meat and milk prices, low investment, and 

weakening institutions support investment in traditional crops at the expense of high-value 

agriculture (HVA), discourage efficient water use, and ultimately suppress agricultural growth.  

 

5. Subsidies dominate public spending on agriculture in Punjab. These subsidies—US$ 
1.25 billion in FY17 (Table 1)—are largely regressive, generate significant negative 

environmental externalities, and focus almost exclusively on major crops rather than HVA. The 

provincial government (GoPunjab) pays more than 40% (US$ 515 million) of these subsidies, 

which are about 2.5 times higher than the funding for agriculture in the provincial Annual 

Development Plan (ADP). Not all of this largesse reaches the producer; for example, a 

substantial share of fertilizer subsidies benefits fertilizer companies and the bulk of wheat 

subsidies goes to banks. Few subsidies target small-scale producers.  

Table 1: Subsidies to agriculture in Punjab (US$ m) 

Item Subsidies paid by 

the Federal 

Government in 

Punjab 

Subsidies paid by 

the Government of 

Punjab 

Total 

subsidies 

Fertilizer gas subsidy 300
a
 0 300 

Reducing General Sales Tax (GST) on diammonium phosphate 

from PKR 400 to PKR 100/bag 

92
b
 0 92 

Reducing GST on urea from PKR 400 to PKR 75/bag 78
c
 0 78 

Reduction in electricity tariff for tubewells from PKR 8.85 to 

PKR 5.35/kWh  

219
d
 41 260 

Subsidy on imported fertilizer 34
e
 0 34 

E-voucher–based subsidy for potash fertilizer  19 19 

Wheat procurement scheme  333 333 

Wheat export subsidies 10
f
 0 10 

Interest-free loans to farmers  57 57 

Irrigation maintenance and repair (M&R)  60 60 

Cotton and wheat seed  3 3 

Crop insurance through Crop Loan Insurance Scheme (CLIS)  2 2 

TOTAL 733 515 1,248 
Source: Federal and Provincial Budget Speech 2017–18, and Agriculture Department.

 

a Total gas subsidy to fertilizer manufacturers is US$ 425 million, while Punjab accounts for approximately 70% of total fertilizer use in 

Pakistan. b Total subsidy is US$ 131.5 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. c Total subsidy is US$ 112 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. d 

Total subsidy on electricity for tubewells is US$ 257 million, and 85% of tubewells are located in Punjab. e Total subsidy for imported fertilizer 
is budgeted at US$ 48 million, of which 70% can be assigned to Punjab. f Total subsidy is US$ 14.3 million, of which 70% is Punjab. 

 

6. The costs of current policies and subsidies extend beyond their fiscal cost. Because 
most subsidies are embodied in inputs or input prices, they promote excessive or imbalanced use 



3 

 

of inputs such as water and fertilizer, resulting in negative externalities and sustainability issues 

(for instance, salinity, sodicity, and waterlogging from water pumping or overuse have degraded 

about 25% of formerly fertile land in Punjab). Wheat subsidies are embodied in the wheat price, 

which is governed by a procurement price set far above import parity, to the detriment of net 

wheat buyers (Box 1). Current policies and subsidies encourage farmers to produce more of the 

same surplus commodities rather than to provide a more diverse range of other products 

demanded by the market. Ninety percent of the cropped area in Punjab remains under major 

crops (dominated by wheat), while only nine percent is planted to higher-value crops. Significant 

benefits are sacrificed by this misallocation of resources: export earnings; the jobs that would 

otherwise be created downstream through value chains; the value added by agro-processing 

beyond milling alone; the higher incomes for producers; the production of nutrient-dense crops 

that reduce malnutrition; and the efficiencies in water use that promote diversification, 

sustainable use of scarce water (Box 2), and resilience to climate shocks and climate change. 

 

Box 1: The high costs of wheat procurement in Punjab  

Since the late 1950s, the government has purchased up to 25% of the wheat crop and up to 50% of the marketed 

wheat surplus. The costs of this procurement system are passed on to urban consumers and to the rural poor who 

are net buyers of wheat. Patronage and rent-seeking are endemic, particularly in the distribution of gunny bags, 

delivery of wheat to purchase points, and releases to flour mills). The system has other enormous costs. The 

direct costs of buying, storing, and releasing wheat at a fixed price over the year are estimated at US$ 333 million 

per year, of which more than 90% consists of interest payments on current borrowing and accumulated debt. As 

of July 2017, the wheat debt of GoPunjab to the State Bank of Pakistan stood at US$ 3.36 billion, against a 

collateral wheat stock worth half of that amount at best. Efforts to dispose of excess wheat stocks in export 

markets have been largely unsuccessful, despite generous export subsidies. Indirect costs include physical losses 

owing to poor storage, high spoilage, and pilferage; over-production of wheat and the consequent under-

production of higher-value commodities; diversion of credit from the banking system; and a lack of incentives for 

private actors to build storage facilities that could also serve other crops. The high procurement price has caused 

wheat production to surpass domestic needs, even as annual average per capita consumption of wheat continues 

to decline. 

 

Box 2: Irrigation price policy and inefficient water use in Punjab 

Irrigation has delivered notable agricultural productivity gains to Punjab in the past, but the irrigation sector 

suffers from major financial deficits. Water charges (abiana) fail to reflect actual water use or cover maintenance 

and repair (M&R) costs. Abiana rates typically represent less than 0.2% of crop budgets. The flat water rate per 

acre implemented in 2003/04 gives farmers little reason to conserve water and use it more efficiently. At best, 

current M&R spending (about US$ 65 million per year) is one-third of the minimum amount required. 

 

7. Now that Pakistan has achieved self-sufficiency in wheat, it seeks to spur further 
agricultural growth and transformation, a process in which Punjab will have a major role. 

The goal of becoming self-sufficient in food grain (especially wheat) production has long 

underpinned policies, investment priorities, and public expenditures in agriculture, but now 

Pakistan must evaluate options for future growth in light of: (1) the rapid shift in domestic 

demand away from food grains to high-value agricultural products; (2) the significant yet largely 

unexploited comparative advantage for several of those products, which can provide 

opportunities to generate export revenue and jobs; (3) the exhaustion of options for new sources 

of irrigation water (productivity improvements depend on obtaining “more crop per drop”); and 

(4) the need for production systems to become more resilient as climate change progresses. 



4 

 

 

8. Agriculture requires a paradigm shift in Punjab to unlock opportunities for future 
growth. Punjab should restore its agricultural competitiveness through innovations that renew 

growth in on-farm productivity and improve efficiency and quality throughout the post-harvest 

value chain. At 0.18% of agricultural GDP, Pakistan’s public expenditures on agricultural 

research are the lowest in a region that is already lagging others. Most agricultural research 

expenditures still go to food grains and other “major” crops (rice, maize, sugarcane, cotton) 

rather than to high-value crops and livestock products. Few resources are dedicated to post-

harvest management, including value addition, quality, food safety, and nutrition. A high 

potential pay-off is associated with redirecting public expenditures and associated policies 

toward the best potential investments for outcomes, with a focus on reforms in wheat, irrigation, 

fertilizers, and marketing, and concomitant investments to improve service delivery, agricultural 

R&D, and insurance. 

 

9. The rural non-farm sector is a neglected source of overall economic growth for 
Punjab. Half of Punjab’s 14.6 million households are classified as agricultural (5.3 million farm 

households and 2 million livestock households). These farm households on average earn almost 

half of their income from non-farm activities, including agriculture value adding and 

agribusiness. But poor access to and high cost of finance, inefficient markets, limited skills, 

insufficient power (electricity), and a weak enabling environment hinder growth in the rural non-

farm sector, including agribusiness. Most rural non-farm employment (77%) remains informal. 

 

10. Lack of funds limits the size of most rural enterprises and 30-40% of them make 
very small fixed investments. Lack of credit at reasonable interest rates and appropriate 

maturities, is also a key constraint for most rural enterprises including agribusinesses. Major 

barriers to institutional credit include lack of collateral, poor financial records and an inability to 

prepare business plans. 

 

11. In assessing sources of economic and agricultural growth, the issues of gender and 
climate change cannot be overlooked. Agriculture in Pakistan suffers from serious gender 

inequality and discrimination. According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2016, Pakistan ranks 

143
rd

 out of 144 countries for women’s economic participation (labor force participation is 22% 

for women, compared to 68% for men). Agriculture is the main source of income for 75% of 

economically active women in Pakistan, yet women are less likely than men to own income-

generating assets (land, equipment), obtain credit, and exercise power in financial or economic 

decisions. Poor access to new farming technologies and techniques, the lack of female extension 

workers, and high illiteracy among rural women further discourage success in agriculture.  

 

12. Punjab agriculture is increasingly feminizing. The share of female employment in 
agriculture has grown steadily as male employment has shifted to more productive sectors. In 

2014, women accounted for 47% of agricultural employment. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 

women work mostly on small farms and engage predominantly in horticultural and livestock 

production. It is vital to recognize how much of this agricultural work is unpaid (67% in 2014 

based on Labor Force Survey data). The Punjab Livestock & Dairy Development Department 

recognizes women’s primary role in livestock production and has invested in improving the 

capacity of female producers (including training and hiring 45,000 young extension assistants 

http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2016/economies/#economy=PAK


5 

 

who will work on a part time basis, half of them women), but often women’s significant 

contributions to agriculture are poorly reflected in plans and programs. 

 

13. Pakistan’s climate change risk is magnified by growing water scarcity, uncontrolled 
urbanization, and rapid population growth. The Global Climate Risk Index places Pakistan 

among the top 10 most climate-vulnerable countries. Pakistan increasingly experiences droughts 

and cyclones; since 2010 floods have caused damages approaching US$ 14 billion. Climate 

change heightens the pressure to manage water resources with utmost care. The melting Hindu 

Kush–Karakoram–Himalayan glaciers could affect water flows into the Indus River system, with 

implications for energy and food security. Agriculture produces approximately 41% of all GHG 

emissions in Pakistan, mostly through livestock production, and Pakistan has a growing 

population with an increasingly animal-based diet. To continue to reduce poverty and increase 

shared prosperity, Pakistan requires technologies and practices for climate-smart agriculture 

(CSA), which will sustainably improve productivity in agricultural systems (particularly 

livestock systems), enhance resilience, and reduce GHG emissions. 

 

14. The proposed SMART Punjab Program aligns with the World Bank objectives of 
private sector development and inclusion in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 

(FY2015–19) and the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 

prosperity. The CPS recognizes that proper water resource management is the next key 

development challenge in Pakistan, particularly Punjab. The SMART Punjab Program 

specifically supports CPS Outcomes 2.2 (Increased Productivity in Farms), 3.1 (Increased 

Financial Inclusion for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Women), 3.2 (Reduced 

Vulnerability for Groups at Risk), 4.1 (Improved Public Resources Management), and 4.4 

(Adoption of Performance and Transparency Mechanisms in Selected Institutions). The Pakistan 

Performance and Learning Review 2015–20 approved by the Board on June 15, 2017 also 

recognizes the need for additional attention to agricultural productivity and creating markets for 

high value commodities. 

 

15. A Program for Results (PforR) is the most suitable instrument for the SMART 
Punjab Program. A coherent package of policy change, institutional strengthening, and 

reorientation of public investments in agriculture is required to attain fundamental improvements 

in the policy regime, stronger institutions in the agricultural sector, and improved post-harvest 

value addition through increased private investment in agribusiness. The PforR instrument 

appears uniquely suited for delivering this kind of package through a clearly articulated results 

chain, while further building the GoPunjab’s capacity and deepen and develop its own systems. 

The US$300 m provided by the PforR will be co-financing a much larger government program 

of US$1.6 billion This PforR mobilizes experience from World Bank Global Practices and 

solution areas (Agriculture, Trade & Competitiveness, Water, Social Development, Environment 

& Natural Resources, disaster risk management/climate change) and the International Finance 

Corporation. Although the PforR is a comparatively new instrument, GoPunjab is familiar with it 

under the Bank-supported Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963). 

 Program Scope 
 

16. The GoPunjab program for agriculture and rural transformation (the “broader 
Government program”) emphasizes enabling productivity, increasing competitiveness in 



6 

 

agricultural marketing and trade, and enhancing resilience as reflected in planning 

documents
1
 and the Medium-Term Development Framework (MTDF). The broader Government 

program is supported by a capital investment for agriculture, livestock, farm to market roads, and 

irrigation of US$3.797 billion over five years (FY18–22), including US$1.145 billion to 

agriculture and livestock. In addition, there is a recurrent budget allocation of US$0.330 billion 

for irrigation M&R and US$0.115 billion for human resources, bringing the size of the 

expenditure framework of the broader Government program to US$4.242 billion. Recall that the 

GoPunjab also spends an estimated US$515 million each year on agricultural subsidies including 

wheat (US$333 million) as part of its recurrent expenditures. 

 

17. The SMART Punjab PforR will support selected parts of the broader Government 
program over a five-year period (Table 2). These selected parts will be referred to as the 

“PforR-supported Program” and consist of 14 out of the Government’s 25 focus areas with a 

focus on increasing crop and livestock productivity, research and extension policy, transition 

towards HVA and CSA, improving the functioning of crop as well as livestock markets 

including food safety, livestock breed and preventive care, agribusiness, and enhancing resilience 

and inclusiveness. 

 

18. There are several GoPunjab investments that are part of the broader Government 
program but not part of the PforR-supported Program. These include the Extension 2.0 

program; agricultural finance, mechanization and education; livestock census, feed, marketing, 

and women programs; government farms and experiment stations; the on-going rural roads 

program; development and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; and on-farm water 

management (including high-efficiency irrigation systems) which is already funded by the Bank 

through the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity Improvement Project (PIPIP – P125999). 

 

19. The SMART Punjab PforR will help the government promote transformational 
change in the crop and livestock subsectors by focusing on activities contributing to three 

Results Areas: (1) increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock; (2) 

increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock; and (3) enhanced 

resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters. Each Results Area 

involves a specific combination of policy reforms, institutional strengthening, and public 

investments. 

 

 

                                                 
1
 Punjab Growth Strategy 2015, Private Sector Development Strategy for the Punjab 2010, Livestock Sector Strategy of Punjab 2010, Livestock 

Policy of Punjab 2016, Punjab Agriculture Action Plan 2015, Punjab Skills Sector Plan 2018, Punjab Industries Sector Plan 2018. 



7 

 

Table 2: Government of Punjab agriculture program and scope of proposed SMART Punjab Program for Results (PforR) 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

Results Area 1: Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

(1) Providing farmers with access to 
quality inputs including seed and E-

vouchers for fertilizer 

(1) Targeted subsidy on fertilizer for small 
farmers through E-vouchers 

 

 Develop E-voucher–based subsidy scheme for fertilizer 
and gradually extend the scheme from 21,000 farmers in 

August 2017 to 200,000 smallholders with less than 5 ha 

by 2021 

Agriculture Department  

(2) Improving agriculture and livestock 
research and extension services 

 

(2) – Re-orientation of crop and livestock 
research and extension 

– Increased financial support for crop 
and livestock research 

 Review existing agriculture and livestock research and 
extension systems 

 Approval of new research and extension policy and 
strategy by the Provincial Cabinet 

 Gradual increase of allocation for agriculture and livestock 
research from 0.1% of AgGDP in FY17 to 0.4% in FY22 

through Annual Development Plan (ADP) and recurrent 

budget 

– Agriculture Department  
– Livestock & Dairy 

Development Department 

– Planning & Development 
(P&D) Department 

(3) ICT-based Extension system 2.0 in 
Agriculture, and 9211 Virtual 

Governance System in Livestock 

   

(4) Introduction and promotion of Hi-
Tech Farm Mechanization 

Technologies 

   

(5) Agriculture land improvement and on-
farm water management through high-

efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) 

   

(6) Strengthening agriculture and 
livestock education 

   

(7) Promoting micro-finance linkages and 
interest-free loans for small farmers 

   

(8) Improving livestock health (8) Paradigm shift in public support to 
animal health from curative to 

preventive healthcare, disease 

surveillance and regular vaccination 

 Establishing separate head of account in the provincial 
budget for curative and preventive health allocations 

 Gradually increasing the ratio of expenditures on curative 
and preventive animal health from 35:65 in FY17 to 10:90 

in FY22 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(9) Enhancing productivity and improving 
livestock breeding through targeted 

progeny testing framework 

(9) Improving livestock breeding of 

specific species 
 Increasing stocks of specific animal breeds, including 

Sahiwal cow, Cholistani cow, and Neeli Ravi buffalo 

 Registration and development of verification database 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(10) – Rationalizing wheat procurement 
and reducing strategic wheat 

reserves 

– Moving storage of public wheat 

reserves from bags to bulk through 

(10) – Phasing out government wheat 

procurement and reducing strategic 

wheat reserves to 1.0 million metric 

tons (MT) by 2021 

– Construction of steel silos for 1.0 

 GoPunjab to develop and approve plan for withdrawal 
from wheat market and reduce strategic wheat reserves to 

1.0 million MT in 2018 

 Gradual reduction of public wheat stocks to 1.0 million 
MT by 2021  

Food Department 



8 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

construction of modern bulk storage 

facilities 

million MT  Development of modern silos for bulk storage of 1.0 
million MT of wheat 

(11) Promoting high-value agriculture 
(HVA) 

(11) Transitioning to HVA  Ensure gradual increase in allocation for HVA in the ADP 
from 3.5% of total capital budget for Agriculture (ADP) in 

FY17 to 15% in FY22 

– Agriculture Department 
– P&D Department 

Results Area 2: Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

(12) – Developing agricultural and 
livestock value chains 

– Promoting value addition through 

Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

(12) Providing incentives to agribusiness 

for investments in value addition 

through matching grant scheme, 

training, and capacity building 

 Establishing the Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

 Notifying the governance structure of the Fund 

 Notifying the Operational Manual for the Fund, including 
the modus operandi of the matching grant component 

 Approval of matching grants 

 Training and capacity building 

Agriculture Department 

(13) Deregulating and improving market 
conditions for livestock 

(13) Improving market conditions for 

livestock through removal of price 

caps on meat and raw milk 

 Excluding meat and milk from GoPunjab’s pricing list for 
Essential Commodities from 2018 onward 

Industries Department 

(14) Improving regulatory framework and 
institutions for agriculture produce 

marketing to enable private sector 

investment 

(14) Modernizing agriculture produce 

markets by regulatory transition from 

the Punjab Agricultural Produce 

Markets Ordinance, 1978 to the 

Punjab Agricultural Marketing 

Regulatory Authority (PAMRA) Act, 

2017 

 Stakeholder consultation on proposed PAMRA Act 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Cabinet 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Provincial 
Assembly 

 Enforcement of PAMRA Act 

 Full transition to PAMRA Act by 2021 

Agriculture Department 

(15) Revamping government livestock 
farms and experiment stations 

   

(16) Improving livestock feed systems    

(17) Revamping livestock markets and 
establishing eco marketing zones 

   

(18) Improving food safety (18) Establishment of food safety testing 
infrastructure 

 Establishing and staffing of one (1) provincial food, 
agriculture, and drug testing reference laboratory 

 Establishing and staffing of three (3) regional food testing 
labs 

 Establishing and staffing of nine (9) divisional mobile 
food testing labs 

Food Department 

(19) Poverty alleviation through provision 
of livestock and poultry to women 

   

Results Area 3: Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

(20) Adapting to climate change for 
enhanced resilience of small farmers 

(20) – Increasing public investment in 

climate-smart agriculture (CSA) 

– Rolling out of agricultural insurance 

scheme 

 Gradual increase of allocation for CSA from 3% of total 
capital budget for agriculture in FY17 to 15% in FY22 

 Preparation of Diagnostic Report for agricultural 
insurance  

– Agriculture Department  
– P&D Department 



9 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

 Preparation of work plan based on the recommendations 
of Diagnostic Report 

 Piloting of agricultural insurance in two districts in 
Punjab 

 Rolling out of agricultural insurance to all districts 

(21) Refurbishing small dams, barrages, 
rehabilitation and improvement of 

irrigation infrastructure, canal lining, 

improving flood works and irrigation 

drainage systems 

    

(22) Water conservation and institutional 
and regulatory reform 

(22) Improving financial sustainability of 

irrigation maintenance and repair 

(M&R) and governance 

 Modernizing the methods of assessing the area subject to 
water charges (abiana) and improving collection of the 

same 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Water Policy 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Groundwater Act 

 Improving water delivery performance ratio in seven (7) 
specific canals: Muzaffargarh, Abasia Link, Abasia, 

CRBC-III, Rangpur, Rangpur Lower and Upper Jhelum 

Irrigation Department  

(23) Widening and construction of 15,000 
km of rural roads 

   

(24) Enhanced implementation support for 
operationalizing sector plans 

(24) Capacity building and institutional 

strengthening 
 Preparation of annual work plans for training and 

capacity building including training for agribusiness and 

government departments 

 Approval of annual work plans by the government 

 Implementation of annual work plans 

Implementing departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 
in government departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 

in Agriculture and Food Departments 
 Establishing of ICT-based M&E systems – Agriculture Department 

– Food Department 
 

PforR geographic scope: Entire Punjab Province 

PforR implementation period: FY18–23 

Total investment plan: US$ 3.8 billion, out of which agriculture and livestock is US$ 1.145 billion, plus US$ 300 million PforR 



10 

 

 Program Development Objective 
 

20. The development objective for the SMART Punjab Program (referred to here as the 
“Program Development Objective” or PDO) is to increase the productivity of crop and livestock 

farmers, improve their climate resilience, and foster agribusiness development in Punjab. Box 3 

lists the PDO-level indicators by Results Area. 

Box 3: PDO-level indicators for the SMART Punjab Program, by Results Area 

Results Area 1—Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 1: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services 

PDO Indicator 2: Annual increase in Punjab AgGDP 

Results Area 2—Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 3: Beneficiaries reached with financial services 

PDO Indicator 4: Number of private wholesale markets and collection centers established 

Results Area 3—Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

PDO Indicator 5: Number of farmers covered by agricultural insurance 

PDO Indicator 6: Number of farmers adopting CSA packages 

PDO Indicator 7: Improvement in irrigation water service delivery 

 

21. To achieve the PDO, the SMART Punjab PforR supports the implementation of a 
coherent package of policy reforms, institutional change, and reorientation of public 

resources toward productive public investments and smart subsidies. Specific key reforms 

include a shift from universal to targeted subsidies through an E-voucher Scheme for 

smallholders (< 5 hectares), modernization of wheat marketing by phasing out public wheat 

procurement, reducing strategic wheat reserves from 4 million metric tons (MT) to 1 million MT, 

removing distortions in output markets for crops and livestock products, and reforming 

provincial crop and livestock research. SMART Punjab will also improve the financial 

sustainability and efficient use of irrigation systems, promote agribusiness, and improve the 

resilience of producers by designing and implementing an area yield index-based crop insurance 

system, which could potentially leverage access to production credit. 

 

22. Progress toward each of the three Results Areas that contribute to the PDO will be 
measured through 12 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Each DLI involves one or 

more specific actions required for agricultural and rural transformation in Punjab. Each DLI was 

selected based on: (1) the criticality of the activity, output, or outcome in the results chain; (2) 

the need to introduce a financial incentive to deliver the activity, outcome, or output; (3) 

measurability and ease of verification; and (4) the capacity of GoPunjab to achieve the DLIs over 

the period that SMART Punjab is implemented. Table 4 represents the Results Area and brief 

description of DLI.  

 

23. The four DLIs under Results Area 1 (increased on-farm productivity and value of 
agriculture and livestock) will be achieved by supporting SMART reforms in the policy regime 

for agriculture (crops and livestock) and reorienting public expenditures from subsidies toward 

targeted investments to improve crop and livestock productivity.  
 DLI 1: Improving access to quality farm inputs. Better targeting of subsidies, particularly for fertilizers, to 

small-scale farmers would increase overall production; it would also help smallholders to close the yield gap 



11 

 

with larger producers and reduce poverty. This DLI will be measured by tracking the number of small farmers 

(<5 hectares) enrolled in the E-voucher Scheme for fertilizers. 

 DLI 2: Revitalizing provincial crop and livestock research and extension systems. A comprehensive, 
strategically relevant policy for agricultural and livestock research and extension will be designed. Over time, 

funding for public research would increase (measured as the percentage of AgGDP spent on research), along 

with the role of the private sector (measured by the composition of the Punjab Agriculture Research Board and 

the percentage of research grants awarded on a competitive basis).  

 DLI 3: Improving livestock health and breeding. Resources will shift from curative to preventive animal 
healthcare (measured by the ratio of expenditures on preventive and curative medicine) to reduce losses to 

disease. Good breeding stock is essential to improve productivity (measured by the number of breeding animals).  

 DLI 4: Modernizing the wheat marketing system and transitioning to high-value agriculture. Deregulating 
the wheat market would reduce wheat and flour prices and free land for HVA (substantially raising farm incomes 

and employment)—measured by the official notification that GoPunjab is withdrawing from the wheat market, 

subsequent phasing out of government wheat procurement, and the percentage of the Agriculture allocation in 

the ADP to HVA schemes. An additional measure is approval of the Punjab Agriculture Policy, which is 

expected to provide further strategic directions for agricultural policy.  

24. The four DLIs under Results Area 2 (increased value addition and competitiveness 
of agriculture and livestock) will be achieved through policy and institutional reforms, as well 

as by marshalling public support for private investors, mainly through a matching grant scheme. 
 DLI 5: Providing incentives to agribusiness for investment in value addition. SMART Punjab will contribute 

US$ 10 million to an Agribusiness and Innovation Fund to be set up by GoPunjab. The fund will award matching 

grants, with particular consideration for women and young people, on a competitive basis (measured by the 

number of matching grants awarded for agribusiness). 

 DLI 6: Deregulating the livestock sector. Removing meat and raw milk price caps (measured by the 
discontinuation of notification of meat and milk prices) would stimulate production and marketing of better 

quality and safer livestock products, raising producers’ incomes and increasing supplies for urban areas.  

 DLI 7: Modernizing agricultural markets. Reforming wholesale market legislation to allow greater private 
sector participation and enhance transparency (measured by approval and notification of the Punjab Agricultural 

Marketing Regulatory Authority Act) would reduce margins taken by middlemen and commission agents and 

reduce the government’s role in controlling these markets.  

 DLI 8: Improving food safety. Better food and agricultural standards, backed by testing and enforcement 
mechanisms, would improve the quality of food products and public health, and address concerns about 

contaminated or adulterated products. This DLI will be measured by tracking progress in establishing and 

operationalizing a provincial food testing reference laboratory as well as regional and mobile laboratories.  

25. The four DLIs under Results Area 3 (enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to 
climate change and natural disasters) will be achieved by improving the management and 

sustainability of water resources, designing and extending the coverage of improved agricultural 

insurance products for different kinds of producers, and public investment in CSA. 
 DLI 9: Improving sustainability of irrigation M&R. More equitable access to water and better assessment and 

collection of abiana would encourage producers to use water more efficiently with no increases in overall water 

use, and increase funds for M&R. Adoption of a provincial water policy and groundwater act are important first 

steps in addressing the overexploitation of water, falling groundwater tables, and increasing salinization. This 

DLI would be measured by approval of the Punjab Water Policy, notification of the 2017 Punjab Groundwater 

Act, improvements in the area assessed for abiana, tracking abiana collection rates, and water delivery 

performance ratios (defined as actual amount of water delivered divided by amount delivered as per canal 

design, measured at different points along the canal and relative to the delivery performance at the head of the 

canal). 

 DLI 10: Rolling-out an agricultural insurance system. Crop insurance can help crop producers stabilize 
incomes and sustain resilience when natural events deplete harvests. The World Bank submitted a feasibility 

report detailing a suitable crop insurance scheme to GoPunjab in July 2017. This DLI will be measured by 

official government approval of the report, development and notification of a workplan aligned with the report’s 

recommendations, piloting a crop insurance scheme in two districts, and rolling out the scheme in all districts.  



12 

 

 DLI 11: Increasing public investment in CSA. Enhancing public investment in CSA would help farmers adopt 
new technologies and approaches and reduce potential losses related to climate change, measured by tracking the 

percentage allocation of Agriculture in the ADP for CSA schemes. 

 DLI 12: Communications, capacity building, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). A substantial 
communications strategy and capacity-building program will mobilize support for agricultural and rural 

transformation among stakeholders into the future. Strengthening M&E capacity in participating departments 

will facilitate monitoring of progress. This DLI will be measured by development and implementation of annual 

capacity development plans. 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 

26. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared for 
SMART Punjab. The assessment incorporates feedback from all stakeholders (governmental, 

non-governmental, producers) and presents recommendations and actions to address 

environmental and social risks associated with the Program. The main actions are included in the 

PAP and some of these constitute dated legal covenants. 

 

27. Environmental risks are Moderate. In general, the expected environment impacts from 
Program activities are assessed as medium to low. Environmental concerns include the 

possibility of increases in use of chemicals due to the shift from conventional crops to HVA; 

institutional capacity for effective environmental management; and environmental compliance 

by micro and small enterprises and food safety testing laboratories. SMART Punjab promulgates 

reforms and related actions that promote balanced fertilizer use, improved water resource 

regulation and efficiency, increased land productivity, agricultural insurance, and CSA. The 

Program is not expected to support large infrastructure except wheat storage facilities which are 

subject to EIA preparation. The Program will involve no expansion of the irrigation network but 

rather promote water resource efficiency. The Program will also not support expansion of 

agricultural land but contribute to increased land productivity. Improvements in animal health 

combined with deregulation of livestock prices would benefit public health. Improvements in 

animal breeding will relieve pressure on rangelands. Crop residue burning and application of 

untreated wastewater for irrigation are important environmental issues related to agriculture but 

not targeted by the proposed Program. 

 

28. Social risks are Substantial. The key social risks include (i) access to program benefits 
for vulnerable and marginalized groups, and (ii) potential social conflict. Smallholders and 

marginalized or vulnerable groups may find accessing some elements of SMART Punjab more 

challenging than other stakeholders — e.g. HVA, the E-voucher scheme, and matching grants. 

These groups may require special support, ranging from technical assistance, training, two-way 

communication, and social mobilization strategies. Phasing out of the wheat procurement system 

while lowering the wheat price thus benefiting the >90% of households who are net wheat 

buyers, may face strong opposition from large wheat growers. The Bank has agreed to provide 

significant technical assistance to assist the Food Department in mitigating social risk associated 

with wheat market reform. Attempts to improve abiana assessment and increase abiana 

collection are likely to meet resistance. Removal of price caps while having beneficial impacts 

on public health and incomes of livestock owners (most of them women), may also negatively 

impact consumption of fresh milk in low income households, unless preceded by an engagement 

strategy in which stakeholders are informed of the benefits of deregulation well in advance and 

milk producers can move towards increasing supply capacity in anticipation of better prices. An 



13 

 

effective conflict mitigation and awareness strategy must be in place to ensure that reforms do 

not lead to marginalization and conflict. No significant land acquisition is envisioned under the 

Program. 

 

29. With regard to grievance redress mechanisms, communities and individuals who 
believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank-supported PforR operation, as 

defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to program grievance 

redress mechanisms or the World Bank Grievance Redress Service. The Grievance Redress 

Service ensures that complaints are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Affected 

communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Inspection 

Panel, which determines whether harm occurred or could occur as a result of the Bank’s non-

compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after 

concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has 

been given an opportunity to respond. To submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate 

Grievance Redress Service, visit www.worldbank.org/grs. To submit complaints to the World 

Bank Inspection Panel, visit www.inspectionpanel.org.  

 

30. In sum, although the proposed operation will undertake or support no activities of high 
risk from an environmental or social perspective, and although federal and provincial 

environmental and social management systems are appropriate, social management procedures 

require strengthening with respect to gender and the poor, conflict management, and two-way 

public engagement. Certain departments need to strengthen their grievance redress systems. The 

Environmental Section of P&D should be strengthened because P&D, having primary 

responsibility for coordinating and monitoring the Program, is in charge of environmental 

screening. For activities that require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Initial 

Environmental Examination (IEE), the relevant implementing agencies should coordinate with 

District Environment Officers. 

 Financing 

31. The financing framework for the activities under the three Results Areas includes 
two sources of finance: (i) GoPunjab budget; and (ii) SMART Punjab PforR (Table 3). 

32. In addition, a significant portion out of 
GoPunjab’s spending on subsidies is expected to 

be diverted towards investment in agriculture 

and livestock when the program is fully 

implemented by 2021. The GoPunjab has already 

substantially increased the capital investment 

allocation for agriculture and livestock in 

anticipation of such savings becoming available. 

33. Budgetary allocations for agriculture and livestock are considered sufficient and 
together with acceptable historical budget execution rates provide enough confidence that 

the intended results of the SMART program will be achieved. The government’s expenditure 

framework is sufficiently aligned with the SMART program to achieve the intended results. 

 

Table 3: Financing of SMART program (US$ m) 

Source Amount % of total 

Punjab Government
 

1290 81 

PforR 300 19 

Total Program 

financing 

1,590 100 

 

http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service
http://www.worldbank.org/grs
http://www.worldbank.org/grs
http://www.inspectionpanel.org/


14 

 

  



15 

 

 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

34. The Departments of Agriculture, Livestock & Dairy Development, Food, Irrigation, 
Industries, Finance, and P&D are responsible for implementing the SMART Punjab 

Program. Each department will have a dedicated Program Delivery Unit (PDU) or a Focal 

Person, depending upon the workload. Each PDU will include current departmental staff, 

supplemented by consultants as needed. Some departments have dedicated PDUs; others will 

establish them.
2
 The Member Agriculture (P&D Department) will act as the Program 

Coordinator for SMART Punjab in the Program Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU), 

assisted by the Chief Agriculture as Deputy Manager. The PCMU which has been established 

under the Punjab Resource Management Program in the P&D Department and also coordinates 

the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR, will coordinate with the seven implementing agencies, 

monitor and evaluate implementation, and report to the Bank in accordance with the terms and 

conditions of the Financing and Program Agreements. It will consolidate reports of all 

implementing agencies and communicate them to the Bank; to do so, it will develop a standard 

template for monitoring and reporting progress. The PCMU will also coordinate with the 

Independent Verification Agency for verifying achievement of DLIs and reporting, and will 

establish an Assignment Account to manage technical assistance funding supported by the 

PforR. The Finance and P&D Departments will ensure that PforR resources are adequately 

budgeted for in their annual budget and disbursed in line with the expenditure framework to 

accomplish the DLIs.   

 

35. A SMART Steering Committee (SC) was established in September 2016. The SC has 
played a constructive role throughout preparation, especially in guiding and confirming policy 

reforms and institutional changes. Headed by the Chief Minister, Punjab, it includes 

administrative heads from all implementing agencies, other key stakeholders, and representatives 

from the Bank (including the Senior Director and Country Director) as observers. The SC will 

provide strategic guidance and direction, facilitate coordination between the seven implementing 

agencies, and oversee progress in all three Results Areas and DLIs on a quarterly basis as 

reported by the PCMU. To ensure effective implementation, the SC may refer any major 

implementation challenge or matter requiring a policy decision for guidance to the three high-

level committees (Secretaries’ Committee, Commissioners’ Conference, and DCO Committee) 

chaired by the Chief Secretary. 

 

36. SMART Punjab will coordinate and collaborate with other programs. It will create 
synergies with Bank projects in Punjab—including the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity 

Improvement Project (PIPIP) and the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963)—and operations 

of development partners.
3
 National entities with supporting roles include: (1) the Auditor 

                                                 
2
 The Agriculture Delivery Unit (ADU) will act as PDU in the Agriculture Department; the Statistical Planning and Reform Unit will act as PDU 

in the Irrigation Department; and the Food and Livestock & Dairy Development Departments will establish PDUs or (in the case of the Industries 

and Finance Departments) Focal Persons before appraisal. At a minimum, PDUs will be staffed by a Procurement Specialist, Financial Specialist, 

Communications Specialist, M&E Specialist, and Internal Audit Specialist, aside from the appropriate technical specialists. PDUs are responsible 
for procurement (tender documents, advertising, bid evaluation and award of contracts), FM, internal audit, communications, M&E, and 

environmental and social management. PDUs will report as required to the PCMU, including: (1) an annual investment plan for their department; 

(2) Terms of reference (ToRs) for consultancy services; (3) an annual procurement plan; (4) reports on implementation progress for each DLI 
under the Program; (5) Program Financial Statements, including procurement, if any; (6) internal audit reports; and (7) implementation of the 

communications strategy. 
3
 For example, the Food and Agriculture Organization (with the recently approved Technical Cooperation Project—Support for the formulation 

of projects for Strengthening Markets and Rural Transformation (SMART) Initiatives in Punjab, Pakistan), USAID (particularly the Punjab 



16 

 

General of Pakistan for the annual external audit of the Program; (2) the Punjab Public 

Procurement Regulatory Authority, which will provide technical guidance on public 

procurement and monitor compliance with procurement standards and practices; and (3) the 

National Accountability Bureau, which will investigate complaints on fraud and corruption (if 

any) relating to the Program. 

 

 Contact points 
 

World Bank 
Contact: Johannes (Hans) Jansen 

Title:  Senior Agriculture Economist 

Tel:  +92 (0) 301 871 5906  

Email:  jjansen@worldbank.org 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 

Contact: Jehanzeb Khan 

Title:  Chairman, Planning & Development Department, Government of Punjab 

Tel:  +92 (0) 300 088 3399  

Email:  chairmanpnd@gmail.com 

 

Implementing Agencies 

Contact: Mohd. Mahmood Rai 

Title:  Secretary, Agriculture Department 

Tel:  +92 (0) 304 092 00009 

Email:  secyagri@punjab.gov.pk 

Other 

The InfoShop 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Tel:  +1 202 458 4500 

Fax:  +1 202 522 1500 

Web:  http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop 

 

                                                                                                                                                             
Enabling and Environment Project), IFPRI (in the policy arena), and the Australian High Commission (which facilitated financial support from 
the Government of Australia for technical assistance during preparation and early implementation of SMART Punjab). 


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17964

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P158522
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization Project (P158522)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Water Resources Organization, Public Works Department, GoTN

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 136.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 318.00
Total Project Cost 454.00

Environmental 
Category:

A - Full Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

The Decision Review Meeting discussed the risk ratings of the project and 
agreed to the proposed overall project risk rating of Moderate.  The review 
meeting discussed project safeguard issues and agreed with the 
proposed classification as Category A in view of potential issues related to dam 
safety, increased pesticides and fertilizer usage. The safeguard responsibility will 
remain with RSA.

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
India in recent years witnessed impressive economic growth and poverty alleviation. During the 
past decade, India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at 7.6% annually and poverty incidence 
reduced on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005-10. Also,improvements in key 
development indicators have been remarkable: life expectancy increased from 31 years in 1947 to 
68 years in 2015 and adult literacy increased from 18% in 1951 to 71% in 2015. 
 
Despite such impressive progress in economic growth, poverty alleviation, and improved human 
development indicators, India remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in 
rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the country is still at the bottom of the group of 
middle-income countries. To address these challenges, the Government of India (GoI) through its 
12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for economic growth, poverty 
reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this period an 
annual GDP growth of 8.2%, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, and 50 million 
of new jobs.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
Tamil Nadu is the second largest state economy in India with one of fastest growth rates: over the 
past three years its Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at 9.2% per annum.  The average 
annual per capita income of the state is around INR 61,500 (at 2010/2011constant prices), which 
is around 42% higher than the national average. Tamil Nadu is also the most urbanized state in 
India with around 48% of population living in cities. 
 
Agriculture and allied sectors in Tamil Nadu account for 12% of the state's GSDP. About 40% of 
state's population is dependent on agriculture for their employment and more than two thirds of 
state's poor people live in rural areas and are engaged in predominately in agriculture activities. 
The majority of farmers are small and marginal with average family landholdings of 0.83 ha. The 
main crops are rice, maize, pulses, groundnut, sugar cane, vegetables, and banana. Rice dominates 
both consumption and agriculture production accounting for 34% of total gross cropped area and 
60% of irrigated area. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly 
limited to only one crop per plot per year. 
 
Tamil Nadu is one of the driest and most water stressed states of India with average annual 
rainfall of 925 millimeters, which is well below the national average of 1,200 millimeters. Per 
capita availability of water in the state is around 900 cubic meters a year compared with the 
national average of 2,100 cubic meters.  The agriculture sector in Tamil Nadu is highly exposed 
to climatic risks, especially droughts, floods, cyclones, and erratic rainfall, which have frequently 
affected the performance of agricultural sector in the past. The dry season lasts five months 
(January through May) even in good years, and droughts occur in three out of ten years.  Climate 
change is likely to exacerbate the vulnerability of agricultural sector with increasing erratic 
weather patterns and climatic shifts.  A clear example is the consequence of devastating floods 
that occurred in November-December 2015, which severely damaged irrigation infrastructures in 
three districts and affected Chennai, the capital city of Tamil Nadu as well. 
 
The state is heavily dependent on irrigated agriculture and over the years an impressive inventory 
of irrigation and water infrastructure was built in the state. There are 89 major reservoirs, 39,000 
tanks (traditional water harvesting structures) and 3 million wells. Irrigated agriculture is the 



Page 3 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

largest consumer of water in the State accounting for 75% of total water usage. About 3 million 
ha of land (54% of total crop land) is under irrigation with different sources of water: 30% of total 
irrigated area is under canal irrigation, 21% is under tank irrigation, and 49% is irrigated by wells. 
 
In recent years the state's agriculture sector has grown modestly at less than 3% per annum 
compared with 6-9% growth of the state's economy. The productivity of major crops has largely 
stagnated:  the current average yields of rice and maize are slightly higher than the national 
average, the average yields of vegetables, cotton, and pulses are lower than the national average. 
To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, there is a strong need for policies and 
programs to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping 
systems and diversification into high value crops; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management 
and value addition; and (iv) improvement of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal 
with increasing threats of climate change. 
 
The Bank-supported Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water-Bodies 
Restoration and Management Project (TN IAMWARMP), which was concluded in 2015, has had 
a significant development impact in the state by modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving 
water use efficiency, enhancing yields and productivity of agriculture, livestock and fisheries, and 
promoting diversification to high value crops. It also supported the introduction of participatory 
irrigation management in the state and the establishment of water users associations (WUAs). 
Under the project 5,300 tanks and irrigation supply canals were rehabilitated and modernized, and 
2,800 WUAs were established resulting in increases of fully irrigated areas by 39% and water 
conveyance efficiency by more than 30%. The total area under high value crop was also doubled. 
Moreover, the project helped the state improve its water resource planning and implementation 
capacities.  These achievements and lessons learned during implementation of TN IAMWARMP 
serve as a good base for further enhancing the performance of irrigated agriculture in the state 
through the proposed project.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
FY2013-17 to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for 
Transformation, the project promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of 
new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small 
and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management. Further the 
proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting 
diversification into high value crops, which significantly reduce water consumption. 
 
The proposed project will contribute to the Inclusion pillar of CSP by enhancing the livelihoods 
of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access, and also by 
improving disaster management abilities of GoTN and the local communities through the 
enhanced design and restoration of irrigation infrastructure with better flood protection features.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
To enhance agriculture productivity, water use efficiency, climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture and increase post-harvest value-addition for smallholder farmers and agro-
entrepreneurs in Tamil Nadu. 



Page 4 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

The project beneficiaries are farmers, including small and marginal, water users associations, 
farmer producer organizations, and other entrepreneurs.

Key Results (From PCN)
The key project indicators (KPI) will be: 
 
(i) Increase in water use efficiency (resilience, water use efficiency); 
(ii) Increase in agricultural productivity (productivity); 
(iii) Increase in areas cultivated by non-paddy crops (diversification and value added);  
(iv) Adoption of resilient technologies and practices (resilience); and  
(v) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries).

D.  Concept Description

The design of the proposed project will include innovative aspects that build on lessons learned 
from TN IAMWARMP and also reflect the evolving needs of the state when it comes to 
modernization of irrigated agriculture. These include improved designs of irrigation 
infrastructure, stronger focus on the demand-side of irrigation with aim to improve water-use 
efficiency, further advances in agricultural diversification, agri-entrepreneurship, and movement 
toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and 
substantial improvements of participatory irrigation management practices by beneficiaries.  
Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the 
project through e.g. higher water use efficiency, increased adoption of sustainable technologies 
and practices, and enhanced diversification of production systems. Activities under the project 
will be duly complimented by use of innovative ICT and new media technologies for enhanced 
efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries.  As 
requested by GoTN, the project is also expected to finance on-retroactive basis, rehabilitation and 
modernization of tanks and other irrigation infrastructures damaged by the flooding of 
November/-December 2015 floods in three districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 
The total project cost is expected to be around US$454 million, of which the Bank will finance 
$318 million (70% of total project cost) and the GoTN will finance US$ 136 million (30% of total 
project cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Tamil Nadu (its individual 
components will cover different geographic areas) and will be implemented over seven year 
period.    The project activities would be grouped into three main components: (i) Agriculture 
Water Management; (ii) Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value 
Addition; and (iii) Project Management Support. The individual components are summarized 
below: 
 
Component A: Irrigation and Water Management 
 
This component addresses irrigation and water management in a holistic fashion by covering both 
supply and demand simultaneously.  It consists of four inter-related sub-components, including: 
(i) institutional strengthening and capacity building of water management; (ii) irrigation systems 
modernization; (iii) participatory irrigation management;   and (iv) converged service delivery at 
the grass-root level.     
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Water Management 
 



Page 5 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

This subcomponent aims to assist the GoTN in addressing the pressing water sector issues, 
including: (i) need for integrated water resources planning, bulk water allocations  and 
management in a basin context, involving all water using sub-sectors to improve the efficiency 
and productivity of limited water resources; (ii) need to improve the knowledge base and 
instruments; (iii) need to improve the financial sustainability of water sector assets, and cost 
effective reliable service delivery; and (iv) need to promote participatory irrigation service 
management. These will be done through strengthening of capacities for enhancing policy 
analysis and implementation, knowledge base, analytical capacity, staff mobility, filling of subject 
matter specialists/experts gap, technology induction, office facilities, and related technical/
logistical support.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Systems Modernization 
 
This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructures, including tanks, and irrigation 
canals.  The modernization of irrigation infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water 
delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and modernization of approximately 4,800 
tanks, and 477 anicuts in 66 sub-basins out of total 127 sub-basins.  Activities under this sub-
component will be carried out based on individual sub-basin development plans specifically 
developed and tailored to local conditions, and will aim to revive traditional water bodies (tanks) 
that are either part of or outside the state➢❨ s irrigation systems network.  The sub-component 
will finance civil works, equipment, consultancies, training and incremental operational costs 
associated with modernization of the schemes, and the work will be carried out by WRD, and as 
required  with direct involvements of WUAs.  
 
Sub-component A.3:Participatory irrigation Management 
 
This sub-component aims to integrate participatory irrigation management (PIM) practices into 
the operations of the Water Resource Department as a distinct unit within the Department in order 
to improve Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of modernized and rehabilitated irrigation 
infrastructures.  The sub-component will assist in strengthening and establishing new water users 
associations (WUAs), including operationalizing WUAs to undertake O&M, water distribution, 
and asset rehabilitation works within their command areas.  
 
Sub-component A.4: Converged Service Delivery at Grass-Root Level 
 
For effective service delivery to farmers, all departments involved in the water sector need to 
collaborate. This convergence for service delivery will be promoted through establishing and 
strengthening Single Window Information and Knowledge Centers (SWIKCs), and facilitating 
Community Collaborative Water Management (CCWM) at village level. CCWM will sensitize 
local communities about the water situation and enable them to draw community level action 
plans for sustainable use of water in their villages for all water users. 
 
The overall component will be supported by information and communication technology (ICT) 
Innovative ICT and new media solutions coupled with robust monitoring and evaluation systems 
for real time submission of information related to the project activities will be designed, 
developed and deployed under Component A in addition to leveraging on the existing ICT 
solutions developed during IAMWARM.  In particular, specific ICT interventions to be 
undertaken under this components will be:  (i) Operationalization and enhancement of Enterprise 



Page 6 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Information Managemenget System platform developed under IAMWARMP through retroactive 
financing and (ii) Implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems based 
upon sensors based inputs for automation of at least one canal network. 
 
Component B: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value Addition 
 
The interventions of this component are aimed at increasing productivity, promoting 
diversification of agriculture production systems, and improving farmers➢❨  access to markets in 
project sub-basins. The component will adopt climate-resilient approaches that promote 
sustainable use of land and water resources. The component will consist of two sub-components:  
(i) sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems; and (ii) 
marketing, value-addition and post-harvest management.  
 
Sub-component B.1: Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production 
systems 
 
Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems will be achieved 
through a large scale program of awareness creation and on-farm demonstrations on new seeds 
and promising technologies, capacity building and training activities; and by leveraging private 
sector investments in water management and farm mechanization.  Climate risk resilience will be 
built into crop and horticulture production systems by:  (a) promoting cultivation of short 
duration, high yielding, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crops/varieties of pulses, maize, 
oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; (b) installation of micro irrigation drip and fertigation 
systems; and (c) promoting water saving agronomic practices like the system of rice 
intensification and the sustainable sugarcane initiative.  For linking production with market 
demand, farmers will be supported and trained to grow those crops and commodities for which 
significant market demand exists, including a shift from paddy to crops with low water 
consumption in which Tamil Nadu is deficient.  ICT-based leveraged activities will be introduced 
like E-velanmai, Farmer Cropping Advisory.  
 
Animal husbandry activities will aim at improving production potentials of livestock through 
adoption of sustainable and climate resilient animal husbandry practices (including fodder 
cultivation) technologies, strengthening of input, extension, and service delivery systems, 
establishing ICT based MIS and infrastructure strengthening and capacity building in breeding, 
disease surveillance and food safety. 
 
Fisheries activities will aim at improving fish productivity mainly in reservoirs, tanks and ponds 
through demonstration of climate resilient modern technology packages such as: short production 
cycle models involving improved fast growing fish varieties; improved reservoir fisheries 
management; introduction of suitable formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; 
promotion of innovative technologies such as cage fish culture and pen fish farming in an 
environmentally sustainable manner; and facilitation of suitable market linkages for better access 
to markets.   
 
Related to above activities, the project will finance the incremental requirements of contractual 
subject matter experts and support staff, goods and equipment, consultancies, studies, trainings, 
civil works, and incremental operating costs. The Project will also support the GoTN in 
improving existing policies, regulations, and procedures to achieve a climate-resilient and 



Page 7 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

sustainable agriculture system by commissioning feasibility studies, preparing detailed action 
plans and implementation guidelines.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Value Addition and Post-Harvest Management 
 
This subcomponent will aim at enhancing farmers' linkages to markets by providing alternative 
marketing channels and improving farm level post-harvest management and value addition.  The 
project will support the setting up of an Agribusiness Promotion Facility, development of farmer 
producer organizations/companies, integration of commercial value chains of agricultural 
commodities, and will facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying arrangements.  
Support will also be provided for modernization and upgrading of selected Regulated Markets 
dealing with project produces and weekly farmers➢❨  markets/rural markets (Varashanthais) on 
cost sharing basis, innovative pilots, institutional strengthening and capacity building of 
Agriculture Marketing and Agribusiness Department. The GoTN is currently in the process of 
amending the Agriculture Produce Market Act of 1987, which would bring in substantial reforms, 
and among others, would create a conducive environment to development of more efficient 
markets with extensive usage of latest ICT technologies. 
 
Component C: Project Management Support 
 
The project will adopt the model of multi-departmental coordination and convergence, and will 
follow the general institutional structure of IAMWARM. The Multi-Disciplinary Project Unit 
(MDPU) established under the IAMWARM will also serve as the management and coordination 
unit for the proposed IAMP, with modifications as needed to be considered during project 
preparation. The MDPU will be responsible for ensuring support to preparation and 
implementation of overall project budget, sub-basin development plans, and implementation 
progress reports by the line departments. The MDPU will provide M&E, procurement and 
fiduciary support as needed to the project implementing agencies. 
 
The activities to be undertaken under the component will also be supported by: i) implementation 
of mobile application and associated back-end software tools for Geo Tagging and remote sensing 
based monitoring of project outcomes and  ii) Implementation of GIS based data acquisition and 
analysis system for studying emission of Methane and other Green House Gases (GHG) in project 
area. Citizen Engagement including Grievance Redressal is to be done by respective department 
as per agreed system.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 66 sub-basins, including the areas experiencing droughts, floods 
and other climate/natural shocks, particularly in coastal areas. The project activities might  influence 
a diverse set of habitats/ecosystems, including, coastal, plains, hilly, wetlands, rivers and sub-river 
basins as explain below.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The primary implementing agency has developed some capacity in managing social and 
environmental impacts under IAMWARM Project, which is the first phase to this project    but 
remain weak when it comes to monitoring and reporting of environmental and social manageent 



Page 8 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

aspects. Moreover, officials, particularly engineers, who were engaged in the previous project may 
move out due to transfers and this may require additional capacity building measures for the current 
staff. The implementing agency has some familiarity in preparing secondary data based 
environmental atlas for sub-basins, undertaking minor Social and Environmental Assessments, 
preparing Environmental Status Reports and contracting special studies of the river basins in the 
State. However, the second phase project will cover new sub-basins, a fresh full environmental and 
social assessment would be required for which the borrower will prepare and share with the Bank a 
detailed Terms of Reference. A multi-disciplinary project unit (including environmental and social 
experts) is being set up to facilitate the preparation and implementation of this project and based on 
experience of the previous project, will require additional support of external experts to facilitate the 
assessment both during preparation and then during operational phase for implementing the 
mitigation measures.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Samuel Thangaraj (GTC06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes Significant physical investments are expected under 
the project and although the nature of these 
investments would be largely rehabilitation of 
existing assets, improper construction could result in 
adverse impacts. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment will be undertaken and an 
Environmental and Social Management Plans would 
be developed for managing risks and maximize 
environmental and social opportunities. These will 
take into account earlier work and experiences of the 
TN WRCP project and consideration of new 
activities proposed in the TN IAMWARM project.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This is triggered, as a large number of tanks will be 
rehabilitated, including carrier system, which may 
impact natural habitats, particularly wetlands. 
Careful mapping using remote sensing will be 
undertaken as part of conducting the environmental 
assessment.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No impacts on forests are expected and the project 
will not affect existing forest management practices.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes No pesticides and fertilizers are expected to be 
financed directly by the project; however, there may 
be induced impacts of increased fertilizer and 
pesticide use due to improved agricultural 
intensification and diversification. The project will 
support scaling-up state-wide Integrated Pest 



Page 9 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Management and Integrated Nutrient Management 
efforts and support for safer and organic food 
production and marketing. A pest management plan 
will be prepared as part of the EA.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA (particularly in relation to proper management 
of any religious and other physical cultural property 
associated with tanks during rehabilitation).

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD A Tribal Mapping of 66 sub-basins to identify areas 
in the sub-basins that are categorized as belonging to 
Schedule 5 areas where GoTN's Tribal Sub-Plans 
and where Forest Rights Act are implemented  will 
be undertaken as part of Social Assessment to 
determine whether or not the OP/BP 4.10 is 
triggered.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes Modernization of irrigation systems and 
rehabilitation and required civil works are likely to 
involve involuntary resettlement. Though efforts will 
be made to avoid this, necessary structures and 
processes to mitigate adverse impacts, if any will be 
put in place in the Social Management Plan.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The dam safety policy is triggered as some tanks 
may have embankments higher than 15 m, though it 
will be confirmed once tanks are identified. The 
proposed project will draw technical resources from 
the ongoing World Bank funded Dam Rehabilitation 
and ImprovementProject (DRIP) in the State of 
Tamil Nadu, including the participation of the Dam 
Safety Review Panel. During preparation, the 
specific needs for supporting safety of Dams and 
tank systems will be assessed comprehensively and 
interventions needed will be determined. This 
includes the necessary monitoring system.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project does not fall on any international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project is not in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
29-Dec-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) shall be completed by November 30, 2016, which 



Page 10 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

will be for the entire project period. A number of safeguards instruments are expected to be 
prepared. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, as all 
investments and their locations would not be known by appraisal. An Environment Management 
Plan (EMP) and a Social Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared by appraisal for at least one 
large infrastructure sub-project. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared that 
will be applicable through the project period. Based on the assessment to trigger the policy on 
Indigenous Peoples, an Indigenous Peoples Framework may be prepared.  Finally, A Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) will also be prepared.

III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Bayarsaikhan Tumurdavaa
Title: Senior Agriculture Economist

Contact: Kazuhiro Yoshida
Title: Senior Irrigation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of India
Contact: Mr. Rishikesh Singh
Title: Director (MI), Ministry of Finance, GoI
Email: rishikesh.singh74@nic.in

Implementing Agencies
Name: Water Resources Organization, Public Works Department, GoTN
Contact: Vibhu Nayer
Title: Project Director
Email: mdpu@gmail.com

IV. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Bayarsaikhan Tumurdavaa,Kazuhiro Yoshida
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA) Date: 19-Jul-2016
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR) Date: 26-Jul-2016

Country Director: Name: Genevieve Connors (CD) Date: 05-Aug-2016

1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 



Page 11 of 11

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

potentially affected persons. 

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20715 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 2 of 19  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160408  Maharashtra Project on 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P160408) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Jun 05, 2017 Aug 24, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of Maharashtra. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower  120.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  480.00  

Total Project Cost  600.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 3 of 19  

     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India is one of the fastest growing economies in the world, ranked among the top ten highest GDP countries, and is 

the world’s second most populous country. During the past two decades, India’s GDP grew at an average of 7 

percent annually. Poverty incidence declined on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10 and 

improvements in key development indicators have been remarkable. However, following years of impressive 

economic growth and poverty alleviation, India is now at a critical juncture in its paths towards becoming an 

economic powerhouse and is facing important development challenges and structural constraints to a more 

inclusive growth and a more sustainable development. India remains home to 263 million poor people (most of 

which reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the economic growth has not generated jobs fast 

enough to absorb labor out of agriculture and low productivity rural jobs. To address these challenges, the 

Government of India (GoI) through its 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for accelerated 

economic growth, poverty reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this 

period an annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, 50 million new 

jobs – and an annual growth in the agriculture and allied rural sectors of 4 percent. 

 
2. Climate change may impede socioeconomic development within India and increasing investment in adaptation 

measures to reduce vulnerability will be essential to maintaining economic growth. India’s rapid growth has 

increased its prominence on the global stage and drawn attention to its climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. 

The country has shown leadership in global efforts to limit climate change and is among the early countries to have 

ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change (in October 2016). Analyses of the country’s historic climate data 

support the extent of the change taking place: an increase in mean annual temperature (0.56°C between 1901 and 

2007), as well as a decrease in seasonal mean rainfall with more frequent extreme rainfall events. Looking ahead, 

temperatures are projected to increase further and at a faster rate than before (by 1.7-2.0
o
C by the 2030s), coupled 

with an overall increase in monsoon rainfall (with an increase in geographic variability) and extreme precipitation 

events (with an increase in rainfall intensity). India shows an increasing trend in its per capita emission of GHGs, 

though current per capita levels are still among the lowest in the world (2.44 tCO2 equivalent per capita in 2012, 

against global average of 5.5 tCO2 equivalent). In absolute terms, India remains one of the largest GHG emitters, 

with its agriculture sector the second largest contributor (around 18 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions).  

 
3. Agriculture sector growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: the sector currently accounts for 14 

percent of national GDP and is a source of livelihood for more than half of the population. More than two thirds of 

the country’s poor live in rural areas, and their chance of getting out of poverty directly depends on the 

performance of agriculture and allied rural sectors. The success of ongoing massive rural-urban transformation will 

also depend on improved connectivity of rural areas to cities, enhanced agriculture productivity and value chains for 

agricultural products and off-farm job creation in rural areas, which would temper down current massive migrations 

to urban areas. The agriculture sector also has a major potential for reducing GHG emissions and improving 

environmental management through enhanced soil and water conservation and climate-resilient farm management 

practices.  

 
4. Over the past two decades, the agriculture sector has performed below its potential and has not yet met the 

envisaged growth targets. In the 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was around 3-3.5 percent, and 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 4 of 19  

     

dropped even below 2 percent per annum during 2013-15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, 

rising labor costs, and declining international commodity prices, exacerbated by the late onset of monsoon rainfall 

and increase rainfall intensity. While overall rainfall is projected to increase, its distribution over time and space is 

likely to become much more erratic, thereby leading to increasingly frequent droughts and floods. Unless significant 

efforts to capitalize on the projected increase in rainfall are made to improve water conservation and soil moisture 

management, water scarcity at farm level will remain a key impediment to achieving higher levels of crop and water 

productivity. 

 
5. Going forward, five inter-related and strategic shifts are required to achieve the 4 percent annual growth target 

set by GoI for agriculture and transform the sector into a modern food system: (i) a shift away from food grain 

production targets towards diversification into high-value horticulture and livestock products; (ii) a shift away from 

pure focus on physical productivity (yields) towards resilience and stability of agriculture to deal with the effects of 

climate change and short-term weather anomalies; (iii) a shift away  from a focus on on-farm production towards 

value addition in the post-harvest segments of the food value chains; (iv) a shift away from a calorie focused 

production structure towards nutrition sensitive agriculture, and (v) a shift away from increasing irrigation water 

supply towards improved water use efficiency. The proposed project is designed to directly contribute to this 

structural transformation process by supporting several of those strategic shifts with a focus on building climate 

resilience in the agriculture sector in the State of Maharashtra.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. The State of Maharashtra is one of the economic growth engines of the country:  it is the top-ranked state in terms 

of contribution to the national GDP (14.4 percent, 2014-15) and has witnessed an average economic growth rate of 

over 8 percent per annum over the last decade. With 9.3 percent of country’s population and 9.4 percent of the 

country’s geographic area, Maharashtra is also the second largest state in India. Structurally, Maharashtra is more 

urbanized and industrialized compared to the rest of the country and economic contributions of the industries and 

of the services sectors are much larger than that of agriculture and allied sectors (which account for only 11 

percent). However, the agriculture sector remains central to Maharashtra’s economic and political landscape, and 

growth in the sector is critical for the state as over 50 percent of its population depends on agriculture.  

 
7. In Maharashtra, agriculture has grown at an annual average of 6.4 percent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, but growth in 

the sector fluctuates heavily and is depending on highly erratic rainfall during any particular year and rainfall 

variability over time. The distribution of rainfall is highly uneven within the state and ranges from over 4,000 mm per 

annum in coastal areas to less than 400 mm in some of the most arid districts. Agriculture remains the highest user 

of freshwater, withdrawing more than 80 per cent of the surface and groundwater (“blue water”) available to the 

state. Since the continuation of the State’s strong economic growth performance would have to be supported by 

higher water availability in all three sectors of the economy, there is a need for Maharashtra to better manage its 

water resources and in particular to enhance the efficiency of the water used for agriculture and focus on increasing 

the availability and use by the agriculture sector of “green water” (rainwater stored in the soil as soil moisture). 

Severe consecutive droughts experienced in large parts of Maharashtra over the last two years have considerably 

affected the state’s agricultural performance and social fabric in rural areas, and have prompted the highest-level 

state authorities to declare “drought-proofing” of agriculture a key development priority for Maharashtra. 

  



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 5 of 19  

     

8. Maharashtra’s agriculture is dominated by small and marginal farmers with an average farm size of 1.44 ha. Most 

of the agricultural production is rain-fed, with less than 20 percent of the arable land under irrigation. Farmers’ 

annual production covers two seasons: kharif crops planted at the onset of the monsoon rainfall and ravi crops 

planted at the beginning of the winter season. Due to the broad range of agro climatic zones and soil types 

encountered, the state’s agricultural production is fairly diverse. Crop production is dominated by food grains, i.e. 

cereals (mostly rice, sorghum or jowar, maize) and pulses (chickpea or gram, pidgeon pea or tur). For oilseed crops, 

soybean remains by far the most important commodity. Cotton and sugarcane, whose production is relatively 

water-intensive, are the two cash crops most commonly found in Maharashtra’s farming systems (the State is 

among the largest producers of cotton and sugarcane in the country).  

 
9. The area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, with a considerable drop in the production of 

sorghum (though naturally better adapted to dryer conditions than other cereals) and a shift from food grains 

towards cash crops has been observed, with an increase in the area for cotton and sugarcane. Since 2000, an 

upsurge in the production of high-value horticulture crops has been observed, and today, the State of Maharashtra 

has emerged as one of the country largest producers of fruits (mango, citrus, grapes, pomegranate) and vegetables 

(onion, tomato). Overall, crop productivity has increased over time but remains at relatively low levels (2013-14, 

non-drought year:  sorghum 814 kg/ha; soybean 1,214 kg/ha; cotton 361 kg/ha). Yield gaps for several key crops are 

still significant, reflecting the need for a mix of sector policies and investments to promote research on climate-

adapted varieties, irrigation for a more efficient on-farm use of water, and extension services for the adoption of 

climate-resilient agronomic practices and technologies – i.e. for building climate resilience in Maharashtra’s farming 

systems.   

 
10. In 2008, GoI released the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), and directed the States to develop 

State Action Plans on Climate Change guided by and consistent with the structure and strategies of the NAPCC. The 

GoM took a pioneering step towards formulating the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change 

(MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study which included the task of 

generating model-based climate projections specific to the State’s geography. The MSAAPCC seeks to address the 

urgent need to integrate climate change concerns into the State’s overall development strategy, thus assisting in 

building long term climate resilience and enabling adaptation to the likelihood of risks arising from climate change. 

The MSAAPCC climate modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected 

to increase across the State of Maharashtra, with important regional variations – resulting, on balance, in potentially 

significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance.  

 
11. The annual mean temperature in Maharashtra is projected to increase by around 1.3-1.5

o
C by the 2030s; the 

projected increase in monsoon rainfall by the 2030s ranges from 13-30% across the state. These analytical findings 

from the MSAAPCC are consistent with the findings of the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change (IPCC). The effects of these longer term climate trends on sectors like agriculture or water, 

effectively signaling a shift in climatic conditions, will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the 

frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall 

intensity) already experienced in Maharashtra over recent past, as illustrated by the 3 severe droughts that hit the 

state over the past 5 years.  

 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 6 of 19  

     

12. The GoI has designed a number of policy initiatives and programs aligned with the recommendations from the 

NAPCC program and the state-level action plans, including the National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture 

(NICRA) to promote the development of climate-resilient villages; the Pardhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 

(PMKSY) Program to promote efficient irrigation practices and improve water use efficiency; the Jalyukt Shivar 

Abhiyan (JSA) Program on watershed and drought management; the Integrated Watershed Management Program 

(IWMP) on natural resources conservation; as well as India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) as 

presented to the COP21 in Paris to address the adverse effects of climate change. Against this background, the GoM 

is committed to further support and implement those policies in Maharashtra and sees the proposed project as an 

opportunity to contribute to the implementation of policies in support of the climate agenda. 

 
13. Higher level authorities in the state of Maharashtra have recently embraced a new paradigm for the agricultural 

sector which now needs to be mainstreamed across institutions and stakeholders. It is built around the recognition 

and understanding of climate change and climate variability as the “new normal”; this in turn, requires a structural 

shift in the approach to sustainable agriculture growth based on longer-term adaptive interventions (reforms, 

investments, capacity development) to build climate-resilience in agriculture – in addition to focusing primarily on 

shorter-term emergency responses to recurring natural disasters. The Bank is very well placed to provide value-

added to the GoM in establishing this new paradigm through its experience with climate-resilient agriculture 

elsewhere, its capacity to work multi-sectorally, and to apply cutting-edge knowledge at scale in support of changes 

in policies and strategies to promote climate adaptation and mitigation, and generate climate co-benefits.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013–17 to 

support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for Transformation, the project 

promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient 

agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource 

management (Outcome 2.4). Further, the proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of: (i) environmental 

protection by enhancing the management of soil and water resources, (ii) reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 

disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and (iii) promoting diversification into high value crops (Outcomes 

2.5 and 2.6). The project will also contribute to the Inclusion pillar of the CPS by enhancing the livelihoods of small 

and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access (Outcome 3.6), and by improving local 

communities’ ability to manage droughts and floods through enhanced design and restoration of irrigation 

infrastructure with better flood protection features (Outcome 3.8).  

 
15. The project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP) which explicitly highlights climate-

resilient agriculture and water management as key priorities for climate adaptation in the South Asia Region (SAR). 

CCAP also advocates that transformative action on climate change requires partnerships with client countries to 

mobilize additional capital for mitigation and adaptation action, which the project proposes to achieve with 

potential co-financing from the GoM as well as from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) through IFC’s 2030 Water 

Resources Program. The project will directly contribute to WBG’s commitment to increase the climate-related share 

of its portfolio from 21 to 28 percent by 2020 in response to client demand.  

  



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 7 of 19  

     

16. The project is based on a multi sector approach and will require close collaboration across the Bank’s Global 

Practices and Units (Agriculture, Water, Trade & Competitiveness, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management) 

in the design and throughout implementation. Close collaboration during planning and implementation will be 

sought with thematically related on-going/pipeline projects and initiatives (e.g. Maharashtra Agricultural 

Competitiveness Project - MACP, P120836; India Climate Change Mitigation Action Support, P162119; National 

Groundwater Management Improvement Program, P158119). Collaboration with IFC is secured through the 

inclusion on the project team of technical staff from IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group (2030WRG) and efforts to 

develop co-financing arrangements with possible funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
17. The PDO is to enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of 

Maharashtra. 

 
18. Direct project beneficiaries will be small farmers (households with 1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and marginal farmers 

(less than 1.0 ha), who will gain from knowledge and technology transfer, and access to assets to enhance climate 

resilience on their farms, as well as increased revenue from crop diversification and participation in emerging value 

chains. Farmer producer companies (FPCs) and small and medium agro-entrepreneurs (SMEs) will also benefit from 

the project through climate-resilient investments in value chain development, support with the promotion of 

backward and forward linkages, and access to business development and incubation services. The project will also 

directly benefit local institutions and agencies (e.g. agricultural research and extension, technical advisory services) 

through capacity development on climate resilience. State Agriculture Universities (SAU), various line departments, 

government agencies and other institutions at district and sub district level will also benefit through a strategic 

partnership with the project towards mainstreaming climate resilience in agriculture.  

   
B. Key Results 
 

19. The following Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed for measuring the core outcomes of the project:  

a. KPI #1 - Resilience: Farmers adopting climate-resilient agricultural technologies [Corporate Results 

Indicator] 

b. KPI #2 - Resilience: Area provided with micro irrigation systems [Corporate Results Indicator]  

a. KPI #3 - Resilience: Average on-farm soil organic carbon content 

b. KPI #4 - Profitability: Average farm income  

c. KPI #5 - Direct beneficiaries: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (by gender) [Corporate 

Results Indicator] 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
20. Project area. The proposed project will be implemented in the 15 districts of the Mrathwada and Vidarbha regions 

that have been most affected by the recurrent monsoon failures of recent years. These districts account for a total 

population of 30.2 million people and a project area of around 3.5 million ha. Out of a total of 18,000 villages in the 

districts selected, the project will cover 5,000 villages characterized by a high climate-vulnerability index and low 

HDI; this includes about 1,000 villages located in the Purna river basin tract and showing very high levels of soil 

http://operationsportal.worldbank.org/secure/P158119/home
http://operationsportal.worldbank.org/secure/P158119/home


 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 8 of 19  

     

salinity and sodicity. Managed spill-over effects are expected for a range project activities and outputs to villages not 

covered by the project. Most of the project area is located in Maharashtra’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. The vast 

majority of rural households in the project districts are small and marginal farmers whose livelihood depends for 

more than 90 percent on rainfed agriculture.  

 
21. Cropping patterns in the selected districts are dominated by cereals (mostly sorghum and millet), pulses and 

oilseeds (soybean). While cotton remains the main cash crop, more and more farmers are growing fruit trees to 

secure their farm income. Unlike in some other parts of Maharashtra where groundwater shortage has become an 

acute problem, in the project area only 55 percent of the total groundwater potential has been harnessed. However, 

poor management of surface water and lack of in situ storage in the project area have aggravated the impact on 

agriculture from the severe consecutive droughts that have hit Maharashtra in the past couple of years. 

 
22. Project rationale and alternatives considered. The proposed project results from a clear understanding at the 

highest level of authority in the state that Maharashtra needs a comprehensive, long-term and systematic approach 

to managing and coping with climate change and variability. In the past, emergency responses to increasingly 

frequent climate events have yielded only limited results: such short-term approach did not significantly boost 

agriculture sector performance, prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, 

farmer suicides), or lead to an increase in farmer income and prosperity. Thus, given the climate projections that 

indicate severe impact on the agriculture and water sectors in Maharashtra under status quo, the new paradigm to 

addressing climate adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and food system is essential.  

 
23. In addition to the short-term disaster management approach, a policy-based project approach was considered to 

address the impact of climate change on agriculture. Such approach would aim at reforming policies, including those 

that encourage the rapid expansion of water-intensive crops resulting in the depletion of groundwater resources. 

This approach was not pursued, since the selected project area presents distinct agro-hydrological features (e.g. no 

rice is grown in the project area and the sugarcane grown in the selected districts represents less than 3 percent of 

the state-level production). Importantly, the key policies impacting the selected project area relate to markets, and 

on these, Maharashtra has been among the most progressive states in terms of implementing policy reform. The 

remaining policies are beyond the State mandate, controlled by the central government, and these mostly relate to 

the distorting minimum support prices for selected commodities, which by and large are not growth in the project.  

 
24. Finally, a watershed-based approach was considered for the project, with a stronger focus on natural resources 

management. This approach was eventually discarded since it would not sufficiently focus on farm-level adaptation 

and mitigation issues nor would it provide the support for value chain development, a key part of the 

comprehensive approach needed to provide the market outlets and input supplies required to incentivize farmers to 

adopt resilient crops and agronomic practices. 

 
25. In line with GoM request, the proposed project, as represented in the graph below, is built around a comprehensive, 

multi sector approach that focuses specifically on building resilience in agriculture through the scaling up of tested 

technologies and practices, while generating the following interdependent triple win solutions:  

a. enhanced water security at farm level - through the adoption of technologies for a more efficient use of 

water for agriculture, and the increase in water storage capacity (surface and sub-surface) and 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 9 of 19  

     

improvement in water distribution structures to address on-farm water availability and reduce the risks 

associated with intra- and inter seasonal climate variability;  

b. improved soil health - through the adoption of good agricultural practices to improve soil fertility, soil 

nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and  

c. increased farm productivity and crop diversification - through the adoption of climate-resilient seed 

varieties (short maturity, drought and heat resistant, salt tolerant) and market-oriented crops with a 

clear potential for income security derived from the integration of farmers in corresponding value-

chains.  

 

Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of the PoCRA  

 

 
26. Sustainable pathways to resilience. Enhancing climate-resilience in agriculture involves the integration of 

adaptation, mitigation, and other practices in agriculture that increase the capacity of the farmer and his/her 

production system to respond to various climate-related disturbances by resisting or tolerating the damage and 

recovering quickly. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive on-farm and off-farm interventions required 

to build resilience in agriculture, there is a need to strengthen institutions, in particular at the local level, and 

improve their capacity to plan for adaptation to evolving climatic conditions and induce a change in local practices.  

 
27. In addition, the successful adoption of climate-resilient farming practices will largely depend on the farmer’s 

perception of income gains from the new technologies, as profitability remains the most important incentive for 

change at farm level. To that effect, crop diversification, access to knowledge and farm assets needs to be 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 10 of 19  

     

accompanied by more market opportunities, which can be achieved through improved participation of organized 

smallholders in the corresponding value chains and the mobilization of private sector (e.g. agri business SMEs).  

 
28. Finally, generating cutting-edge knowledge on climate change and its impact on key sectors such as agriculture and 

water is key to providing strong analytical underpinnings for policies on climate adaptation and mitigation – which 

still need better implementation in Maharashtra (and the rest of the country), despite the state being a frontrunner 

in India on the reform agenda for climate change.      

 
29. Leveraging financial resources. Implementing climate-resilient practices at a scale to cover the targeted 5,000 

villages in a saturation mode with watershed treatment and on-farm technologies requires an estimated total costs 

of well over US$2 billion. The tentative budget for the proposed project is US$600 million, with US$480 million from 

IBRD and US$120 million from GoI/GoM. This represents an average budget envelope of US$20,000 per village and 

year. A contribution from project beneficiaries towards technologies adopted and assets acquired from the project 

will be subsequently factored in, on the basis of the cost-sharing norms applied in other GoM programs and 

projects. Therefore, a major task during project preparation will consist in strategically prioritizing interventions 

planned in each cluster of around 10 villages, selecting results-based investments to be financed, and phasing in 

activities to be implemented in a given cluster.  

 
30. Against this background, the GoM is seeking to leverage its own resources and the IBRD funding with 

complementary funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group is currently 

supporting the GoM’s efforts to access GCF grant funding in the range of US$250 million to scale up climate 

adaptation in Maharashtra rain-fed agriculture. During project preparation, Bank and 2030WRG staff will work as 

one project team and explore with counterparts possible co-financing arrangements between the IBRD funding and 

the GCF grant.  

  
31. Project overview. The proposed project seeks to introduce transformational changes in the agriculture sector by 

scaling-up proven technologies and good agricultural practices that contribute to building climate resilience and 

enhancing farm income. The project will promote the transfer of technologies for climate adaptation and mitigation 

at farm level and will support targeted interventions and limited physical investments in the catchment area to 

promote the use of surface water over groundwater. To enhance farmer income, the project will support activities 

aimed at linking organized smallholders with agri-food SMEs and accessing new market opportunities enhancing 

their participation in commodity value chains.  

  
32. Finally, for the sustainability of the comprehensive approach proposed to build resilience in agriculture, the project 

will enhance the capacity of institutions and agencies at various levels to mainstream resilience (in particular in 
agricultural services for smallholders), develop strategic partnerships with national and international entities, and 
help generate evidence-based knowledge to advance the policy agenda on climate change and vulnerability.  To 
achieve the PDO and KPI targets, the project is designed around the four components described below.    

 
Component A: Promoting Climate-resilient Agricultural Systems (US$ XXX million) 
  

33. The objective of this component is to build climate-resilience in agricultural production systems through a series of 
activities at farm level, complemented by interventions in catchment areas. Mini watershed plans will be developed 
early to provide a road map for investment priorities and the implementation of related activities. This component 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 11 of 19  

     

will focus on: (i) scaling-up the adoption by farmers of climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health and water-use efficiency; and (ii) catchment area treatment to promote the use of “green water” for 
agriculture over “blue water”, and improve the availability of water at farm level. This component contributes 
directly to the PDO by promoting the transfer of climate resilient technologies at farm level (KPI #1), supporting the 
development of micro-irrigation systems (KPI #2) and encouraging farmers to adopt practices that enhance soil 
health (KPI #3). 

  
34. Participatory development of mini watershed plans. In line with the Maharashtra Groundwater Development and 

Management Act (2009, effective from 2013) which promotes the watershed as participatory planning unit, this 
component will finance the development of some 500 mini watershed plans, each covering a cluster of 8 to 12 
villages and an area of around 5,000 ha. Mini watershed plans are comprehensive multi-year activity and local 
investment tools for planning and monitoring. They include a comprehensive resource mapping, a rapid appraisal of 
stakeholders taking into account gender specificities, and participatory water budgeting to inform on possible 
investments in irrigation and drainage, and water resources management. Those plans will serve as a road map for 
the implementation of subsequent activities and investments under the proposed project. 

  
35. Technology transfer and climate-resilient agriculture practices for a sustainable soil and water management.  To 

enhance increase water productivity and achieve water security at farm level, the component will scale-up the 
adoption of technologies and practices aimed at maximizing the use of surface water for agriculture, at managing 
groundwater resources in a sustainable manner, and at getting “more crop per drop”. To that effect, the component 
will finance the adoption of in-situ soil moisture conservation practices, and the expansion of micro irrigation 
systems (primarily drip and sprinkler irrigation), including water supply structures and drainage facilities. The 
component will also help improve on-farm water availability through selected investments at catchment level (as 
prioritized in the mini watershed plan) to increase surface and sub-surface water storage capacity. To that effect and 
in close coordination with the Chief Minister’s Program on watershed and drought management (Jalyukt Shivar 
Abhiyan), the project will finance drainage line treatment, the improvement of water courses, the construction of 
new and desilting of existing water harvesting structures (e.g. farm and community ponds), and the construction of 
groundwater recharge structures. Agronomic practices promoted under this component in support of improved soil 
moisture management will include, among other, contour bunding, broad-bed furrow and conservation furrow 
cultivation. The component will also support efforts towards a more rigorous monitoring of the quality of the water 
available for agriculture. 

 
36. To improve on-farm soil fertility and micronutrient management, the component will scale-up the adoption of 

climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at: (i) increasing the soil organic matter content, and (ii) sustaining a 
viable agriculture on the naturally saline and sodic farm soils prevailing in parts of the project area. Conventional 
methods to address soil salinity and soil sodicity (i.e. land reclamation with widespread application of gypsum or 
lime) will be reviewed for their economic sustainability and financial viability in the local context, and used only 
where significant and long term net benefits can be expected. Good agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health have been successfully tested in other programs in Maharashtra and beyond (e.g. NICRA) and include 
biomass mulching, residue recycling, manure management, conservation tillage, in-situ moisture conservation and 
others.  

  
Component B: Climate-resilient Post-harvest Management and Value Chain Promotion (US$ XXX million) 
 

37. The objective of this component is to enhance climate resilience beyond farm gate and provide end-to-end solutions 
in selected commodity value chains. To ensure successful crop diversification, the component will help: (i) develop 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 12 of 19  

     

smallholder-inclusive value chains for climate-resilient commodities, and (ii) overcome constraints in the seed supply 
chain. In line with GoM priorities, this component will focus on Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) as major drivers 
of change in the agri-food system. An increase in farm income remains the key driver of change and a pre-
requirement for the adoption of the climate-resilient technologies and good agricultural practices promoted under 
Component A. Thus, this component will directly contribute to the PDO by creating opportunities for increasing the 
revenue of small and marginal farmers (KP #4) through crop diversification and their participation in selected value 
chains.  

   
38. Promoting Farmer Producer Companies. This component will build on the outcomes of other GoM programs and 

projects that have focused on FPCs as agent of change (e.g. MACP). A rapid appraisal exercise, with mapping, 
profiling and capacity needs assessment of the 420 FPCs in the project area (most of them in early development 
stage), will provide the basis for a series of activities tailored to the growth potential of existing FPCs. The 
component will also support the development of farmer-group based organizations into entrepreneurial, market-
oriented, financially sustainable companies with the capacity to perform selected value-adding activities and deliver 
a range of services (e.g climate-related technical advisory services, training on climate adaptation and mitigation 
practices in post-harvest management). The component will support viable mechanisms to further consolidate and 
set up new business linkages for FPCs with private sector (e.g. exporters, seed companies, farm machinery, agro-
input suppliers, and financial institutions). For the professionalization of FPCs, the project will explore a 
collaboration with IFC’s Agribusiness Leadership Program and/or Business Edge Program. Eligible FPCs will also 
benefit from participating in the incubation program of the proposed Climate Innovation Center (see Component C). 

  
39. Strengthening emerging value-chains for climate-resilient commodities. The selection of agricultural value chains for 

end-to-end solutions (from agricultural research to consumer markets) will be finalized by the PMU during project 
preparation. Pulses and oilseeds are emerging as potential priority commodities for end-to-end solutions. In 
addition, the component will support value-chains emerging in the project area following farmers’ production 
diversification to include higher-value commodities, in particular fruit trees (more climate-resilient than annual 
crops given their deeper root system). The component will also support viable investments in product aggregation, 
handling, transformation and marketing (e.g. collection centers, grading and packaging units, cold storage facilities, 
ICT-based market information systems). Priority will be given to investments that promote the use of green 
technologies (including solar energy). Value-chain financing and specifically access to finance and financial services 
for value chain actors will be explored under this component 

  
40. Improving the performance of the supply chain for climate-resilient seeds. The adequate supply of seeds with short 

duration, drought-, salinity- or heat-tolerant features, is a key priority for the GoM’s in its strategy to build climate 
resilience in the agriculture sector. The seed industry in MH is largely segmented, with private seed companies 
mainly focusing on the high value, low volume seeds (e.g. cotton, sugar cane, GM and hybrid varieties), while public 
sector seed corporations dominate the market for low value, high volume seeds (e.g. cereals, pulses and oilseeds). 
The component will address the need for increasing the availability of seeds, given farmers’ evolving demand 
resulting from the recommendations of the district-level contingency plans triggered by climate events (e.g. delays 
in onset of monsoon rains call for different crop mix). To address the shortage of breeder seeds, the component will 
assess the SAU’s breeder seeds programs and support solutions aimed at enhancing their performance (including 
developing linkages with FPCs for seed multiplication). This component will also seek to support key actors in the 
seed supply chain such as the Maharashtra State Seed Corporation who plays a unique role in the production and 
distribution of climate-resilient certified seeds for small and marginal farmers (e.g. pulses and oilseeds). It will also 
finance the development of a limited number of seed processing and storing hubs in strategic locations of the 
project area. 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 13 of 19  

     

 
Component C: Institutional Development, Knowledge and Policies for a Climate-resilient Agriculture (US$ XXX million) 
 

41. The objective of this component is to ensure sustainability in the approach proposed for building climate resilience 
through a longer term adaptive management of agriculture, soil and water resources, by: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of existing institutions to design and deliver agro-technical and climate advisory services, (ii) establishing a 
Climate Innovation Center, and (iii) promoting an evidence-based policy dialogue on climate resilience. Successful 
implementation of the activities in this component will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing the outreach 
of institutions and agencies promoting climate-resilient agriculture in the project area (KPI #5) and generating 
spillover effects to farming communities from other villages in the project area not covered by project activities.   

 
42. Sustainability and institutional capacity development. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive approach 

on climate-resilient agriculture proposed in this project, this component will support the development and 
implementation of a capacity development program for district and local level stakeholders. This component will 
mainstream climate-resilience in the strategic objectives of institutions and agencies involved in the delivery of 
services to small and marginal farmers. At district level, the project will work closely with the Superintendent District 
Agricultural Offices (SDAOs) and build their capacity to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the climate-
resilience agenda on the ground. At state level, the project will develop partnerships with the SAUs and support 
existing programs for the development and field-testing of emerging agricultural technologies and practices for 
climate-adaption of dryland farming systems. The component will also promote knowledge and learning exchanges 
on climate-resilience with national/international entities such as ICRISAT, CRIDA, the Indian Institute of Science, the 
Indian Meteorological Department, the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), the 
Australian Water Partnership (AWP), and the Carbon Management and Sequestration Center (CMASC, Ohio State 
University).  

 
43. Maharashtra Climate Innovation Center (CIC). This component will finance the planning, launch and start-up phase 

for a CIC until it operates in a self-sustained manner. The CIC will support local private sector capacity – with focus 
on entrepreneurs and SMEs – to commercialize and deploy emerging technologies and business models in growing 
climate sectors (e.g. climate-resilient agriculture, water, energy) to provide local solutions to climate change. The CIC 
will offer services tailored to local needs and conditions among a suite of tools which includes: access to latest 
technology information and market intelligence, fee-based business advisory and other incubation/coaching support 
services, and tailored proof-of-concept grant and seed investment financing to prove and scale early-stage firms and 
concepts. The CIC will draw on local and international expertise to support the GoM with the review and formulation 
of policies and strategies relevant to climate change and climate resilient, in particular as linked to the agri-food 
sectors. During project preparation, the PMU will commission a feasibility study for the CIC; it will be followed up 
during early project implementation with the development of a detailed CIC business and financial plan to be 
submitted for approval to the relevant authorities.  The CIC will be established with technical guidance from the 
Bank’s Climate Technology Program. 

  
44. Knowledge and policies. This component will finance a range of analytical studies aimed at updating and 

disseminating existing knowledge on a range of issues related to climate resilience and agriculture. Such studies will 
provide the analytical underpinnings to improve the policy and strategy framework required to further enhance 
resilience in the agri-food system in Maharashtra (and beyond). This component will support efforts towards a multi 
stakeholder dialogue on policies promoting climate resilience in agriculture, as well as direct payments to farmers 
for environmental services (e.g. soil carbon sequestration, groundwater conservation). This component will also  
look at reliable ways to quantify potential mitigation benefits from activities promoted by the project and aim at 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 14 of 19  

     

providing a pathway to carbon financing. The component will also finance the development of a state-of-the art 
climate and agro-hydrological model that supports policy-makers Maharashtra by: (i) making projections on the level 
of sustainable withdrawal of surface and groundwater in a given watershed under various climate and land use 
scenarios, (ii) generating suitability maps for Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR), and (iii) assessing the magnitude of 
MAR in the project area.  

  
Component D: Project Management (US$ XXX million) 
 

45. This component will primarily finance the project’s incremental operating costs.  A PMU has been set up by the 
Department of Agriculture (GoM) and tasked with the overall management of the project, while ensuring smooth 
coordination of activity implementation by various agencies and strategic partners. Given the transformative nature 
of the project, institutional coordination within and across the relevant sectors is emerging as a critical task in 
developing an effective project implementation mechanism. The PMU will be responsible for compiling an annual 
Activity Plan and Work Program and develop the corresponding budget proposal to be submitted for approval to the 
Project Steering Committee.  

 
46. The PMU will ensure that all project activities are implemented in line with the provisions in the official project 

documents; in particular, the PMU will be in charge of financial management, project procurement, and safeguards 
compliance. The component will support all activities related to project communication, public awareness and 
outreach, including the development of a comprehensive project web site. It will finance the services of specialized 
consultant firms to develop and implement a comprehensive project impact evaluation (including all surveys). 
Further, the project will promote the intensive use of ICT across components; to that effect, this component will 
finance both ICT goods and specialized consultant services. The project’s M&E system will be ICT-based, enabling the 
PIU to access project information and data from the field in real-time. ICT will also be used to facilitate the feedback 
from project beneficiaries on project activities planned/under implementation (citizen engagement), and will be 
mainstreamed in the project’s grievance and redress mechanism. 
 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. Districts in 
eastern Maharashtra on the Deccan plateau are particularly prone to drought. The net irrigated area is only 30.77 million 
Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. In Maharashtra, main crops include rice (although not grown in the project area), 
jowar, bajra, pulses, vegetables and onions. The main cash crops include cotton, sugarcane (though the project area 
accounts for only 3 percent of the state sugar cane production), turmeric, and several oilseeds. Amravati and Yavatmal, 
respectively in Vidharba region are the largest orange and cotton growing districts. 
The Project will be implemented in two main regions:  Vidharbha  and Marathwada comprising some 5,000 villages - 

selected for their high climate vulnerability index and low HDI; in addition, about 1,000 of these villages are characterized 
by high levels of soil salinity and sodicity. The project area is characterized by a substantial spatial and temporal rainfall 
variation and scarcity of water resources . These are increasingly exacerbated by frequent droughts associated with 
climate change and high human pressure on natural resources.  



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 15 of 19  

     

The proposed project is premised on the fact that climate changes are quite inevitable and that it affects all the 
households  much more on the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable sections. Further, it is well recognized that the 
households/ communities in the rain fed agriculture are quite diverse and heterogeneous with several sub groups 
identifiable based on several factors – resource endowment, gender, ethnicity ( scheduled tribes), castes (scheduled 
castes), religious minorities and geographical setting ( forests, hills, coastal areas). Each of these subgroups gets affected 
differently and has differential capacity for participation. Lastly, to ensure a village/ community spread resilience, group / 
collective action would be essential which demands substantial outreach efforts. Given this scenario, following issues 
emerge as significant: local participation, institutional linkages and communication outreach. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
GoM has established a PMU, with a full time environmental specialist, to guide and coordinate preparation of 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF) of the project. A consultant firm has also been brought on 
board by GoM to prepare the ESMF together with the project implementation plan (PIP). During project implementation, 
there will also be environment specialists at the District PMUs in Akola and Aurangabad. GoM has experience with 
implementing World Bank funded projects, in similar sectors, such as Maharashtra Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
and Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project. For these projects, GoM is already implementing various tools for 
managing environmental and social issues, such as ESMF. Therefore, there is good borrower orientation and sensitivity to 
implement Bank’s safeguards. 
The project, through the safeguards instruments, will also put in place a capacity building program for staff, and project 

beneficiaries to ensure successful implementation of ESMF and IPM plan, and compliance with the Bank’s safeguards 
policies. A full understanding of the capacity-building need is expected once the draft ESMF is prepared.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Suryanarayana Satish, Anupam Joshi, Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

OP 4.01 is triggered because the project involves a 
series of interventions for increasing productivity, 
enhancing resilience, and agriculture value chain 
development.  Investments to be supported under the 
project will not lead to any major irreversible impacts, 
however, if not designed effectively,  may generate 
impacts such as soil degradation, water pollution, 
biodiversity conservation, labor safety issues. (these 
are mostly temporary by nature and site specific).  
 
The project will also have positive impacts on the 
environment and natural resource base of the project 
area such as drought-proofing rain-fed agriculture in 
the semi-arid regions, prevention of soil degradation, 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 16 of 19  

     

increase of soil moisture and in biomass and organic 
matter of soil, decrease of run-off and soil losses, 
increased climate resilience and annual water 
availability. All mitigation measures would be carefully 
designed in order to enhance the positive impacts, and 
ensure sustainability of investments. 
 
Overall, the project related impacts are mostly 
positive, hence it has been classified as category B. At 
this very juncture, the scope and location of the 
interventions are not known. Hence, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being 
prepared which outlines the process for future 
subprojects to ensure that they are environmentally 
and socially sound, sustainable, and in line with GoM 
and World Bank operational safeguards policies. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project financed investments are not expected to 
intervene in any critical natural habitats. The project 
areas contain some essential ecosystems with rich 
biodiversity, and a number of wildlife sanctuaries such 
as Jayakwadi Bird Sanctuary, in Marathwada, and 
Bhamragarh, Bor, Charpala, Chikhaladara Wildlife 
Sanctuary. There are also a number of tiger habitats 
such as Tadoba Andhari Tiger Project, Melghat Tiger 
Project, Pench Tiger Reserve located in Vidarbha 
region. 
 
As details of the exact sites of the proposed 
investments are yet to be known, and investments 
involving civil works may be located within the 
proximity of these areas OP 4.04 is triggered. The 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for 
avoidance, mitigation of impacts and preventive 
measures for negative effects on natural habitats.  
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Project financed activities will not support 
afforestation, reforestation or pasture improvement 
activities. The project will not encroach on forest land 
or change the management of forest resources. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered because investments targeted 
at increasing agricultural productivity and climate-
resilient agronomic practices may encourage the use 
of pesticides. There is therefore a need to promote the 
use of integrated pest management techniques, 
including the safe use, storage and disposal of agro-
chemicals. The ESMF will aim at providing as much 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 17 of 19  

     

information as possible on biological approaches to 
pest management. The project will prepare and 
promote an Integrated Pest Management Plan. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project is not expected to have an impact on 
physical cultural resources, as it will be implemented 
in areas where agriculture is already practiced. 
However, the project area comprises of Aurangabad 
district, which contains many historical structures and 
UNESCO world heritage sites.  
The project will ascertain through preparation, if there 
is evidence that the project location sites would 
contain features of archeological, historical or cultural 
significance.  Following which, the ESMF would include 
provisions of chance finds to be followed by 
implementing partners, on the proper management of 
physical cultural resources if discovered during project 
implementation.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

There are 2.7 million Scheduled Tribe population in 
the 15 project districts which account to about 8% of 
the total population. Further, 27 Tehsils spread across 
11 districts are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution which provides a variety of 
safeguards for the tribals. Given this, the project 
triggers the Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples.  However, the next step on 
deploying the instrument- Tribal Peoples Plan (TPP) or 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF)— needs to 
be decided. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Once the project interventions are firmed up and the 
Social Assessment Study is completed, a decision can 
be made on whether lands are required and the 
methods of scuring thereof. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project investments will 
not support construction, or rely on performance of an 
existing dam >15m height. The project will not  
support rehabilitation of existing or building any new 
irrigation schemes originating from existing dams in 
the State 
 
The project may include construction of small check 
dams. The potential adverse safety and security 
impacts will be addressed in the ESMF which will 
include adequate measures to ensure that the design, 
construction and the maintenance of the small dams 
will be done by qualified engineers.  



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 18 of 19  

     

 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
OP 7.5 is not triggered as no international waterways 
are involved. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No NA 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 05, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project has initiated efforts towards the conducting a comprehensive Environmental and Social Assessment. This is 

expected to result in: (i) Integrated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Tribal People Plan/ 
Framework, as appropriate; (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), if need be; (iv) IPM/IPNM plans.  A Terms of 
reference (TOR) for the conduction of assessments and preparation of the ESMF  has been prepared by the PMU.  
 
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. While the assessments will be 
participatory with due and extensive consultations with all the stakeholders, especially, the poor and vulnerable farming 
community. Further, the ESMF will also outline arrangements for consultations with the stakeholders and disclosures 
thereof both during preparation as well as implementation phases.   
 
 All safeguards studies shall be completed and the ESMF publicly disclosed by April 15, 2017. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Patrick Verissimo, Ranjan Samantaray 

Lead Agriculture Economist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of India 

Rishikesh Singh 

Director (MI), Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of F 

rishikesh.singh74@nic.in 
 

 



 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 19 of 19  

     

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture, Government of Maharashtra 

Vikas Chandra Rastogi 

Project Director 

rastogi.chandra@gmail.com 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Patrick Verissimo, Ranjan Samantaray 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Takeaki Sato 21-Feb-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Martien Van Nieuwkoop 27-Feb-2017 

Country Director: Hisham A. Abdo Kahin 02-Mar-2017 
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 

INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 

ADDITIONAL FINANCING 

Report No.: PIDISDSA20872 

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-April-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 1. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Ethiopia Project ID: P161373 

   Parent Project ID: P151432 

 Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P161373) 

 Parent Project Name: Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (P151432) 

 Task Team Leader(s): Qaiser M. Khan, Louise Victoria Monchuk, Yoseph Abdissa Deressa 

 Estimated Board Date: 28-Sep-2017 

 Managing Unit: GSP01 

 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 

(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)? 

No 

 Project Financing Data (in USD Million) 

 Total Project Cost: 21023.70 Total Bank Financing: 700.00 

 Financing Gap: 835.00  

     Financing Source Amount 

     Borrower 19,541.30 

     Cofinancing 560.00 

     IDA recommitted as a Credit 1,300.00 

     Total 21,401.30 

 Environmental Category: C - Not Required 

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? 

No 

 2. Project Development Objective(s) 

 

A. Original Project Development Objectives (PDO) - The PDO of the Enhancing Shared Prosperity 

through Equitable Services (ESPES) program is to improve equitable access to basic services and 

strengthen accountability systems at the decentralized level. The program is anchored around four sets 

of key results: (a) ensuring equitable access to basic services; (b) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (c) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (d) ensuring quality data access and results. 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



  

 B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF) 

 The PDO of the ESPES AF remains the same as the parent program. 

 3. Project Description 

 

ESPES supports Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program (woreda block grant system) 

which provides funding to close to one thousand woredas all over the country which are responsible for 

delivering basic services in health, education, agriculture, water and rural roads. The block grant 

program is a decentralized system of governance that supports flows of information, resources and 

accountability between different levels of government and between service providers and citizens. This 

system has been found to be effective in improving equitable access to services as indicated in the 

Systematic Country Diagnostic, the Poverty Assessment and the technical assessment undertaken as 

part of the preparation of the ESPES. Government ownership and commitment to the program also 

continues to be very strong. 

 

This proposed additional financing is sought to help finance the expenditures associated with the 

Government of Ethiopia’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Program which provides block grants to 

region and woreda levels for delivering Basic Social Services such as health care, education, agriculture 

services, rural roads, and water and sanitation. The additional financing would (a) scale up existing 

Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) DLR targets; and (b) introduce new DLIs especially in the areas 

of citizen engagement and fiduciary management. Alongside the AF, the operation is also being 

restructured into a hybrid PforR to include an investment component to provide capacity building 

support for citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards 

management systems (ESMS), improved data production and dissemination, and program management. 

Performance of the operation has been satisfactory over the last 12 months. The closing date will also 

need to be extended from May 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022 to cover the implementation of the new 

DLIs and the capacity building component. 

 

The objective of the system strengthening and capacity building Investment Project Financing (IPF) 

Component is to improve the Government’s federal, regional and woreda level administrative systems 

for implementing and monitoring the block grant program, thereby improving the efficiency and 

effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas. For instance, the safeguards 

capacity building element is relevant to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for 

implementing resettlement, compensation and grievance redress for all infrastructure projects 

implemented in their respective woredas. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level 

capacity citizen engagement, fiduciary management, environmental and social management, and data 

production and dissemination. 

 

The proposed AF includes an allocation of US$100 million for the IPF component which aims at 

complementing the PforR by providing technical assistance and capacity building for service delivery 

system performance. The IPF component is made up of 3 sub-components which are described below. 

 

 Sub-component 1: Strengthening Systems and Sectors (US$30 million): This component 
provides support to the service delivery systems at the federal, regional and Woreda levels. 

Support to sectors is closely tied to the availability of quality data to monitor sectoral outputs 

and outcomes (including monitoring ESPES DLIs). The component will finance key activities 



such as (a) strengthening sectoral MIS for Education, Health, Agriculture and WASH, (b) 

providing finance and TA to the SARA health survey
1
, and (c) costs related to undertaking 

behavioral change campaigns for improving human development outcomes in the bottom 20 

percent of Woredas. The component will also finance activities that strengthen the procurement, 

financial management, governance, and social and environmental systems at decentralized 

levels.  

 Sub-component 2: Citizens Engagement (US$30 million): This component will finance three 
key areas of CE, namely (a) Financial Transparency and Accountability (US$5 million), (b) 

Grievance Redress Mechanisms (US$5 million), and (c) Social Accountability (US$20 

million). In FTA, the activities include support to budget literacy, media campaigns, support for 

audit and procurement information disclosure, related training assessing the effectiveness of 

FTA, strengthening FTA/GRM/SA linkages; capacity building support to the EIO and support 

to grievance management GRM offices. With regard to Social Accountability, to inform the 

implementation of the social accountability activities, the government is undertaking a study to 

determine the best institutional arrangement. It would involve that the government hires a 

national consultancy firm to manage the individual social accountability implementers. The 

choice will depend on technical expertise and capacity as well as independence to undertake 

social accountability activities. Overall, the technical design of the on-the-ground 

implementation of social accountability in the ESPES program will be informed by the ongoing 

design on the ESAP II successor program provided that those design details are agreed within 

the timeline of the preparation schedule of the ESPES AF. 

 Sub-component 3: Capacity building and M&E (US$40 million): The objective of the 
support is to strengthen the capacity of the Central Statistics Agency to produce and disseminate 

timely and reliable statistics to monitor progress under the second Growth and Transformation 

Plan. Some support will also be provided to VERA to improve vital statistics and especially the 

interface with CSA. The capacity building support for CSA and VERA will focus on 1) data 

production and dissemination, and 2) organizational and soft statistical infrastructure and 

capacity building; and 3) improving the quality of vital statistics. This component will also 

support M&E, management and operational costs including (a) incremental staffing costs, (b) 

operational costs including audits and program monitoring and evaluation, and (c) costs 

incurred by the DLI verification agencies.  

 

 
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 

(if known) 

 

 

The physical setting is not relevant for safeguard analysis as the IPF component does not involve any 

capital investment or civil works and will strengthen the system by (a) enhancing citizens’ engagement, 

environmental and social risk management capacity; (b) deepening fiduciary aspects of basic service 

delivery; and (c) ensuring quality data access and results. There will be no land acquisition or restriction 

of access in this IPF component. 

The ESPES AF will be implemented throughout the country. The objective of the system strengthening 

and capacity building IPF component is to improve the government’s federal, regional and woreda level 

administrative systems for implementing and monitoring the block grant program and for improving the 

efficiency and effectiveness of the country in delivering basic services to all woredas in environmentally 

and socially sustainable manner. For instance, the safeguards local capacity building element is relevant 

to all sectors because the woredas are responsible for implementing community consultation, land 

                                            
1
 The SARA survey is not being financed by the Health PforR SDG project. 



acquisition and resettlement, including compensation enforcement and oversight of grievance redress 

mechanism, etc. for infrastructure development such as rural roads project regardless of funding 

sources. These projects will benefit greatly from enhanced local-level capacity in safeguards, especially 

in relation to social impacts and aspects, which are typically weaker than biophysical aspects, at woreda 

level.  

. 

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 

 

Tamene Tiruneh (Environment) 

Laura Campbell (Social) 

Chukwudi H. Okafor (Social) 
 

 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 No This is a capacity building project 

focusing on system strengthening, 

including safeguards. It will not have any 

negative impacts on people and 

environment 

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No  

 Forests OP/BP 4.36 No  

 Pest Management OP 4.09 No  

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

 
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 

7.50 

No  

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

. 

 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 
There will not be any large scale and significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with this project. 

It will actually enhance local capacity in safeguards, which will be beneficial not only to basic sectors 

but also to all sectors implementing projects in woredas.  

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 
The long term impacts of the project activities are positive in terms of environmental and social 

management. The safeguards capacity building at local level will contribute towards improved 



environmental and social management in project design, implementation and monitoring in both the 

public and private sectors. 

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 Not applicable 

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental and social assessment and 

management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the Establishment of Environmental 

Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 

299/2002); and the Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).  

 

As part of the Management Action Plan, in response to the PBS 3 Inspection Panel investigation, (a) the 

Government has developed Environmental and Social Management Operational Manual, and (b) a 

screening tool to manage the interface between Bank-financed projects and Commune Centers, was 

developed, and it is being rolled out. An Incremental ESSA was carried out as part of the preparation of 

the ESPES AF. It identified changes or improvement to the systems in place for environmental and 

social management at all levels, including taking stock of implementation capacity and performance at 

woreda level and the identification of any areas for improvement, based on the review of the original 

ESSA and any developments since then. This has informed the preparation of the safeguards IPF 

component with regard to local capacity building. 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 
The key stakeholders are the MoFEC, MoEFCC, basic sector ministries, BoFEDs and regional 

environmental agencies and basic sector bureaus. Consultation on the Incremental ESSA will be held, 

and it will be disclosed on the infoshop and in-country before appraisal.  

 B. Disclosure Requirements 

 
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 

respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 

Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 

 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 Not applicable 

 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 

 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World 

Bank's Infoshop? 

Yes [   ] No [  X ] NA [   ] 

 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place 

in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to 

project-affected groups and local NGOs? 

Yes [   ] No [  X ] NA [   ] 

 All Safeguard Policies 

 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 

responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures 

Yes [  X ] No [   ] NA [   ] 



related to safeguard policies? 

 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the 

project cost? 

Yes [  X ] No [   ] NA [   ] 

 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include 

the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to 

safeguard policies? 

Yes [   ] No [   ] NA [  X ] 

 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with 

the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project 

legal documents? 

Yes [   ] No [   ] NA [ X  ] 

 III. APPROVALS 

 
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Qaiser M. Khan, Louise Victoria Monchuk, Yoseph Abdissa 

Deressa 

 Approved By: 

 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg Date:  

 Practice Manager/Manager: Name: Dena Ringold Date:  

 



















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 



















































CONEPT NOTE


 

 

 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 

 

ANGOLA 
 

 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS  

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHAI DEPARTMENT 

 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P
u

b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 a
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

 
 

 
P

u
b

li
c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 a
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

 

 



 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

Currency Equivalents, Fiscal Year, Weights and Measures, Acronyms, Project Information Sheet, 

Main Milestones, Project Summary, Results-Based Logical Framework, Time frame  .……..  i-viii 

 

I.  STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE ........................................................................ 1 

1.1 Project Linkages with the Country Strategy and Objectives ............................................... 1 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement .......................................................................................... 1 

1.3 Aid Coordination ................................................................................................................. 2 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................... 3 

2.1 Project Objectives ................................................................................................................ 3 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered ................................................ 4 

2.3 Project Type ......................................................................................................................... 5 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements .......................................................................... 5 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries ............................................................................................ 7 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Formulation, Design and  Implementation ................... 8 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learnt Reflected in the Project Design .................... 8 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators ................................................................................................ 9 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY ..................................................................................................... 10 

3.1 Economic and financial performance ................................................................................ 10 

3.2 Environment and Social Impact......................................................................................... 11 

IV PROJECT Implementation .................................................................................................... 13 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................................... 13 

4.2 Monitoring ......................................................................................................................... 17 

4.3 Governance ........................................................................................................................ 18 

4.4 Sustainability ..................................................................................................................... 18 

4.5 Risk Management .............................................................................................................. 18 

4.6 Knowledge Building .......................................................................................................... 19 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY ................................................................... 19 

5.1 Legal Instruments .............................................................................................................. 19 

5.2 Conditions for the Bank’s Intervention ............................................................................. 19 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies ......................................................................................... 20 

VI. RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................................................................... 20 

ANNEXES 

 Annex I : Country Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators 

Annex II : Organizational Structure for Project Implementation 

Annex III : Map of Project Areas 

Annex IV : Bank Portfolio in the Country 

Annex V : Macroeconomic Indicators 

Annex VI : Procurement Arrangement 

Annex VII : Waiver Request for Financing 82.1% of the Project Cost by an AfDB loan



 

i 

 

 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
June 2017 

 

Currency Unit =  Kwanza (AOA) 

1 UA  = AOA229.68 

1 UA  = USD1.38 

1 UA  = EUR1.23 

1 USD = AOA165.92 

 

FISCAL YEAR 

 
1 January - 31 December 

 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

 

        1 metric ton  =  2,204 pounds  

        1 kilogram (kg)  =  2.200 pounds  

        1 meter (m) =  3.28 feet  

        1 kilometer (km) =  0.62 mile  

       1 hectare (ha) =  2.471 acres 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



ii 

 

LIST OF ACRONYMS 

 

AfDB  African Development Bank 

ATA  Agricultural Transformation Agenda  

CAADP  Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program 

COAO  Angola Country Office  

CPAVCDP Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

CPIP  Country Portfolio Improvement Plan 

CPIA  Country Performance and Institutional Assessment 

CPPR  Country Portfolio Performance Review 

ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

ESMF  Environmental and Social Management Framework 

ESMPS Environmental and Social Management Plans 

FDI  Foreign Direct Investment 

FOs  Farmers’ Organizations 

GoA  Government of Angola 

GDP  Gross Domestic Product   

IAD  Institute for Agrarian Development 

ICBPR  Institutional Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction  

IFAD  International Fund for Agriculture Development 

IITA  International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 

IPM  Integrated Pest Management 

IVS  Vet Services Institute 

ISFM  Integrated Soil Fertility Management 

MDGs  Millennium Development Goals 

MINAGRI  Ministry of Agriculture   

MOSSAP  Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Projects  

mt  metric ton 

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation 

NAPA  National Adaptation Program for Action 

NARES  National Agricultural Research and Extension System 

NDP  National Development Plan 

PDMPSA National Medium Term Development Plan for Agricultural Sector 

PIU  Project Implementation Unit 

PPP  Public-Private Partnership 

PSC  Project Steering Committee 

RBLF  Results-Based Logical Framework 

RDGS Southern Africa Regional Development and Business Delivery Office 

SDGs          Sustainable Development Goals 

SMEs  Small and Medium Enterprises 

TYS  Ten Year Strategy 

UN  United Nations  

UNDP  United Nations Development Program  

WB  World Bank 



iii 

 

PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

Client information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

BORROWER : Government of Angola 

EXECUTING AGENCY :  Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI)  

 

Source 

Amount (million)  

Instrument UA USD 

African Development Bank  73.77 101.07 Loan 

Government 14.54 19.91 Counterpart contribution 

Beneficiaries 1.58 2.17 In-kind contribution 

Total Project Cost 89.89 123.15  

 

 

AfDB’s key financing information 

 

 
Loan Currency  USD 

Loan Type   Fully Flexible Loan  

Tenor  25 years 

Grace period  8 years 

Average Loan Maturity  16.75 years 

Repayments  (34 consecutive semi-annual payments after grace period) 

Interest Rate  Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium if applicable 

Base Rate  Floating Base Rate (6-month USD LIBOR reset each 1st 

February and 1st August). A free option to fix the Base Rate 

is available. 

Funding Cost Margin  The Bank funding cost margin  as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 1st 

February and 1st August 

Lending Margin  80 basis points (0.8%) per annum 

Maturity Premium  20 basis points (0.2%) per annum 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount payable at latest at signature of the 

loan agreement 

Commitment fees  0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees start 

accruing 60 days after signature of the loan agreement and 

are payable on Payment dates 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate* 

 In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base Rate, 

the borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating or refix it 

on part or full disbursed amount. Transaction fees are 

payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate* 

 The borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the Base 

Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to convert loan 

currency 

 The borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to another 

approved lending currency of the Bank. Transaction fees are 

payable. 
* Conversion options and transaction fees are subject to the Bank Conversion Guidelines available: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

 

 

 

 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


iv 

 

 

Main milestones 

 

Submission of Cabinda Province Study Report November 2016 

Government Request for Bank Support December 2016 

Concept Note Approval May 2017 

Appraisal Mission June 2017 

Board Approval December, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion December 2021 

Last Disbursement March, 2022 

 



v 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP) will provide improved production, produce conservation, storage, processing and 

marketing infrastructure necessary for selected commodity value chains: food crops (cassava, 

banana, sweet potato, peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland 

fisheries; small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). The Project will rehabilitate 

water conveyance structures necessary for irrigation; train value chain actors in technical and 

managerial skills; introduce mechanization for land preparation; support adaptive research; and 

improve agricultural extension services. The Project will also rehabilitate or construct rural 

infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-processing centers, 

market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water facilities in the 

communities and improve rural energy access. The Project will enhance access to improved 

productive resources (improved seed varieties, fish fingerlings, fertilizers, crop protection 

chemicals) through the establishment of a credit facility to be externally administered by World 

Vision International (WVI). The project will be implemented over a four-year period at a total cost 

of USD123.15 million. 

 

Needs Assessment: Angola has made remarkable progress in socio-economic and infrastructure 

development since the end of the 27-year-long civil war in 2002, but more still needs to be done to 

lift majority of its population out of poverty. The sharp and long-lasting decline in oil prices has 

derailed Angola’s economic performance. GDP growth slowed to 0.1% in 2016 down from 4.8% in 

2014. This led to a significant reduction of the nominal GDP to about USD96.2 billion in 2016 from 

USD126.8 billion in 2014. The Government of Angola (GoA) seems increasingly aware of these 

realities and has taken steps to mitigate the impact of the oil price shock on the economy. The 

Government therefore requested assistance from the Bank to strengthen investments in agricultural 

transformation through commodity value chains in order to diversify exports, reduce imports 

through value chains development, increase national revenue sources and reduce dependence on oil.  
 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed CPAVCD Project fits in with the 

two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola in the Country Strategy Paper (CSP, 

2017-2021) as follows: (i) inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to 

sustainable infrastructure development, in particular, in energy and transport. The Bank Group is 
ideally suited to support Angola through this Project because: (i) the Bank Group has gained useful 

experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in its RMCs and in particular, Angola through 

implementation of similar projects; and (ii) the project is in concordance with the Bank’s High-5 

Priorities with its numerous flagship initiatives that will be brought to bear in this project. The Bank’s 
partnership with other technical and development agencies such as the Consultative Group of 

International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system, International Fund for Agricultural Development 

(IFAD), World Bank (WB) and others is an asset that the Bank can draw upon. 
 

Knowledge Management: The Project shall develop a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System based 

on Geographic Information System and computer assisted technology for data collection, compilation 

and presentation. The M&E Specialist will coordinate all results and measurement activities, ensure the 

quality control and provide the necessary capacity building. In using the performance indicators and 

targets specified in the results-based framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing monitoring 

and planning indicators, they will be sex and age disaggregated. They will be captured using analysis of 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and field 

exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution by 

showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). 



 

vi 

 

 

ANGOLA 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CPAVCDP)  

LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and project name: ANGOLA : Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

Purpose of the project:  Contribute to food and nutritional security, employment generation, and shared wealth creation along the commodity value chains 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2021) 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 1. Jobs and wealth are generated 

along the value chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is 

enhanced  

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.  Increased domestic food  supply for key commodities 

(cassava, sweet potato, beans, coffee, cocoa, oil palm meat 

and fish) 

3. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting 

1. na  

2. 670,000 mt  

 

 

3. 37% 

1. 27,000 

2. 1.3 million mt. 

 

 

3. 80% reduction 

Min of Finance reports 

National Bureau of 

Statistics (NBS) reports 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 

 

2. Increased Crop, fisheries  and 

livestock Production 

1. Number and percentage of women and men with increased 

incomes, (young men and women) 

2.1 Crops production (tons)  

2.2 Livestock production (tons) 

2.3  Fisheries production (tons) 

 

1. USD500 

2.1 cassava 

(491,359 mt  p.a); 

banana (121,000 

mt p.a); potato 

(163,614 mt  p.a); 

beans (6,121 mt  

p.a); coffee (405 

mt  p.a); cocoa 

(na); oil palm 

(na);  

2.2 Meat (na) 

2.3 Fish (na) 

1. USD3,500/hh pa 

2.1 Cassava (900,000 mt p.a); 

banana (210,000 mt p.a);  potato 

(300,000 mt ton p.a); beans (12,000 

mt  p.a); coffee (2,200 mt p.a); 

cocoa (1,900 mt  p.a); palm oil 

(8,400 mt  p.a);  

 

 

 

 

2.2 Meat (25,000 ton)  

2.3 Fish (15,000 ton) 

Min of Finance reports 

NBS reports 

Household surveys 

Risk 1: Counterpart funding not 

readily made in time 

 

Mitigation 1: Government 

contribution will be limited to local 

costs related to maintenance of 

office buildings and remuneration 

of counterpart staff  

 

OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Commodity Value Chain 

Development 

1.1 Capacity of producers on 

improved technical and 

managerial skills built 

1.2  Improved access to  financial 

services (credit) 

 

1.3  Farm extension services provided 

 

 

1.4  Increased production of crops 

 

 

1.5  Increased production of 

livestock/fish 

1.6  Increased employment in crop 

value chains 

 

 

1.1  No. farmer associations trained in technical and 

managerial skills, of which men and women, young men and 

women 

1.2.1  % Farmer Organizations and SMEs obtaining loans  

1.2.2 Number of women, men, young men and women getting 

access to credit 

1.3.1 No.  private sector agencies providing extension services  

1.3.2 % farmers provided with farm extension services, of 

which are women and youth 

1.4.1   Area under crop production 

1.4.2  Crop Yields 

1.4.3  No. of Seedlings multiplied/selected 

1.5.1   Quantity of meat/fish production 

1.5.2 Number of  fish fingerlings 

 

1.6  Number of farmers and processors 

 

 

 

1.1  4 

 

 

1.2.1  5 

1.2.2 23 

 

1.3.1  2 

1.3.2  10 

 

1.4.1 18,800 

1.4.2 2t//ha 

1.4.3  0 

1.5.1  n.a 

1.5.2 NA 

 

1.6   51,000 

 

 

 

1.1  60 

 

 

1.2.1 120 

1.2.2 8,000 

 

1.3.1  25 

1.3.2   80 

 

1.4.1 39,177 

1.4.2  4 mt/ ha 

1.4.3 1.2 million 

1.5.1 25,000mt/15,000 mt 

1.5.2   15 million 

 

1.6  95,000 

 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports 

 



vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

2.  Infrastructure Development 
2.1  Roads linking farms to markets 

rehabilitated 

2.2  Extension of electricity 

 

2.3  Processing facilities functional, 

well-equipped demonstration and 

technology centers  

2.4  Storage facilities rehabilitated 

2.6  Rehabilitated irrigation canals 

2.7  Construction of landing sites 

2.8  Construction of abattoir 

2.9  Construction of quarantine parks 

2.10 Community development 

facilities improved  

 

2.1  Kilometers of all-weather feeder roads rehabilitated 

 

2.2.1 Km of power extension 

2.2.2 % of households with an electricity connection 

2.3  No. of demonstration & technology centers  

 

 

2.4  No. of warehouses constructed  

2.6  Area of land under irrigation (Ha)  

2.7  No. of landing sites constructed 

2.8  No. of abattoir constructed 

2.9  No. of parks constructed 

2.10.1 No. of boreholes constructed 

2.10.2  No. of clinics rehabilitated & equipped 

2.10.3  No. of schools/crèches rehabilitated & equipped  

2.10.4 % increase in numbers of boys’ and girls’ school 

enrolment rates,  

 

2.1   0 

 

2.2.1  0 

2.2.2 na 

2.3   2 

 

 

2.4  4 

2.6   108.1 

2.7   0 

2.8   0 

2.9   0 

2.10.1  0 

2.10.2  0 

2.10.3  25 

2.10.4  46 

 

2.1   191 

 

2.2.1   54 

2.2.2   80 

2.3     10 

 

 

2.4   14 

2.6  750 

2.7  2 

2.8. 1 

2.9  2 

2.10.1 16 

2.10.2  4 

2.10.3  29 

2.10.4  65 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports  

Risk 2: Facilities are not well 

maintained, under utilized  

 

Mitigation 2: Proper  asset usage 

mechanism developed 

3.  Program Management/ 

Monitoring & Evaluation 

3.1  Program work plan and 

operations are implemented 

3.2  Program activities monitored and 

information produced regularly 

3.3 Public sector support 

 

 

3.1  Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 

 

3.2 .1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 

3.2.2  No. of audit reports produced annually 

3.3     No. of staff trained 

 

 

3.1    0 

 

3.2.1 0 

3.2.2 0 

3.3 0 

 

 

3.1   95% 

 

3.2.1 4 

3.2.2 1 

3.3 55 

Program agreements, 

funding documents 

Supervision mission 

Financial management 

reports M&E reports 

 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS                                                                                                                              SOURCES OF FINANCE  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Commodity Value Chain Development 

improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); training in good agricultural practices; mechanization along the value chains; 

support to training in post-harvest technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and business management 

training; development of market information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; environmental protection management for 

productivity enhancement, processing, marketing and community infrastructure. 

 

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 

Extension of electrical power grid; rehabilitation of feeder roads; rehabilitation of community markets and storage facilities; installation of water boreholes for potable and sanitation 

systems; construction of irrigation water distribution schemes; development of irrigated land; construction of residences to support extension advisory services; construction of structure to 

mitigate coastal erosion; construction of health centers and primary schools; construction of a fisheries training facility; construction of piers and produce preservation warehouses; 

construction of an abattoir; construction of a tissue culture laboratory at Ste Vicente Research Centre; and livestock quarantine facilities.. 

 

Component 3: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions. 

 

 
Project Cost (USD million):   123.15 

  AfDB Loan                     :     101.07 
     

  Other sources 

   Government of Angola  :  19.91 
   Beneficiaries                  :    2.17 

 

Component 1                     :  21.46 
Component 2                     :  90.57 

Component 3                     :  11.12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.7  Establishment of database for 

value chain actors 

1.7. % of value chain actors registered 

 

1.7  0 

 

1.7   95 

 



viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIMEFRAME 
 

 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                   

Board approval                   

Signing of Loan Agreement                   

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement for loan                   

Project launch                   

Technical coordination meetings                   

Project work plans and budgets                     

Technical Design Review/Baseline data update                   

Prepare bid documents and contract awards for works, goods and services                   

Contracts execution for works, goods and services                   

Quarterly reports submission                   

Annual reports submission                   

Bank’s supervision missions                   

Financial audit                   

Mid-term review                   

Impact assessment and technical audit                    

Project completion reporting                    

 

 

 

 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF MANAGEMENT FOR A 

PROPOSED AfDB LOAN OF USD101.07 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC 

OF ANGOLA FOR THE FINANCING OF THE CABINDA PROVINCE 

AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 

(CPAVCDP) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendation for an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to finance the Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1 Project Linkages with the Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1 Angola’s Long Term Plan, dubbed “Vision 2025” articulates the country’s conceptual 

view to achieve sustainable development and seeks to “extricate the country from poverty by 

promoting economic growth, macroeconomic stability and employment”. Vision 2025 was 

designed to be implemented in a period of 25 years, in three stages, with concrete objectives and 

targets and which may be adapted: 2000-2005 (peace, national reconstruction and economic 

growth startup); 2005-2015 (consolidation of national reconstruction, modernization and 

development); and 2015-2025 (sustainability and growth). The National Development Plan 

(NDP) 2013-2017 underscored aspects of the “Vision 2025” by stressing the need to: (i) diversify 

the economy; (ii) invest in infrastructure (in particular, transport, energy and water and 

sanitation); (iii) enhance better management of natural resources; and (iv) expand employment 

opportunities to reduce poverty. The new NDP 2018-2022 that is under preparation is only due 

for approval after the general elections in August 2017. 

 

1.1.2 The recent approved CSP 2017-2021 adopts a broader context of policy continuity by 

anchoring on the longer Vision 2025 of the country. It focuses on two complementary pillars: (i) 

inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable 

infrastructure development, in particular energy and transport. The project is aligned to the 

Bank’s Feed Africa – Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025; the Bank 

Group Industrialization Strategy for Africa 2016-2025; the Bank’s Private Sector Development 

Strategy 2013-2017; the Bank Group Strategy for the New Deal on Energy for Africa 2016-

2025; the Bank Group Strategy for Jobs for Youth in Africa 2016-2025; and the Bank Group 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018. Lastly, the CSP is fully aligned to the achievement of Angola’s 

SDGs, in particular, the  SDG 1 (“No poverty”), SDG 2 (“No Hunger”), SDG 5 (“Gender 

equality”), SDG 6 (“Clean water and sanitation”), SDG 7 (“Clean energy”), SDG 8 (“Good jobs 

and economic growth”), SDG 9 (“Innovation and infrastructure”), SDG 10 (“Reduced 

inequalities”), and SDG 13 (“Protect the planet”).  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

 

1.2.1 In March 2015, a Middle Income Country (MIC) Technical Assistance grant of 

UA420,045 was approved for the Government of Angola to undertake a Study as part of a project 

cycle pre-investment activity. It is noteworthy that the Bank Group had not carried out an 

agriculture sector review in Angola since the Bank Group commenced operations there in 1980. 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is based 

upon the technical documents produced by the Study.  

 



2 

 

1.2.2 The project fits in with the two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola 

in the just approved CSP 2017-2021. The Bank’s strategy focuses on: (i) inclusive growth 

through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable infrastructure development, 

in particular, in energy and transport. The agricultural transformation interventions under the 

pillar I are aligned with the Bank’s High 5s priorities of Feed Africa and Industrialize Africa, 

while the infrastructure development interventions under pillar II will help achieve the following 

High 5s: Light-up and power Africa, Integrate Africa and Improve quality of life of Africans. It 

also fulfils the requirement of the Ten-Year Strategy (TYS, 2013-2022) as it pertains to inclusive 

growth objective through the involvement of youth, women and skills development. It is also in 

alignment with Pillar 2 (improving rural infrastructure and trade-related capacities for market 

access) and Pillar 3 (increasing food supply and reducing hunger and malnutrition) of the 

Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP). 

 

1.3 Aid Coordination 

 

Apart from the Bank Group, development partners in the agriculture sector include the World 

Bank and the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD). The World Bank is 

supporting the Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSSAP) with the 

amount of USD30 million and jointly financed by IFAD with USD8.2 million and a grant of 

USD4 million from the Government of Japan. The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) has a 

number of agricultural development initiatives with the aim of promoting the sector by providing 

an enabling environment for farmers and processors. One of the strategies is Private-Public-

Partnerships (PPP) in agricultural production. In pursuit of this, US-owned Chiquita Brands 

International recently announced plans to begin growing banana in the southern province of 

Benguela; while Brazilian-owned Odebrecht Africa Fund is investing in sugar and ethanol 

production in Malanje Province. The American company "Ellada Investiments Pty Ltd" is trying 

to invest in the production of coffee in northern Uige province; and China Development Bank is 

financing rice production in Kuando-Kubango province. Other foreign owned companies are 

expected to invest in coffee, sugar, cassava and palm oil production. Tables 1.1a and 1.1b provide 

the details of development partners’ activities in the various sectors.  

 

Table 1.1a: Official Development Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 

0,66

1,28

3,70

5,15

12,28

40,35

251,61

268,61

876,05
1 252,89

0 200 400 600 800 1 000 1 200

France

United Kingdom

Norway

Netherlands

UNDP

USAID

European Union

Japan

World Bank

AfDB

Total ODA volume (2015) - approved and ongoing projects  (Million USD)



3 

 

Table 1.1b: Sectors of Donor Intervention 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1 Project Objectives 

 
Development objective  

 

2.1.1 To contribute to increased food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

 Specific project objectives 

 

2.1.2 To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and incomes through increased 

agricultural output and value addition. The Project will also contribute to enhance income of 

small and medium enterprises engaged in input supply, production, processing, storage and 

marketing of selected commodities on a sustainable basis.  

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The proposed CPAVCD Project is composed of three components: (i) Commodity Value 

Chains Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Management and 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project focuses on the provision of the enabling environment 

for agricultural development and value addition of staple crops (cassava, banana, sweet potato, 

peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland fisheries; poultry 

and small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). It will rehabilitate or construct rural 

and resilient infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-

processing centers, market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water 

facilities in the communities and improve rural energy access. A summary of the activities is in 

Table 2.1.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Capacity Building & 
Institutional 

Development; 8; 10,38

Agriculture , 7, 

Higher Education and 
Vocational Training, 5, 

83,36

Power; 5; 1 244,93

Environment ; 11; 
28,50

Fisheries; 3; 
29,97

Multi-sector and 
Governance, 5, 554,35

Health ; 8; 148,79Other Infrastructure; 
6; 29,15

Justice; 4; 
Multinational projects; 3; 

9,71

Social, 2, 
68,53

Trade & Regional 
Integration; 2; 13,77

Water & Sanitation ; 
5; 326,11

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900

1 000
1 100
1 200
1 300
1 400
1 500

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14

O
D

A
 v

o
lu

m
e

s 
(M

ill
io

n
 U

S
D

)

X- axis: Number of projects 
Note: Bubble size - represents ODA volumes (Million USD)

ODA Sectoral Distribution, Approved and Ongoing projects (2015)



4 

 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 

Components 

Total Cost 

(USD 

million) 

Description 

Component 1  

Commodity Value 

Chains Development 

 

21.46 

 (17.4 %) 

Provision of improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and 

livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); 

training in good agricultural practices; promotion of 

mechanization along the value chains by equipment and 

machinery leasing with two tractors/associated implements each 

in the four Municipalities; support to training in post-harvest 

technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value 

chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and 

business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of 14 processing equipment for 

commodity value addition and marketing; environmental 

protection management for productivity enhancement, 

processing, marketing and community infrastructure; provision 

of two refrigerating units for vegetables in Cabinda 

Municipality; and establishment of the credit fund.   

Component 2 

Infrastructure 

Development 

90.57 

(73.5 %) 

Extension of electrical power grid (54 kms); rehabilitation of 

feeder roads (191 kms); rehabilitation of four community 

markets and storage facilities; installation of 16 water boreholes 

for potable and sanitation systems; rehabilitation of 1,500 km of 

irrigation water distribution schemes; development of 750 ha of 

irrigated land; construction of nine residences to support 

extension advisory services; construction of structure to mitigate 

coastal erosion at Landana; construction of one health center and 

one primary school in each of the four Municipalities; 

construction of a fisheries training facility at Tanda-Zinze 

(Cabinda Municipality); construction of two piers and produce 

preservation warehouses at Tungu and Chicaca in Cacongo 

Municipality; reconstruction of the landing pier at Landana in 

Cabinda  Municipality;  construction of an abattoir in Cabinda 

Municipality; construction of two animal quarantine parks in 

Cabinda Municipality; construction of a tissue culture laboratory 

at Ste Vicente Agriculture Research Centre 

Component 3:  

Project Management 

/Monitoring and 

Evaluation  

11.12 

(9%) 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, 

management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; 

development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered 

 

The technical solutions retained are based on criteria that help ensure Project success and 

sustainability. Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their weaknesses in 

generating the expected impact on a sustainable basis (Table 2.2). 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



5 

 

 

Table 2.2: Technical Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

Alternative Solution Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

1. Instrument: Project vs. sector 

budget support  

Under sector budget support, 

resources are disbursed in tranches 

based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector fiduciary 

environment was not conclusive and 

had high level of uncertainty 

2. Build in credit administration 

into the project  

Create a unit within the Provincial 

Department of Agriculture to 

administer credit to beneficiaries 

No experience exists within the 

Government institutions to administer 

credit on a sustainable basis 

3. Matching grant for acquisition 

of production inputs and 

machinery 

Beneficiaries are supported with 

matching grants to partially defray 

the cost of acquiring the requisite 

inputs and machinery for 

production / processing activities. 

The mechanism has often not worked 

effectively if beneficiaries are 

expected to provide surety to access 

the credit from participating financial 

institutions. Stringent collateral 

requirements make it challenging to 

take off. 

 
2.3 Project Type 
 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is an 

investment project financed by an AfDB loan.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 

Project costs 
 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at USD123.15 million, net of taxes, and based 

on 2017 prices, comprising of USD66.08 million (54%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

USD57.07 million (46%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively. The summary of 

estimated costs by component, expenditure category, sources of financing as well as an 

expenditure schedule are presented in the tables below. Detailed project cost tables are presented 

in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD ‘000) 

 

Components 
Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total  

Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 9,265.58 10,605.13 19,870.71 53 

2. Infrastructure Development 35,365.08 45,533.41 80,898.49 56 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 7,230.91 3,501.44 10,732.35 33 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.98 111,501.55 53 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.75 57 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 

 

2.4.2 The project cost of USD123.15 million will be financed by: (i) an AfDB loan of 

USD101.07 million (82.1% of project costs) covering all major activities including review of 

infrastructure designs and a credit facility; (ii) the Government of Angola: USD19.91 million 

(16.2% of project costs) mainly through the extension of electricity lines to project areas, 

provision of office space, salaries for government staff, road maintenance and services such as 

electricity, water and telecommunication for the Project office. Government will also, in addition 



6 

 

to the contributions, bear the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and duty exemptions of all 

procurements; and (iii) beneficiaries: USD2.17 (1.7% of project costs) in-kind contribution 

during land preparation activities and payments for services in maintenance of agro-processing 

facilities. The summary of project costs are presented in the tables below. 

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Category of Expenditure (USD ‘000) 
 

Categories of Expenditure 

 

 

Local 

Cost 

 

Foreign 

Cost 
Total Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

%  

Total  

Costs 

 I. Investment Costs       
   A. Works 34,426.07 44,078.16 78,504.23 56 70 

   B. Goods 1,320.34 3,932.21 5,252.55 75 5 

   C. Services 7,270.44 8,812.12 16,082.56 55 14 

   D. Miscellaneous 2,750.00 2,250.00 5,000.00 45 4 

Total Investment Costs 45,766.85 59,072.49 104,839.34 56 94 

II. Recurrent Costs      
   A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 624.00 336.00 960.00 35 1 

   B. Operation & Maintenance 4,045.40 75.60 4,121.00 2 4 

   C. General Operating Costs 1,425.32 155.88 1,581.20 10 1 

Total Recurrent Costs 6,094.72 567.48 6,662.20 9 6 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.97 111,501.54 53 100 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.76 57 8 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 3 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 110 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (USD ’000) 
 

 

Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 3,650.36 11,321.45 4,086.91 2,398.89 21,457.61 

2. Infrastructure Development 2,352.79 39,757.04 34,991.95 13,472.07 90,573.85 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 2,904.47 3,212.38 3,060.48 1,941.79 11,119.11 

Total Project Costs 8,907.62 54,290.87 42,139.34 17,812.75 123,150.58 

 

Table 2.6: Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (USD ’000) 
 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

I. Investment Costs      

 A. Works      

  Construction & Rehabilitation 20,040.68 - 2,092.58 22,133.25 18.0 

  Roads 54,232.33 8,265.03 - 62,497.36 50.7 

  Electricity extension - 4,947.63 - 4,947.63 4.0 

 Subtotal Works 74,273.01 13,212.66 2,092.58 89,578.24 72.7 

 B. Goods      

  1. Vehicles      

   Vehicles 479.61 - - 479.61 0.4 

  2. Equipment & Materials      

   Equipment 4,595.76 - - 4,595.76 3.7 

   Furniture 271.14 - - 271.14 0.2 

 Subtotal Goods 5,346.51 - - 5,346.51 4.3 

 C. Services      



7 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

  

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars,  2,003.50 - - 2,003.50 1.6 

  Technical Assistance & Consultancies 7,498.98 - - 7,498.98 6.1 

  Contractual Services 5,207.65 1,328.40 - 6,536.05 5.3 

  Audit 300.00 - - 300.00 0.2 

 Subtotal Services 15,010.14 1,328.40 - 16,338.54 13.3 

 D. Miscellaneous      

  Credit facility 5,000.00 - - 5,000.00 4.1 

Total Investment Costs 99,629.65 14,541.06 2,092.58 116,263.29 94.4 

      

II. Recurrent Costs      

 A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 979.20 - - 979.20 0.8 

 B. Operation & Maintenance      

  Vehicles 108.00 - - 108.00 0.1 

  Infrastructure - 4,144.57 48.00 4,192.57 3.4 

 Subtotal 108.00 4,144.57 48.00 4,300.57 3.5 

 C. General Operating Costs 348.81 1,228.71 30.00 1,607.52 1.3 

Total Recurrent Costs 1,436.01 5,373.28 78.00 6,887.29 5.6 

Total Project Costs 101,065.66 19,914.34 2,170.58 123,150.58 100.0 

 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (USD ‘000) 

 

Sources 
Foreign 

Cost 
Local Cost Total Costs 

% 

Total 

Cost 

 AfDB Loan 66,081.89 34,983.77 101,065.66 82.1 

 Government of Angola - 19,914.34 19,914.34 16.2 

 Beneficiaries - 2,170.58 2,170.58 1.7 

Total Project Costs 66,081.89 57,068.69 123,150.58 100.0 

 

2.4.3 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The AfDB loan of USD101.07 million will 

finance 100% of Goods; 82.91% of Works; 91.35% of Services; 100% of the credit fund; and 

29.01% of recurrent costs. The loan will finance 100% of foreign costs and 60.85% of local 

costs. Despite contributing 16.2% of total costs, the Government of Angola does not have the 

capacity to finance the requisite 50% of total project costs as a result of the current economic 

hardship and fiscal deficit arising from the prolonged decline in oil prices. Consequently, local 

costs have been factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.  

A waiver request for financing 82.1% of the project cost through an AfDB loan is presented in 

Annex VII. 

 
2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries 

 

The CPAVCD Project will be implemented in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province 

namely: Belize, Buco Zau, Cacongo and Cabinda with a combined human population of 688,285. 

The direct beneficiaries are the 51,000 economically active smallholders living in the rural areas 

in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province who are already or being encouraged to participate 

in agriculture. The indirect beneficiaries include existing 15 small, medium and large-scale 

entrepreneurs and business associations who provide services to the producers and processors. 

This number is expected to increase significantly when other economically active value chain 

entrepreneurs get involved in the Project. Commodity processors, marketers, agro-dealers in the 



8 

 

province will be engaged. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop 

and animal production, processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. At least 50% of 

beneficiaries (women) will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits.  

 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Formulation, Design and Implementation 
 

During the study stages, cross-sectional consultations were held by the consultants in the four 

municipalities. A general workshop was held on 25 August 2016 in Cabinda city where all 

stakeholders were present. The general outline of the proposed project was presented and 

deliberated upon. The general workshop incorporated both plenary and working group sessions 

that were designed along thematic areas critical for the successful and logical implementation of 

the project. Comments and suggestions were later incorporated in the final documents by the 

consultants. The workshops established the desirability for interventions using the value chain 

approach. The key outcome of the consultation process was a consensus on the Project objective 

and strategy as well as the implementation arrangement. These were further validated during the 

appraisal mission of June 2017 with representatives from key Government agencies such as: IDA 

(Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services Institute); IIV (Veterinary 

Research Institute); IDF (Forestry Development Institute); the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

and farmer cooperative heads in each of the four Municipalities. The consultation process was 

complemented at final briefing sessions with the Director-Generals of the departments, Secretary 

of State for Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture, as well as with development partners 

such as the World Bank and FAO. The participatory approach adopted during the formulation 

will be continued during its implementation. The implementation arrangement will therefore 

include representatives of key stakeholders such as the existing farmer groups and value chain 

actors in the Project Steering Committee to ensure that their interests are taken into consideration 

at all times.  

 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learnt Reflected in the Project Design 

 

2.7.1 The Bank Group currently has two on-going projects in the agriculture sector as follows: 

(i) Angola Fisheries Sector Support Project (UA20.00 million); and (ii) Environment Sector 

Support Program (UA0.42 million). Though these initiatives offer great potential for agricultural 

and rural development by improving productivity and ensuring sustainable use of natural 

resources, actual implementation has been bogged by institutional and project staffing 

challenges. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance in Angola is deemed unsatisfactory with 

an average score of 2.3 out of 4. The average age of the portfolio is 3.8 years with two projects 

of more than five years foreseen to be completed by the end of 2017. Details are in Annex B1 of 

the Technical Annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The sole agriculture project financed by Bank Group to date was the Bom Jesus-Calenga 

Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (UA17.2 million ADF grant), which ended in 

November 2016. The Project Completion Report indicated that the project met most of its targets 

for rural infrastructural development and economic diversification, but it took nearly twice as 

much time to complete the construction and rehabilitation works. The Bank Group has gained 

useful experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in the country. Key lessons that 

have been learned include: (i) institutional environment under which the project operates needs 

to be optimum so as to avoid unnecessary delays to project implementation; (ii) retention of 

qualified staff is key to core management functions, to ensure timely delivery of outputs, and 

effectively achieve the development goals. It is thus envisaged that the Cabinda Province 

Agriculture Value Chains Development (CPAVCD) Project will have a specific activities on 

institutional development to bring a major transformation of the agriculture sector in Cabinda 

Province. There is no Project Completion backlog in the country. 



9 

 

 

2.7.3 The Table below summarizes key lessons learnt from closed and on-going agriculture 

sector interventions in the country, and indicates how they have informed the design of 

CPAVCD Project. 

 

Table 2.8: Consideration of Lessons Learnt in Project Design 
 

Lessons learnt  Actions incorporated into the design of CPAVCD 

Project 

The need to ensure a 

geographical focus and that 

resources are not thinly spread 

 

The Bank has adopted a cluster model where production 

and processing are in a closely-knit geographical area as 

opposed to sites in various communes. This would allow 

for optimal use of installed infrastructure and ease of 

technical assistance and supervision activities 

The need for participatory and 

socially inclusive formulation 

and implementation of 

development interventions  

The organization of three workshops that attracted all 

stakeholders and their potential involvement in 

implementing the Project would ensure ownership and 

sustainability after project investment period 

The need for decentralization 

of implementation to the 

Province where the project is 

located using existing organs  

The implementation arrangement of CPAVCD Project is 

located in Cabinda where the actual day-to-day actions are 

taking place. The recruitment of a dedicated PIU will 

ensure efficiency in delivery 

The need to ensure high state 

of readiness for project start up 

and implementation.  

 

The various technical assessments carried out during the 

Study provided the technical, engineering, environmental 

as well as procurement documents that will ensure that 

project will be implemented in a shorter period (four years 

instead the default five).   

 
2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

 

2.8.1  The key performance indicators for monitoring progress in achieving the Project 

objectives are in the results based logical framework (RBLF). These indicators include impacts, 

outcomes and outputs that will be further refined at Project start-up when more information/data 

would be available through revised assessments. Key impact indicators include level of wealth 

created along the value chains (farmers, processors, women, market operators, etc); level of food 

and nutrition security achieved; and number of jobs created. The key outcome indicator is the 

additional income earned by value chain actors.  

 

2.8.2  Outputs indicators on infrastructure development include number of climate resilient 

water control structures rehabilitated; number of wash bore/tube wells constructed, hectares of 

land with supplementary irrigation facilities; increased crop yield and hectares of land put to 

production of the commodities; number of small holders and percentage of them using good 

agronomic practices; percentage of producers trained in technical and managerial skills; and 

percentage of farmers provided with farm advisory services. Other output key indicators for 

processing, market and community development include kilometers of feeder roads 

rehabilitated; number of community markets, storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated; and 

number of social facilities rehabilitated and equipped (schools, clinics, potable water for drinking 

and processing).   

 

2.8.3 Key output indicators for the commodity value chain development include number of 

operational storage facilities and collection centers; percentage of actors trained in post-harvest 



10 

 

technologies, modern food processing, group dynamics and leadership; percentage of farmers’ 

organizations and SMEs undertaking collective marketing and purchasing. Other output 

indicators include market share of local food products vis à vis imported ones; and percentage 

of beneficiaries obtaining credit and paying back on time. Key output indicators for Project 

management include the rate of implementation of the annual work plan, number of supervision 

missions per year and number of technical and financial reports per year, rate of disbursement, 

and timeliness of reports. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  

 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of 2016 market prices. The objective of the financial analysis of the project activities is to: 

(i) assess the commercial viability of the proposed agricultural, livestock and value addition 

enterprises to be funded under the project; and (ii) to provide a basis for the economic analysis 

of the project. The analysis focuses on crops, livestock and aquaculture production modules and 

various agro-processing enterprises. These analyses were carried-out with financial and 

economic costs generated using Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in 

Annex B7 and further elaborated in Annex B7 in Volume II of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.2 The CPAVCD Project will contribute to the improvement of socio economic indicators 

especially on reduction of poverty and malnutrition, maternal and child health, reduced child 

literacy, improved schooling rate of children especially girls due to improved communication 

through rehabilitated roads, provision of schools and community health centers. 

 

       Table 3.1: Key economic and financial figures* 

 

FIRR : 19%  NPV (base case) is USD 204,698,612  

 

EIRR : 23%  NPV (base case)  is USD 317,656,845 
    

*NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

  

 Financial analysis  
 

3.1.3 Based on the above assumptions, the aggregate financial benefits from agricultural 

production and processing activities when computed against the investment costs for the project 

activities generated Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 19% and Net Present Value 

(NPV) of USD 204.70 million. Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially 

feasible. The FIRR of 19% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

 Economic analysis 
 

3.1.4 The Economic Analysis is carried out to determine the impact of the proposed project to 

the economy as a whole, to justify Government intervention with public funds. The economic 

analysis includes most quantifiable incremental costs and benefits that are associated with the 

project's investments.  

 

3.1.5 The economic analysis was conducted using the similar approach as the financial 

analysis, on the basis of shadow prices (prices in conditions of the efficient market operation) of 



11 

 

tradable goods and total cost of project. In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, 

such as, easy access to markets through market linkages; easy transportation of goods and 

services, better health delivery systems, improvement in literacy and employment generation. 

However, these additional benefits were difficult to value in monetary terms due to the limited 

scope of this report and data limitations, hence they could not be adequately captured in the 

analysis. In these conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD317.66 million and 

Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 23% as captured in the technical annexes. 

 

3.2 Environment and Social Impact 

 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The proposed Cabinda Province Agricultural Value Chains Development project was 

classified Category 2 (validated 9th June 2017) because the project activities are expected to have 

minimal and site-specific environmental and social impacts. The project will finance 

construction and rehabilitation of small irrigation scheme, processing and storage facilities, and 

community infrastructure (heath care centers, schools and water supply and sanitation) as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. These impacts can be 

managed with the application of mitigation measures elaborated in site-specific environmental 

and social management plans (ESMPs). The ESMP that was prepared in September 2016 by the 

Cabinda Province Agriculture Development Study consultants for the general project 

intervention areas will be fine-tuned for specific sites during project implementation; hence, an 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF, which was posted on the Bank’s 

website on 11th August 2017) will provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social issues and guide the preparation of environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) 

and/or ESMP as required during project implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and the agricultural production and value-chain development activities 

including  (i) loss of vegetation cover due to site clearing, soil erosion, landscape degradation 

and possible habitat fragmentation, (ii) noise, vibration and emissions from operation of 

machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (iii) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, and (iii) wastes generated from processing 

and marketing facilities. These impacts are site specific and readily managed with the application 

of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) refilling the 

exposed or excavated soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing 

compaction of soils, (ii) ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing 

sustainable water management systems, and (iv) capacity building of value chain actors to 

promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy.  

 

3.2.1.3 Overall, the CPAVCDP will have significant positive impacts such as improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agricultural commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local economy of the 

Cabinda province. 

  

3.2.2 Climate change 

 

The Cabinda province experiences seasonal variability of rainfall. Studies indicate that the 

province is susceptible to sea level rise, with a projection of 0.13 – 0.56m by the 2090s. Sea level 

rise can aggravate flooding events causing riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure 

damages, crop failure, fisheries destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant 



12 

 

implications on livelihoods of agricultural, pastoral and fisheries communities. The Project has 

been assessed Category 2 per the Climate Safeguard Screening Systems requiring the 

implementation of adaptation measures to increase the resilience of communities and the 

infrastructure to be rehabilitated to withstand the impacts of climate change. The project will 

address the potential climate risk through the implementation of practical risk mitigation and 

adaptation measures. Specifically, water harvesting technologies, and rehabilitation and 

improvement of water infrastructure to reduce the dependency on rainfall for agricultural 

activities. Furthermore appropriate measures including physical structures will be implemented 

to reduce coastal degradation as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other hazards that 

accompany floods, and land use changes. This includes construction of gabions and rip rap 

concrete pillars at Landana beach to mitigate coastal erosion; reconstruction of the existing pier 

at Landana; construction of a small floating pier for fishing boats; as well improvement of the 

irrigation and drainage schemes. The Project will prioritize the implementation of adaptations 

measures as identified in Angola’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA for 

agriculture, pastoral and fisheries systems). Implementation will be monitored through the 

inclusion of appropriate indicators in the project monitoring and evaluation framework. 

Furthermore engineering designs will integrate the need to raise drainage datum and camber 

access roads to the required levels to mitigate effect of floods in order to enhance resilience of 

the infrastructure. Overall, the project promote climate smart agriculture through the use of 

improved agricultural technologies and conservation agricultural practices as a means to enhance 

the resilience of the farming systems. It is estimated that USD7.40 million (or 7.2%) of the loan 

would be used on the above mentioned activities and is considered as climate finance portion of 

the loan.  

 

3.2.3 Green Growth 
 

CPAVCD Project has been designed in congruence with the Green Growth principle of “quality 

and inclusiveness of growth”. The Project design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (rapid population growth, urbanization, shifting consumption 

patterns, uneven economic growth, lack of energy access, and limited access to value addition 

by processing. The Project has been designed to be more holistic in that it has integrated 

economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of human well-being in 

the Province. The Project has further considered solutions to the impact of environmental 

changes, such as land degradation, disaster risk and climate change. 

 

3.2.4 Gender  

 

Structural transformation of Africa’s agriculture is a prerequisite for enhancing agricultural 

productivity, food security and poverty reduction on the continent. However, a critical ingredient 

of such a transformation is gender equality, given its potential impact on social inclusion and 

employment generation. Unfortunately, available evidence reveals that Angola’s agricultural 

landscape is characterized by gender inequalities disproportionately against women. These 

gender-based differences ranged from access to productive resources, low rates of technology 

adoption to economic capacities and incentives. This project will address some of the gender 

inequalities in agricultural productivity, by reducing or closing women’s deficits in agriculture 

performance and will unlock women and youth’s productivity potential. The indirect effects 

include increases in female managers’ bargaining power and improvements in their social status 

as their earnings increase, better child nutrition, health, and education attainment in households 

with female-managed plots.  There is a large gap between men and women in terms of income, 

access to basic services (energy, water and sanitation), access to housing, land, credit and 

continuing education in the Cabinda Province. The project will also contribute to the 

improvement of socio economic indicators especially the Sustainable Development Goals on 



13 

 

reduction of poverty, maternal and child health, reduced adult illiteracy, improved schooling rate 

of children especially girls due to improved access roads. With gender integrated value chains, 

the project will achieve competitive domestic food supply and increase the income levels of 

farmers, processors and marketers. Through improved agricultural production, productivity and 

market linkages, expected impact include food and nutrition security, creation of jobs, of which 

women and youths account for about 50%, along the commodity value chains. For inclusivity, 

the project shall ensure professional training, access to credit and other resources to women and 

youth; facilitate acquisition of machinery and equipment among women and youth; and provide 

capacity building (agribusiness and entrepreneurial, etc.) for women and youth amongst other 

activities.   

 

3.2.5 Social Impact 

 

3.2.5.1 As the project intends paying particular attention to women as well as mechanizing and 

enhancing the agricultural processes and products, drudgery will be removed, more women will 

be empowered, more jobs created and nutrition status significantly improved in the intervention 

areas. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation in Angola is quite poor particularly in rural 

areas. This negatively affects the health status of the population, school enrolment and retention 

especially for the girl-child, agricultural productivity and poverty status of the people in general. 

The Project will drill boreholes and construct sanitary facilities in public places such as markets, 

schools and health facilities in an effort to contribute to improvement of the hygiene situation. 

 

3.2.5.2 The expected increased commercial activities particularly around the warehousing, and 

processing facilities and markets with increased influx of people of diverse cultures, beliefs and 

behaviors is likely to expose people to sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS. The 

Project shall therefore design sensitization and capacity building activities to address these health 

issues. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good nutrition and hygiene 

practices as well as prevention and management of malaria and HIV/AIDS; (ii) improving access 

to health facilities by way of extending the feeder roads to them; (iii) rehabilitation and equipping 

community health facilities; and (iv) skills training for health care providers. 

 

3.2.5.3 In order to accommodate all these activities a total of USD34.09 million has been 

earmarked for the provision of social infrastructure such as schools, clinics, potable water and 

sanitation systems for the beneficiaries. Community mobilization and training on nutrition, 

conflict resolution and health issues have been estimated at USD5.63 million. It is also estimated 

that USD17.65 million (or 45%) of these sums will target women. 

 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the Project 

activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agriculture and pastoral 

systems.  

 

IV- PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Agriculture will be the executing agency of the project. Based on the 

weaknesses identified in the agriculture project that just ended and lessons distilled by the Bank 

from its experience in implementing programs in the country, the management of the CPAVCD 



14 

 

Project emphasizes a highly decentralized but inclusive structure. At the National Level, a lightly 

staffed National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established at MINAGRI in Luanda 

to coordinate project activities in Cabinda Province and also to carry out key policy and 

institution back stopping at the Ministry of Agriculture as well as disbursement and reporting 

liaison with the Bank. The NPCU will be headed by a national Project coordinator (NPC) and 

staffed by a liaison officer, a secretary and a driver. The staff of the NPCU will be paid from the 

proceeds of the loan. Furthermore, a Project Implementation Unity (PIU) will be competitively 

recruited as a consulting firm to manage the project and be based in Cabinda town itself. The 

PIU will comprise eight key officers as follows: (i) Project Manager; (ii) Financial Manager; (iii) 

Civil Engineer; (iv) Agro-processing Specialist; (v) Financial Accountant; (vi) Procurement 

Expert; (vii) M&E Officer; and (viii) Credit Management Specialist. The setting up of the PIU 

will be retained as a condition precedent to disbursement.  

 

4.1.2 The Government will provide full time counterpart staff to understudy the consultants 

and IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) will take over the management of the project after 

two and a half years. The Gender Expert at the Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

will assume the leadership and responsibility for all gender related aspects of the Project and will 

engage with national NGOs for support. This arrangement will provide in-house training and 

sustainability upon the exit of the consultants. The Government counterpart specialists will 

receive a predetermined monthly allowance as incentive. The existing Provincial Director of 

Agriculture shall provide oversight function on the implementation of the Project in Cabinda 

Province represented by Agricultural Development Stations in each Municipality. 

 

4.1.3 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy guidance to 

the project. The PSC will be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture. The PSC will be chaired 

by the Minister of Agriculture and will comprise a representative (of not lower than the grade of 

Director) each from IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services 

Institute); Ministry of Women and Youth; Ministry of Environment; Ministry of Finance; 

Ministry of Fisheries; Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda; and Departments of 

Agriculture; Forestry; and Water from Cabinda Province. A representative of the farmer apex 

cooperative association will also be in the PSC. The PSC will approve work plans and budget 

estimates for activities and monitor reports of project implementation. The organogram for 

Project implementation is presented in Annex II.  

 
 Procurement Arrangement  

 

4.1.4 Procurement of goods and works and the acquisition of consulting services, financed by 

the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for 

Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement will be carried out following: 

 

 BPS – Borrower Procurement System: Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures 
(PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as set forth in the Public Contracts 

Law No. 9/16 of 16 June 2016 and related implementing regulations, using the national 

Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other SDs agreed during project negotiations. 

Procurement of (i) construction of abattoirs for an estimated total amount of UA 343,360, 

(ii) construction of processing centers for an estimated amount of UA 455,500, (iii) vehicles 

for an estimated total amount of UA 350,080 and (iv) furniture for an estimated total amount 

of UA 197,910 (iii) will be procured using BPS. 

 



15 

 

Bank PMPs: Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation 

Documents, will be used for the procurement of works and goods and for the selection of 

consultants under the project. Works procured using Open Competitive Bidding (OCB) through 

International Competitive Bidding include : (i) construction of four clinics for an estimated total 

amount of UA780,000; (ii) construction of four schools for an estimated total amount of 

UA1,200,000; (iii) construction of one irrigation scheme for an estimated total amount of 

UA2,627,440, (iv) drainage works for an estimated total amount of UA1,833,000; (v) 

construction of a greenhouse for an estimated total amount of UA821,000; (vi) construction of 

pier (landing sites) for an estimated total amount of UA4,077,390; (vii) construction of 

warehouses for an estimated total amount of UA518,900; (viii) construction of residences for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,097,890; (ix) other infrastructures for an estimated total amount 

of UA873,750; (x) construction of Belize roads for an estimated total amount of UA10,126,900 

(with prequalification); (xi) construction of Buco Zau roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA5,183,140; (xii) construction of Cacongo roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA6,267,890; and (xiii) construction of Cabinda municipality roads for an estimated total 

amount of UA18,007,710 (with prequalification) . Goods procured using Open Competitive 

Bidding (OCB) through International Competitive Bidding include equipment related to the 

constructions for an estimated total amount of UA3,110,530. The selection of: (i) a Project 

Implementation Unity (PIU) in charge of the implementation of the project, for an estimated 

total amount of UA2,020,070; (ii) service for support to product marketing by NGOs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA291,970; (iii) two consulting firms for review of designs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,391,350; and (iv) three contracts for supervision of the works, 

for an estimated total amount of UA3,708,690 will be carried out using the Quality and Cost 

Based Selection (QCBS) method. The selection of audit services, for an estimated total amount 

of UA218,980, will be carried out using the Least Cost Selection (LCS) method. A policy 

advisor, for an estimated total amount of UA289,050, will be recruited using the Individual 

Consultant (IC) selection method. The personnel for the National Coordination Unit will be 

selected through selection of individual consultant method, for an estimated amount of 

UA466,860. The Bank Group has approved that a Memorandum of Understanding should be 

signed with World Vision International for the administration of the credit facility, and with a 

consideration of administration fee estimated at UA182,000. WVI has a well-established 

expertise in a wide range of technical sectors including agriculture, health and nutrition, water 

and sanitation, education, etc. in Angola since 1989 also has experience utilising credit funds 

from the Bank and other development partners.  

 

4.1.5 Advance procurement: Advance procurement mechanism will be used to select the 

project management team (project implementation unit – PIU), in order to be in place at project’s 

start. The establishment of the PIU will be a loan condition. 

 

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: Country, Sector, Executing Agency 

(EA), and Project procurement risk assessments were undertaken for the project and the output 

have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS, Bank or Third party) and the 

PMPs being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement capacity 

development action plan (CDAP) under the project. The resources, capacity, expertise and 

experience of the Executing Agency, the Institute of Agrarian Development (IDA), are 

inadequate to carry out the procurement, as it has little experience in implementing Bank-funds 

operations and do not have procurement professionals conversant with Banks and national 

procedures. Most of the issues/risks associated with the procurement components for 

implementation of the project have been identified and include: (i) lack of capacity at the EA 

side, and (ii) weaknesses at sector level (agriculture sector, cooperatives), although some 

capacity exist for execution of smaller works and supply of vehicles and basic equipment and 



16 

 

furniture. The corrective measures which have been agreed are: (i) recruit a private project 

implementation unity (PIU), which will include procurement responsibilities; (ii) this project 

management team will prepare a project procedures manual and train appointed IDA 

staff/counterpart; and (iii) all the executing agency staff will receive adequate procurement 

orientation to enhance their procurement and project management capacity, as part of the project 

launching and during its implementation. It is expected that appointed IDA staff will take over 

the private service provider at mid-term project implementation. Detailed assessment and 

mitigations measures can be found in the Technical Annexes B.5. 

 

 Financial Management 
 

4.1.7 An assessment of the IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) in the Ministry of 

Agriculture at the Cabinda Provincial level as Project Executing Agency (that included a review 

of the budgeting, accounting, treasury systems, internal controls, and reporting and external audit 

arrangements) was done to ascertain effective financial management of the project.  The current 

financial management of resources managed by IDA at provincial level is primarily for small 

value operating expenditures from periodic transfers made from the National office in Luanda. 

Basic manual records are maintained by an administration staff with no formal reporting and 

specific bank account maintained. At national level, the department of finance (within the 

Finance and Administrative Department at the Ministry of Agriculture) is responsible for the 

function of planning and budgeting including recording expenditures and maintaining assets 

through the use of the Government wide IFMIS (Sistema Integrado de Gestiiodas Finanqas do 

Estado) (SIGFE). The staff receive training in finance and accounting from the Ministry of 

Finance and can manage the accounting for the smaller and recurring nature of some operating 

expenses given their experience with other donor financed projects. However, given the 

complexity and size of the project to be implemented at provincial level, the existing FM capacity 

do not fully meet the Bank’s minimum requirements to ensure financial resources to be made 

available under the project would be used for the intended purposes. In this regard there is need 

for technical assistance in ensuring not only the effective financial management of the project 

but also in capacity building of the finance department at IDA. A Project Implementation Unit 

(PIU) will be competitively recruited as a consulting firm to implement the project, including 

financial management responsibilities and also training government staff with the Ministry of 

Agriculture, through IDA having the overall responsibility of overseeing its implementation.   

 

4.1.8 The project financial management activities will therefore be done by the PIU under the 

oversight of the NPCU that will include a competent accountant whose specific duties shall be 

to ensure a sustained existence of a satisfactory system of accounting, reporting and proper 

record keeping of all documentation to permit a timely production of complete and accurate 

financial reports. The finance staff in the firm will work together with the government 

counterpart finance staff that will be designated to the project at the province to enable transfer 

of skills and offering substantial operational benefits to Angola in terms of contribution to 

capacity development in order to enable them eventually take over project FM. Training in Bank 

requirements regarding financial management will be given as part of project launching and 

during its implementation. Given, the proposed arrangements, the overall FM risk for the project 

is assessed as Substantial with the risk mitigated through the putting in place of the PIU that will 

be responsible for project implementation. The detailed FM assessment including the financial 

management responsibilities of the PIU are attached in Annex B4. 

 

4.1.9 The NPCU will have overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with the Bank’s 

reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic progress reports with financial 

information for the Bank loan and Government contributions to the Bank within 45 days after 

the end of the respective quarter. The NPCU in liaison with the PIU will submit quarterly interim 



17 

 

unaudited financial reports covering their activities, as well as the related annual financial 

statements. The PIU will produce a project implementation manual, which will include 

comprehensive financial management procedures, describing the detailed financial procedures 

in processing, budgeting, recording, reporting and auditing of the financial transactions of the 

Project. Furthermore, external audits for the project will be done annually in accordance with a 

Bank approved audit Terms of Reference. The project external audits will be done by private 

auditors and the audit reports (including management letter) submitted to the Bank within six 

months after the end of the respective period covered by the audit with the costs of the audit 

borne by the Loan.  

 

Disbursements 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the Direct Payment method 

for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification of invoices 

submitted by other service providers or contractors and preparation of disbursement application 

which will be reviewed at the NPCU and signed off by the Government designated staff and 

submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account method to be managed by the NPCU 

will however be used for financing the smaller and recurring nature of some operating expenses. 

The opening of a Special Account denominated in United States Dollars together with the 

associated local currency account in Angola Kwanzas at National level will be required before 

disbursement of loan proceeds. The Reimbursement method of disbursement will also be 

available.  All disbursements under the Loan will be made in accordance with the Bank’s rules 

and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. In addition, a 

Disbursement letter will be agreed upon as part of the Loan negotiations. 

 

4.2 Monitoring  

 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual (POM) 

which will be prepared by the PIU shortly after project loan approval. IDA will monitor overall 

operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of the project, 

implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national standards. The 

PIU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project and compile the project’s quarterly 

and annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, IDA, other line ministries, and the 

Cabinda Provincial Directorate of Agriculture. A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken 

two years after project start to review the project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon 

completion of project investments at the end of project year four, the PIU will prepare a 

Borrower’s project completion report.  

 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Office of 

Planning and Statistics (GEPE) of the Ministry of Agriculture will be used to assess the 

contribution of the project towards the country and province’s development goals and objectives 

as defined in the relevant development plans. The baseline values were drawn from the NDP 

2013-2017, and the results framework of Bank’s new projects. In using the performance 

indicators and targets specified in the results-based framework, project implementers tracking 

progress towards project results are expected to take special note of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing 

monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated by sex and age. The key functions 

of the M&E Officer in the PIU will be to ensure quality and accountability of monitoring; 

information management; facilitation of knowledge building; and knowledge sharing on 

monitoring and evaluation. 

 



18 

 

4.2.3 The RBLF will form the basis for measuring outputs, outcomes and impact. Supported 

by the M&E Specialist, the PIU will prepare: (i) Annual Work Program and Budgets; (ii) 

Quarterly Progress Reports; (iii) Mid-year Progress Reports; (iv) Annual Progress Reports; (v) 

Status Reports for Supervision Missions; (vi) Mid-term Review Report; and (vii) Project 

Completion Report.  

 
4.3 Governance 

 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Angola, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of CPAVCD Project 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to provincial to commune levels. This 

is in relation to better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of 

resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, 

and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4 Sustainability  

 

The ownership of CPAVCD Project is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders 

played during formulation and preparation of the Project. As the coordinator of the Study that 

gave rise to this project the Ministry of Agriculture put up a technical team of experts both in 

Luanda and Cabinda to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The intense 

interest of the Governor of Cabinda Province in this project was made manifest during the 

workshop during which she appointed her economic advisor as the focal point for the Province. 

The maintenance of the access roads and municipal infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the Province as is done nationwide. The present Project will build capacities 

of the Provincial agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure profitability for the 

value chain actors.  

 

4.5 Risk Management 

 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Angola have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group will 

engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. It is expected that the proposed project will contribute to reducing unemployment 

and poverty, particularly among the youth, and thereby directly mitigate some of the main 

underlying factors of social conflict. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-

sensitive approaches and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. 

CPAVCDP is a category II intervention and will require an environmental, social and health 

impact assessment. The ESIA and ESMPs have been prepared as part of the Study and will be 

fine-tuned for specific project sites during implementation and to be examined as well by the 

Bank. The following is the main risk identified and with its mitigation measures.  

 

Risk Rating1 Mitigation Measures 

Macroeconomic risks: slow 

economic growth and deterioration 

of the country’s creditworthiness 

due to persistent oil crisis     

 

H 
The Bank will intensify the dialogue with the 

Government to adopt supportive macroeconomic 

policies to rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce 

exchange rate flexibility, strengthen the banking system 

to prevent systemic crisis, and implement structural 

reforms for economic diversification. 
H= High 
 

 



19 

 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach in 

agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be monitored 

closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized implementation unit 

located in the Province; the role of value chain actors including farmers and farmers’ 

organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge will be 

captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and periodic 

impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside the 

production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the Project 

results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank website, 

etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information 

sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, 

share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension 

agents. This will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access to the 

disseminated knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports will introduce and 

consolidate knowledge and skills, and facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the 

community and national levels. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments 

 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an AfDB loan agreement for USD101.07 

million between the Republic of Angola and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions for the Bank’s Intervention  

 

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfillment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan 

 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the competitive recruitment of the members of the Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), which will comprise the following key officers: (a) Project 

Manager; (b) Financial Manager; (c) Civil Engineer; (d) Agro-processing Specialist; (e) 

Financial Accountant; (f) Procurement Expert; (g) Monitoring and Evaluation Officer; 

and (e) Credit Management Specialist, whose experience and qualifications shall be 

acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

 

 

 

 



20 

 

 

 Other Conditions  

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than three months from the date of loan effectiveness, appoint 
Government counterpart staff to the PIU, with qualification and experience 

acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(ii) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(iii) Prior to the use of Special Account disbursement method, submit to the Bank a 
disbursement application with a Special Account in the name of the Project, 

denominated in USD together with the associated local currency account in 

Angola Kwanzas, in a bank acceptable to the Bank, for deposit of the proceeds of 

the Loan. 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(iv) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(v) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable to 
the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including any 

implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATIONS 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to the Republic of Angola for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report.  

 

 



I 

 

Annex I 
 

Angola 

Country Comparative Socio-economic Indicators 

 

 
 

 

 

Year Angola Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2016 1,247 30,067 94,638 36,907
Total Population (millions) 2016 25.8 1,214.4 3,010.9 1,407.8
Urban Population (% of Total) 2016 40.8 40.1 41.6 80.6
Population Density  (per Km²) 2016 20.7 41.3 67.7 25.6
GNI per Capita (US $) 2014 4 850 2 045 4 226 38 317
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2016 68.3 65.6 63.9 60.3
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2016 59.8 55.6 49.9 52.1
Gender -Related Dev elopment Index  Value 2007-2013 ... 0.801 0.506 0.792
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 187 countries) 2014 149 ... ... ...
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2008-2013 30.1 42.7 14.9 ...

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2016 3.2 2.5 1.9 0.4
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2016 4.9 3.6 2.9 0.8
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2016 47.5 40.9 28.0 17.2
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2016 2.3 3.5 6.6 16.6
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2016 99.5 79.9 52.9 51.2
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2016 98.5 100.2 103.0 97.6
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2016 22.3 24.0 25.7 22.8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2016 53.1 61.5 66.2 79.4
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2016 54.6 63.0 68.0 82.4
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2016 44.5 34.4 27.0 11.6
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2016 13.1 9.1 7.9 9.1
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 96.0 52.2 35.2 5.8
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 156.9 75.5 47.3 6.8
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2016 5.9 4.5 3.5 1.8
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 477.0 495.0 238.0 10.0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2016 19.4 31.0 ... ...

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 16.6 47.9 123.8 292.3
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 166.0 135.4 220.0 859.8
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2015 49.9 53.2 68.5 ...
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 49.0 71.6 89.3 99.5
Healthy  life ex pectancy  at birth (y ears) 2013 45.9 54.0 57 68.0
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 51.6 39.4 61.2 99.4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2014 2.4 3.8 ... ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2014 370.0 245.9 160.0 21.0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2014 81.0 84.1 90.0 ...
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2014 85.0 76.0 83.5 93.7
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2014 15.6 18.1 16.2 1.1
Daily  Calorie Supply  per Capita 2011 2 473 2 621 2 335 3 503
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2013 2.1 2.6 3.0 7.7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2015 128.7 100.5 104.7 102.4
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2015 100.4 97.1 102.9 102.2
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2015 28.9 50.9 57.8 105.3
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2015 22.7 48.5 55.7 105.3
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2015 36.8 47.6 50.6 82.2
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2015 71.2 66.8 70.5 98.6
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2015 82.0 74.3 77.3 98.9
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2015 60.7 59.4 64.0 98.4
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2014 3.4 5.0 4.2 4.8

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2013 3.9 8.6 11.9 9.4
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2013 47.5 43.2 43.4 30.0
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2013 46.6 23.3 28.0 34.5
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2012 1.4 1.1 3.0 11.6

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

August 2016

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

Ang ol a Afri ca

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

GNI Per Capita US $

Ang ol a Afri ca

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Population Growth Rate (%)

Ang ola Afri ca

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

Ang ol a Afri ca



II 

 

Annex II 
 

Angola 

Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



III 

 

 

Annex III 
Map of Project Area (Province wide) 

 

 



 

IV 

 

 

Annex IV 
Bank Portfolio in Angola (June 2017) 

 

S
o

u
r
c
e
 o

f 

F
u

n
d

in
g

 

PROJECT Sector Amount (UA) 

Since 

approval 

by ADF 

& AfDB 

(years) 

B
o

a
r
d

 

A
p

p
r
o

v
a

l 

d
a

te
 

S
ig

n
a

tu
r
e
 

D
a

te
 

E
ff

e
c
ti

v
e
 

D
a

te
 

C
o

m
p

le
ti

o
n

 

D
a

te
 

D
is

b
u

r
se

m

e
n

t 
R

a
te

 

IP(3) DO(3) 

ADF Fisheries Sector Support Project Fisheries 20,000,000.00 3.9 5/15/2013 12/2/2013 10/29/2014 6/30/2019 9.33% 1.5  2  

MIC Cabinda Province Agriculture Development Study Agriculture 420,045.00 2.3 12/22/2014 3/25/2015 3/25/2015 6/29/2017 61.83% (1)  n.a n.a  

ADF Environmental Sector Support Project  Environment 12,000,000.00 8.1 3/11/2009 7/16/2009 12/17/2009 12/31/2017 68.65% 3.3 3 

AfDB Science and Technology Development Support Project Social 66,335,969.57 1.4 10/21/2015 3/15/2016 6/16/2016 3/31/2021 0.23%  3 3  

MIC 
Studies: Cost and financing of HE and implication of 

private sector 
Social 398,478.00 3.1 2/14/2014 3/25/2015 3/25/2015 6/30/2017 37%  3 2  

AfDB 
Institutional Capacity Building for Private Sector 

Development 
Multi-Sector 18,317,572.40 2.5 9/17/2014 12/18/2014 4/14/2015 12/31/2019 2.29%  2.3 3  

ADF Financial Management Support Project Multi-Sector 5,900,000.00 9.4 11/14/2007 1/7/2008 9/4/2008 12/30/2017 43.90% 2.21 2  

ADF National Transport Sector Master Plan Transport 2,900,000.00 3.5 9/17/2013 1/22/2014 5/20/2015 12/30/2018 0.00%  2 2 

AfDB 
Institutional and Sustainability Support to urban water 

supply 

Water & 

Sanitation 
91,226,699.49 2 4/1/2015 6/24/2015 8/31/2015 12/31/2020 0.66%  3 3  

  SUB-TOTAL   217,498,764.46 4        7%  2.4 2.3  

AfDB Line of Credit to BPC Finance 239,546,556.79 1.4 10/21/2015 12/13/2016   6/30/2024 0.00%     

  TOTAL   457,045,321.25 3.8        3% --  ---  

 
(1) The final disbursement rate of the MIC grant that funded the project’ preparatory work, was approximately 62% because the amount of the contract with the consultant for the elaboration of the “Cabinda Integrated 

Agricultural Rural Development Study” was lower than initially expected. There are no pending activities. The project technical execution is 100%. 

(2) As at July 2017, the latest Flashlight Report available is from April 2017 
(3) Calculation of the average of the ratings of project supervision missions based on the Implementation Progress and Results Reporting (IPR) approach (March 2011). For the projects for which the IPR of the last 

supervision mission undertaken in 2017 was not available, it was considered the average of the 2016 ratings. That is the case of: Fisheries Sector Support Project; Institutional Capacity Building for Private 

Sector Development; Financial Management Support Project. For the project National Transport Sector Master Plan, it were considered the rates of the last supervision mission, which was undertaken in 

November 2016. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



V 

 

Annex V 
 

Angola 

Key Macroeconomic Indicators 

Indicators Unit 
Actual Estimate Projections 

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017          2018 2019 2020  

  

Real GDP Growth Rate Percent 6.8 4.8 3.0 0.1 3.0 3.5 2.8 2.5 

Oil Percent -1.1 -2.6 6.3 0.8 6.4 6.8 4.8 3.7 

Non-oil Percent 10.9 8.2 1.5 -0.4 1.1 2.1 2.3 1.6 

Inflation (Consumer Price Index) (annual 

average) 
Percent 7.7 7.5 14.3 42.0 20.0 19.7 9.5 8.3 

Exchange Rate (end of period) AKz/USD 97.6 102.9 135.6 166.1 208.5 228.4 240.5 257.4 

Total revenue and grants percent of gross domestic product (GDP) 40.2 35.3 23.7 19.5 18.9 22.1 27.3 26.1 

Total expenditure percent of GDP 40.5 41.9 30.6 23.6 25.6 24.5 30.9 30.5 

Overall deficit (-)/surplus (+) percent of GDP -0.3 -6.6 -3.3 -4.1 -6.7 -2.3 -3.6 -4.4 

Current account balance percent of GDP 6.7 -3.0 -10.0 -4.3 -6.1 -5.1 -6.6 -7.1 

Gross reserves months of imports 7.2 8.8 11.0 8.1 6.8 6.9 6.7 6.4 

Total public debt percent of GDP 32.9 40.7 65.4 71.6 62.8 60.2 59.7 57.2 

External debt percent of GDP 23.8 28.6 40.5 43.1 37.6 38.9 43.3 42.0 

Domestic debt Percent of GDP 9.0 12.0 25.0 28.5 25.3 21.3 16.4 15.2 

Social Indicator  

Indicators Unit 19901 20002 20163  

Population Million 10.3 13.9 25.8  

Employment to population ratio 15+, percent of total 66.6 65.4 68.3  

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.90 a day,  

2008-2013 (purchasing power parity) 
percent of population … 54.3 30.1 

 

Maternal mortality ratio 

Child Stunting 

Infant Mortality 

modelled estimate, per 100,000 live births 1,200 890 

477  

Total enrolment, primary percent net … … 85.7  

Proportion of seats held by women in 

parliaments 
percent 14.5 15.0 36.8 

 

Prevalence of HIV, total percent pop (15–49) … 1.7 2.4  

Environment and Climate Change Indicators  

Indicators Unit 19901 20002 20153  

CO2 emissions kg per purchasing power parity USD of GDP 2.3 1.5 1.4  

Improved sanitation facilities percent of population with access 22.0 48.3 52.0  

Improved water source percent of population with access 46.0 48.1 49.0  

Source: Ministry of Finance, Angola, BNA, IMF, AfDB Statistics Department, AfDB Statistics Department Databases; World Bank: World Development Indicators; UNAIDS; 

UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, WRI, United Nations Development Programme; Country Reports, and Economist Intelligence Units projections country forecasts (2017-2020). 

Notes: … Data Not Available 
1 Latest year available in the period 1990–1995; 2 Latest year available in the period 2000–2004; 3 Latest year available in the period 2013–2016. Last update –May 2017. Joint 

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Report 2015 - Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water.  

    

 



 

VI 

 

Annex VI 

Procurement Arrangement  
 

 
 

 
Note: Figures in parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by African Development Bank loan and grant 

 REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA

Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project

Procurement Arrangements

Procurement Method (USD '000) Procurement Method (UA '000)

International National International National

Competitive Competitive Consulting Competitive Competitive Consulting

Bidding Bidding Services: QCBS Other N.B.F. Total Bidding Bidding Services: QCBS Other N.B.F. Total

A. WORKS  

Constructions & Rehabilitations  19,397.91 642.76 - - 2,092.58 22,133.25 14,159.06 469.17 - - 1,527.43 16,155.66

  (19,397.91) (642.76) (20,040.68) (14,159.06) (469.17) (14,628.23)

Roads  54,232.33 - - - 8,265.03 62,497.36 39,585.64 - - - 6,032.87 45,618.51

  (54,232.33) (54,232.33) (39,585.64) (39,585.64)

Electricity  - - - - 4,947.63 4,947.63 - - - - 3,611.41 3,611.41

  

B. GOODS  

1. VEHICLES  

Vehicles (FW)  - 479.61 - - - 479.61 - 350.08 - - - 350.08

  (479.61) (479.61) (350.08) (350.08)

2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS  

Equipment  2,302.69 2,293.07 - - - 4,595.76 1,680.80 1,673.78 - - - 3,354.57

  (2,302.69) (2,293.07) (4,595.76) (1,680.80) (1,673.78) (3,354.57)

Furniture  - 271.14 - - - 271.14 - 197.91 - - - 197.91

  (271.14) (271.14) (197.91) (197.91)

Materials  - - - - - - - - - -

  

C. SERVICES  

1. TRAINING  - - 655.50 - - 655.50 - - 478.47 - - 478.47

  (655.50) (655.50) (478.47) (478.47)

2. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE  - - 108.00 - - 108.00 - - 78.83 - - 78.83

  (108.00) (108.00) (78.83) (78.83)

3. CONTRACTUAL SERVICES  - - 12,963.84 - 1,328.40 14,292.24 - - 9,462.65 - 969.64 10,432.29

  (12,963.84) (12,963.84) (9,462.65) (9,462.65)

4. AUDIT  - - 300.00 - - 300.00 - - 218.98 - - 218.98

  (300.00) (300.00) (218.98) (218.98)

D. MISCELLANEOUS  - - - 5,000.00 - 5,000.00 - - - 3,649.64 - 3,649.64

  (5,000.00) (5,000.00) (3,649.64) (3,649.64)

E. OPERATING COSTS  - - - 2,228.01 5,451.28 7,679.29 - - - 1,626.28 3,979.04 5,605.32

  (2,228.01) (2,228.01) (1,626.28) (1,626.28)

Total  75,932.94 3,686.58 14,027.34 7,228.01 22,084.92 122,959.78 55,425.50 2,690.93 10,238.93 5,275.92 16,120.38 89,751.66

  (75,932.94) (3,686.58) (14,027.34) (7,228.01) - (100,874.86) (55,425.50) (2,690.93) (10,238.93) (5,275.92) - (73,631.28)



VII 

 

Annex VII 

 

Waiver Request for Financing 82.1% of the Project Cost through an AfDB Loan 

 

Introduction 

 

Angola has made remarkable progress in socio-economic and infrastructure development since the 

end of the 27-year-long civil war in 2002, but more still needs to be done to lift majority of its 

population out of poverty. The sharp and long-lasting decline in oil prices has derailed Angola’s 

economic performance. GDP growth slowed to 0.1% in 2016 down from 4.8% in 2014. This led 

to a significant reduction of the nominal GDP to about USD96.2 billion in 2016 from USD126.8 

billion in 2014. The Government of Angola (GoA) is increasingly aware of these realities and has 

taken steps to mitigate the impact of the oil price shock on the economy. The Government therefore 

requested assistance from the Bank to strengthen investments in agricultural transformation 

through commodity value chains in order to diversify exports, reduce imports through value chains 

development, increase national revenue sources and reduce the dependence on oil. The 

Government is adjusting its policies to facilitate the needed economic transition as international 

oil prices are not expected to recover in a near term. Two key policies were adopted, namely: (i) 

the Accelerated Program for Economic Diversification in February 2015, and (ii) the Strategy for 

Mitigation of the Oil Crisis adopted in January 2016.  

 

Agriculture Policy Framework 

 

The Angola Long Term Plan, dubbed Vision 2025 is based on the national model involving five 

dimensions: human development; economic development; socio-cultural scientific-technological 

development; political development; and institutional development. Vision 2025 was designed to 

be developed in a period of 25 years, in three stages, with concrete objectives and targets and 

which may be adapted in the light of the changes and adjustments that may prove necessary and 

timely, in particular: 2000-2005 (Peace, national reconstruction and Economic Growth startup); 

2005-2015 (consolidation of National Reconstruction, Modernization and development); 2015-

2025 (sustainability and growth). 

 

The National Medium-term Development Plan for the Agricultural Sector 2013-2017 (PDMPSA) 

establishes the following strategic objectives: 

 

 Strategic objective 1: To promote a wider campaign of professional training and transfer 
of technology to optimize agricultural production and productivity; 

 Strategic objective 2: To implement a process of agrarian transformation and rural 
development based on family farming, cooperatives and public-private partnerships; 

 Strategic objective 3: To establish a mechanism for tight coordination and synergies 
between different sectors and other stakeholders in rural areas, emphasizing society 

participation in the national development process; and 

 Strategic objective 4: to contribute to the process of industrialization of the country. 
 

The Government has in the aforementioned strategies and polices pronounced its priorities for 

agriculture as follows: (1) increase the production and commercialization of cereals, horticultural,  

 

 



VIII 

 

roots and tubers crops, coffee, artisanal/continental fisheries’ products; (2) livestock breeding; (3) 

promotion of sustainable natural resources management; (4) promotion of research activities 

needed to support and promote productive activities such as micro-finance, rural extension, small 

irrigation schemes, milk production, apiculture and poultry. 

 

Country’s fiscal outlook and debt sustainability 

 

The overall fiscal balance, in surplus in the last four years, is expected to deteriorate substantially, 

reaching a yearly deficit of around 4% of GDP on average between 2014 and 2019. After reaching 

a historic maximum level of USD36.1 billion in September 2013, gross international reserves 

declined to USD31.4 billion at end-June 2014. The falling oil commodity prices further drove 

decline on the country’s current account from 5.5% in 2013 to less than 2% in 2015. This has 

constraint the government’s ability to mobilize resources to fund large infrastructure projects. 

Given the budgetary constraints facing the country, most of its public expenditures have been 

redirected to infrastructure projects.  

 

In the medium-term, Angola’s oil revenues (as a share of GDP) are expected to decline while there 

is high demand for increased spending on infrastructure and poverty alleviation. This leaves the 

country in a challenging fiscal position characterized by large fiscal deficits over the medium term, 

leading to increasing gross financing needs and rising public debt-to-GDP ratios. Despite the 

challenging fiscal and external sector outlook, Angola’s external debt position appears sustainable, 

although it is expected to increase from 22% of GDP in 2013 to 37% of GDP in 2019. Moreover, 

total public debt is also expected to rise from 34.6% in 2014 to 45.6% by 2019.  

 

Conclusion 

 

The GoA has demonstrated its commitment through its development program and spending. 

However investment in physical infrastructure is not a sufficient condition for improved and 

sustainable service delivery. There is need for greater need for support in institutional 

strengthening and professionalizing service delivery which this project seeks to achieve. The 

commitment of the Government is evidenced as depicted in the overall National Development 

Program. Owing to the importance of the project, current commitment levels and constraints in the 

national budget and future outlook, the project seeks a waiver from the Policy on Expenditure for 

Bank Group Financing that requires at least 50% counterpart contribution by the Government. This 

is in line with the provisions of paragraphs 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 of the project appraisal report and 

justification that the project be allowed with an AfDB financing of 82.1% of the project cost while 

the remaining 17.9% is covered by the GoA and beneficiaries. 

 

 
 



















































Langue : ANGLAIS


 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

BURUNDI 

 

 

 

SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHAI DEPARTMENT  

 

November 2017 

 
         Translated version 
 

 

P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

  
 

 
P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

 

 
 



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
PAGES 

Currency Equivalents, Fiscal Year, Weights and Measures, Abbreviations and Acronyms, Project Brief, 

Project Summary, Results-Based Logical Framework, Project Implementation Schedule ............... i to v 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK....................................................................... v 

I. Strategic Orientation and justification ................................................................................ 1 

1.1. Linkages with the Country's Strategy and Goals ......................................................... 1 

1.2. Justification of the Bank's involvement ....................................................................... 1 

1.3. Aid Coordination ......................................................................................................... 2 

II. Project Description .......................................................................................................... 4 

2.1 Components of the project ........................................................................................... 4 

2.2 Adopted technical solutions and substitution solutions studied .................................. 5 

2.3 Type of Project ............................................................................................................ 5 

2.4 Cost of project and financing arrangements ................................................................ 6 

2.5 Area and beneficiaries targeted by the project ............................................................ 8 

2.6 Participatory approach for the identification, design and implementation of the 

project ..................................................................................................................................... 8 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group experience and lessons learned in project design ........ 9 

2.8 Key performance indicators ....................................................................................... 10 

III. Project feasibility ........................................................................................................... 10 

3.1 Economic and financial performance ........................................................................ 10 

3.2 Environmental and social impact .............................................................................. 12 

IV. Implementation .............................................................................................................. 15 

4.1 Provisions for implementation: ................................................................................. 15 

4.2 Monitoring ................................................................................................................. 17 

4.3 Governance ................................................................................................................ 18 

4.4 Durability ................................................................................................................... 18 

4.5 Risk management ...................................................................................................... 19 

4.6 Knowledge Development .......................................................................................... 19 

V. Legal framework ........................................................................................................... 19 

5.1 Legal instrument ........................................................................................................ 19 

5.2 Conditions associated with the intervention of the Bank .......................................... 19 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies ................................................................................. 20 

VI. Recommendation ........................................................................................................... 20 

 

 



 

i 

 

Currency Equivalents  
(October 2017) 

 

Currency Unit  =BIF 

1 UA = 2.472.99675 BIF 

1 UA = US $ 1.41339 

1 UA = 1.24727 Euro 

 
 

Financial Year 

1 January - 31 December 
 

Weights and Measures 

1 metric ton = 2204 pounds  

1 kilogram (kg) = 2,200 pounds 

1 meter (m) = 3.28 feet 

1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inches 

1 kilometre (km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha) = 2,471 Ares 
 

Acronyms and abbreviations 
 

IGA : Income Generating Activities 

BIF  Burundi Francs 

WB : World Bank 

FDC : Family Development Centre 

TEC : Technical Education Centre 

PMU : Project Management Unit 

PSC : Project Steering Committee 

SFGPR II : Strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction II 

BTC : Belgian Technical Cooperation 

AVC : Agricultural Value Chain 

GDAPL : General Directorate of Agricultural Planning and Livestock 

PDAL : Provincial Directorate for Agriculture and Livestock 

CSP : Country Strategy Paper 

AFD : African Development Fund 

FAO : Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

TSF : Transition Support Funds 

IFAD : International Fund for Agricultural Development 

M/F : Male/Female 

IEC : Information Education and Communication 

MINAGRIE : Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 

DPM : Delegated Project Manager 

MSNDPHG : Ministry of National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender 

PAIRB : Rural Infrastructure Support Project for the Bugesera Natural Region 

PATAREB : Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project 

(PATAREB): 

CAADP : Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 

ESMP : Environmental and Social Management Plan 

PPP : Public Private Partnership 

TFP : Technical and Financial Partners 

NAS : National Agricultural Strategy 

UA : Unit of Account 

EU : European Union 

NPV : Net Present Value 

IRR : Internal Rate of Return 
 

  



 

ii 

 

 

PROJECT DOCUMENT 

CLIENT RECORD 

 

BENEFICIARY   Republic of Burundi 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) 

 

Financing Plan 

Source  Amount Instrument 

 

TSF (Pillar I) 

 

 UA 12 million 

 

Grant 

Government  UA 0.00 M.  - 

TOTAL COST  UA 12 M.   

 

Key information on TSF financing 

 

TSF Grant Currency 

 

$US 

Commitment fee: % per annum on undisbursed amounts 

Service Commission 0%  of outstanding amount per  year 

  

TRE (baseline scenario) 

TRI (baseline scenario) 

NPV 

23.01% 

20.17% 

BIF 89,72 billion 

 

Time Frame - Main milestones (Expected) 

Preparation August-September 2017 

Concept Note Approval October 2017 

Project appraisal October 2017 

Project approval December 2017 

Entry into Force January 2018 

Closure of loan December 2022 

Last Disbursement June 2023  
 

 



 

iii 

 

Project Summary  
 

General overview of the project: The Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera 

Natural Region Project (PATAREB) covers Bugesera natural region comprising seven (07) 

municipalities in Kirundo Province and Gitreranyi municipality in Muyinga Province. These 

municipalities cover an area of 2 100 km ², that is 7,5 % of the national territory, and has a 

population of 1 004 907 inhabitants (2017 estimates), 519 665 of them women, or more then 

51,71% of the population within the project intervention zone (PIZ). The project targets 

economically, socially and environmentally fragile and disadvantaged communities, who 

possess significant agricultural and fish farming potential  and whose sustainable development 

will contribute to improving food and nutritional security, increase the income of vulnerable 

small-scale producers, alleviate the impact of poverty on rural households and strengthen the 

resilience of populations, including women and youth.  With a total cost of UA 12.00 million, 

fully funded from Pillar I (additional support) resources of the Transition Support Facility 

(TSF), the project will be implemented over a five-year period in  three (03) components: (i) 

Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of the Living Conditions of inhabitants; and (iii) 

Management and Coordination. PATAREB will directly benefit more than 650,000 people, 

51% of them women, and approximately 355 000 residents within the area of intervention. In 

order to ensure sustainability of investments, the participative and inclusive approach adopted 

during preparation and evaluation will continue during execution in order to associate all the 

recipients and to allow the durability of the investments. Similarly, an innovative approach to 

participative development of agricultural values chains and streams will be adopted to address 

the key constraints to durable financing of agricultural entrepreneurship within the framework 

of public-private partnerships (PPP) and improve the access to markets, guaranteeing a better 

price for producers. 

 

Needs Assessment: Burundi's agricultural sector engages more than 94% of the active 

population and accounts for more than 39% of the GDP, more than 80% of foreign exchange 

earnings and provides 95% of the dietary intake. It also accounts for 25% of government 

spending. The financing needs of the sector were estimated at approximately BIF 145 billion 

during the evaluation mission, to achieve the objectives of the National Plan for agricultural 

investment (NAIP-2012-2017) in terms of increased production and productive capital, 

organization of producers, developing profitable sectors and strengthening institutions 

providing technical support to rural areas. In 2017, the resources are estimated to be BIF 59.28 

billion, a significant deficit of over BIF 85.70 billion. The TSF resources, approximately BIF 

29.28 billion, will help to significantly reduce the financing gap, especially in the eight (08) 

municipalities in Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces. Moreover, the control of water for irrigation 

in the project area requires significant resources, as well as the dissemination of new 

technologies, creation of added value in the main agricultural sectors, sustainable promotion of 

young agricultural entrepreneurs, and strengthening resilience of socio-ecological systems. 

 

Added value for the African Development Bank: PATAREB supports the Bank's Ten Year 

Strategy 2013-2022 and the priority intervention areas funded by TSF in Burundi will support 

food and nutritional security, value chains and strengthen resilience. In particular, the project 

will contribute to reducing the Agricultural Financing Gap, serving as a catalyst for agricultural 

development of the area, by promoting a better control of water, reinforcing economic 

infrastructures, promoting appropriate technologies for food production, processing and 

marketing. In addition, PATAREB reinforces the Bank’s role in financing the agricultural 

sector in Burundi while taking into account the Bank's previous experience in similar projects. 

Lastly, it implements the Bank strategy to “remedy fragility and reinforce resilience in Africa 



 

iv 

 

2014-2019” by consolidating the role of communities, the private sector, and local NGOs in 

reinforcing resilience, local governance and citizen monitoring. This intervention will help build 

resilience and reduce situations of fragility that characterize the targeted Provinces. The project is 

also aligned to the Bank's Gender Strategy 2014 - 2018, in strengthening their right to ownership 

of developed land, economic empowerment through income generation and strengthening their 

capacity in management and in entrepreneurship. 

 

Knowledge management PATAREB will establish a baseline for land surveys (including on 

value chains), which will serve to establish a reliable database, disaggregated by gender, to 

measure results indicators and the impact of the project. A geo-referenced map will be created 

to provide information on developed sites and completed infrastructure. Specific impact 

assessment studies (quick and in-depth) will be carried out by competent firms and the results 

will feed into the project database. This information will be made available on a web site and 

will be shared with all stakeholders. The project will also support training and capacity building 

for diverse local actors, including, in the first instance, farmers within the reclaimed wetlands 

and women in charge of processing and marketing food products. The project will seek to 

disseminate good practices for conservation and storage of agricultural products. In the field of 

irrigation, the project will develop expertise in hillside irrigation using solar energy, and 

resilience to climate change, disseminating innovative actions promoting local know-how, 

including by women. Communication mechanisms and capitalization of project outcomes, 

value addition processes benefiting women and youth through development of value chains, as 

well as participatory assessment and evaluation by the civil society integrated within the project 

implementation mechanism, is part of knowledge management. 



 

v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
(*): Baseline indicator data will be updated at the end of the baseline survey. 

COUNTRY AND NAME OF 

PROJECT: 

Burundi : Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project (PATAREB) : 

PROJECT PURPOSE:  Stimulate  agricultural development of Bugesera natural region by setting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and suppo rt to social safety nets. 
 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Long term  2017 2022 and beyond 

Stat. INSAE, 

EMICOV/EDS 

 

Food and nutritional security 

improved and incidence of 
poverty reduced 

Average prevalence of food insecurity in the project intervention zone 

(PIZ) 

12%  5%  / 8% ( 2020) 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (children 5-59 months) in the PIZ 50.8% 25% / 35% (2020) 
SCRPIII Studies / 
Survey 

Proportion of population in poverty within the PIZ, disaggregated: M/F 39% 25% / 30% (2018) AGVSA Reports 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Medium Term  2015 2020  Risks 

 Unclear land and demesnial issues may bring 
difficulties in highlighting sites to be developed 

and compromise project objectives in terms of 

food security and the fight against poverty 

particularly for women and youth. 

 

Mitigation measures 

 Support to the project in terms of planning and 
land management which will result in the 
establishment of tripartite agreements  (rights 

holders of the common lands, professional 

organizations) and cooperatives in order to 
mitigate  conflicts  

1. An increase in agriculture, 

food , vegetables and fish 

production 

Average productivity for rice and sorghum respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 2 and 0.8 ≥ 10 and 2  Agricultural statistics 

 Project Monitoring 
Reports 

 Mid-term review report  
and project completion 

report 

Average productivity of maize and cassava respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 1 and 4.5 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Average productivity for vegetables (T/Ha) ≤ 2 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Commercial fish production volume / year (T) 700 2.200 

2. Improved  income for 
producers in rural areas, 

including women and young 

farmers 

Income/year for food crop production managed by men/women (BIF) 540000/300000 1000000/855000 

Income/year for horticulture production men/women (BIF) 90000/171000 1905000/2175000 

Income per year for fish farm run by men/women (BIF) ND 1260000/1065000 

3. Access to income and social 

services improved for very poor 

households 

Number of households benefiting from social transfers ND 1500 

% of social transfer beneficiaries  with a current integrated farm plan. ND 100% 

3. Establishment of a pro-youth 
agri-business promotion 

framework  

Number of operational companies with promoters H/F ND ≥ 12/11 

Number of bankable agri-business projects developed for H/F* ND 100/88 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Short Term  2017 Before 202  Risks  

 Climatic hazards may aggravate ecosystem 
degeneration (drought, flooding, etc.) leaving 
inhabitants more vulnerable and promoting 

conflict. 

 Restricted ownership and management of rural 
infrastructures 

Mitigation Measure: 

 Irrigation, protection of areas at risk, opening 
up production zones, integration of climate 

information in designing projects, and 
safeguarding incomes will alleviate this risk. 

I. SUPPORT TO DEV. OF 

AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

1.1 Reclaiming wetlands 

Reclaimed wetland areas (ha) for the benefit of men/women 618 1150 
 Project activity report 

 Monitoring unit reports 

 Contracts signed with 
the companies 

 Civil Society Activity 
Report 

 

1.2 Development of hillside 

irrigation 
Area covered by pilot highland irrigation (ha) for the benefit of M/F 0 30/20 

II. AGRICULTURAL 
TRANSFOMATION AND 

Area (ha) developed using new technologies for M/F  ND 3.382 / 2.200 



 

vi 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IMPROVEMENT OF 

LIVING CONDITIONS 

 

2.1 Support to Development 

of Value Chains 

Member of contact groups  formed in the Farmer Field Schools (FFS)  and 

Demonstration Units (DU) on  technological innovations: M/F 

0 105 / 105  Capacity building in conflict management for 
municipalities 

Number of stores (post-harvest inputs) built managed by M/F 0 4 / 6  CARDER Reports 
Agreements and 

protocols signed 

Project activity report 

Risks 

 Lack of follow-up of  technological 
innovations by communities 

 Weakness of follow-up by municipalities (MOD), 
delays in procurement, low capacity in technical services 

and of companies. 
Mitigation Measures: 

 Take committed and participatory steps in 
involving, organizing and training local actors 

 Financing a capacity building program for all 
actors. 

Person-days of training in technological review workshops : M/F 0/0 1450/1450 

Number of peasants trained in fine with resilient 

technologies 
ND 1750 / 1750 

Number of producers of improved seeds assisted: M/F 0 20/10 

Length of tracks built post-harvest (km) 0 13  

Number of beneficiaries from the Funds for CVA Promotion : M/F 0 12,600/8,400  

2.2 Promotion of Youth 

Entrepreneurship 

Number of business incubators supported 0 5≤ 

 DGPAE/MINAGRIE 
performance report 
 Civil Society 

Organizations report 

 MFI Report 
 Project Activity 

Report 

Number of Youth Employability support beneficiaries 0 / 0 365 / 135 

Number of PO and female EIG for transformation strengthened M/F 0 / 0 0 / 30 

Number of innovative youth initiative support fund beneficiaries: M/F 0/0 105/105 

Number of MFI that have signed agreements for rural financing 0/0 1 

Number of young producers benefiting from support in fish farming M/F: 0/0 85 / 25 

2.3 Support to Social Safety 

nets 

Area (ha) of catchment areas developed for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 2.500 / 910 

Area (ha) of catchment areas afforested for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 1.000 / 650 

Number of operators  (M/F) benefiting from livestock breeds:  0/0 350 / 200 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of agricultural inputs:  0/0 7.000 / 5.000 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of IGA: 0/0 950 / 1.500 

A number of social transfers beneficiaries taking part in awareness raising 
actions 

0/0 2100  
 

      

III. PROJECT 

MANAGEMENT 

Numbers of work plans and budget (AWB) produced and carried out 0/0 5  MPP 

 SAP System 

 Audit Reports 

 Activity Reports 

 Mission aide-
memoire 

 Impact assessment 
report 

Risks 

 Institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 
management and monitoring-evaluation. 
Mitigation Measures: 

A capacity building program for MINAGRIE 

and the PMU in project administration, 
procurement and financial management will 

mitigate this risk. 

Number of quarterly reports / approved annual audit reports 0/0 20/5 

Numbers of PPM plans produced and updated /rate of disbursement 0/0 5 / ≥ 95% 

Number of steering committee meetings held 0/0 10 

Number of supervision missions carried out by project supervisors /the 

Bank  
0/0 20 / 10 

Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced 0/0 1/1 

 Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced  0/0 1/1 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

Component 1: Support to Dev. of agricultural Infrastructure:  UA 3.38 million (28.20%) 

Component 2: Transf. Agricultural and improvement of living Cond.: UA 7.46 million (62.19%) 

Component 3: Project Management    UA 1.15 million (9.61%) 

TOTAL UA 12.00 million (100%) 

Total cost of  project: UA 12.00 million 

TSF Grant UA 12.00 million  (100%) 

Burundi Government UA 0.00 million (0.00%) 

(**)  M/F: Male / Female 
  



 

vii 

 

 

Indicative calendar of Project Execution 

 
 

No. ACTIVITIES 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 

1 TSF Grant Negotiations                         

2 Signature of grant agreement                          

3 Satisfaction of conditions precedent to 1st disbursement                          

4 Publication of general procurement notice                          

5 Recruitment of PMU staff                          

6 PATAREB launching workshop                          

7 
Procurement of PMU goods and offices (vehicles, IT equipment 

etc.) 
                  

      

8 Update of project baseline                           

9 Signature of agreements with partners organisations                         

10 Development of the Annual Work Plan(PTA)                          

11 Installation of management unit                          

12 Recruitment of service providers                           

13 Hillside irrigation: DAO                          

14 
Installation of post-harvest infrastructure (tracks, storage 

warehouses, processing units): DAO 
                   

      

15 Agreement with Micro-finance Institutions                          

16 Agreement with Partner Organisations                          

17 Development of Rice Value Chains                         

18 Development of Sorghum Value Chains                         

19 Development of Maize Value Chains                         

20 Introduction of Blue Economy Value Chain                         

21 Training of  actors                          

22 Watershed Management (ABV)                         

23 Support to Social Safety Nets                         

24 Development of Markets and Marketing                         

25 Monitoring and Supervision of Work                         

26 Development & Implementation of Monitoring-Evaluation System                          

27 Annual external audit                         

28 Completion report                         



 

1 

 

PROPOSAL AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS OF 

DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP CONCERNING  

A TRANSITION SUPPORT FACILITY GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI 

TO FINANCE THE SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 
 

Management submits this proposal for a UA 12 million TSF grant to the Republic of Burundi, 

to finance the Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project 

(PATAREB). 

 

I. Strategic Orientation and justification 
 

1.1. Linkages with the Country's Strategy and Goals 
 

1.1.1.  PATAREB is in line the implementation framework strategy of Government overall 

development policy, as captured in the "Burundi Vision 2025" document and in the 2 phase of 

strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction (PRSP II). At the sector level, it  at the 

same time supports implementation of the national Plan for agricultural investment (NAIP) 

linked to Burundi's National Agricultural Strategy (NAS)  of the implementation of the national 

policy on social protection, as well as the national employment policy These strategies aim at 

a high and inclusive growth likely to promote  improvement in the quality of life of vulnerable 

populations, by addressing food and nutritional security constraints, increasing incomes and 

creating employment particularly for the youth, by making agriculture more attractive. In 

addition to structural investments in water control, development of wetlands and afforestation 

of ridges, the project will contribute to the development of agricultural value chains targeted 

through new growth areas in Bugesera region and taking into account agro-industrial needs 

(rice, maize, sorghum, horticultural products, fish), as well as strengthening household 

resilience towards climate change. The project will also contribute directly to the objectives of 

the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) of Agenda 2063 of 

the African Union and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), related notably to food security 

et improvement of nutrition, promotion of sustainable agriculture discernible by production, 

productivity and greater value addition, youth employment, infrastructure, promotion of gender 

equality and empowerment of women as well as climate change. 

 

1.2. Justification of the Bank's involvement 
 

1.2.1  Agriculture financing remains insufficient as a result of reduction of external financing 

but also because the Government has not increased the proportion of national resources reserved 

for the agricultural sector. The share of the national budget reserved for agriculture was, on 

average, 5.2% between 2012 and 2014, compared to 10% of the national budget agreed upon 

during the Maputo declaration and the PNIA review conducted in 2015 showing a gap of 450 

billion BIF, which did not meet the target objective of inclusive growth, poverty reduction and 

strengthening of nutritional and food security. Considered in the past as the breadbasket of 

Burundi, Kirundo province, the project intervention zone is seriously affected by irregular 

rainfall patterns. As a result, it is one of the main emigration areas in the country. Climate 

analysis shows that the rainy season regularly experiences altered rainfall patterns and when 

this happens during the main farming seasons, the fall in agricultural production is considerable, 

increasing the rate of food insecurity which may be as high as 60%. On average, water deficit 

is estimated at more than 40%, which makes the choice offered by the development of swamps 

and hillside irrigation the best strategies to ensure a good harvest. In addition, due to a 

combination  of several factors such as (i) the sharp drop in agricultural production resulting 



 

2 

 

from climate change, (ii) the precariousness of populations, exacerbated by the widespread 

practice of selling of standing crops s causing a sharp drop in prices paid to producers, (iii) the 

high level of unemployment and underemployment, especially of the youth,  Kirundo province 

is among the poorest in the country with a  poverty index of 69.2% (ECVMB 2014) and a rate 

of malnutrition of children under 5 years, at more than 60%. In a context where 85 percent of 

the possesses land of less than or equal to 50 Ares and an average more than 6 children per 

household, efforts must be made to improve agricultural productivity, support the resilience the 

most vulnerable populations by allowing them to have access to employment and methods of 

financing income-generating activities. 

 

1.2.2  As a result of drought experienced in Kirundo Province in recent years which have had 

a negative impact on living conditions, the Government has implemented an ad hoc working 

group to propose a lasting solution to this situation. Within this context, the Bank was requested 

to support this program by financing PATAREB, for an amount of UA 12 million, to strengthen 

the resilience of the people of this region. This TSF support will help reduce the deficit in 

agricultural investment within the region, in particular by implementing the NIPA of the SAN. 

Consistent and high rates of agricultural growth resulting from high productivity are therefore 

necessary for increase in incomes and to accelerate poverty reduction. By targeting this 

disadvantaged area with significant agricultural potential, and by supporting  development of 

infrastructure and agricultural entrepreneurship, the TSF intervention will help reduce poverty, 

social disparities, promote employment of the youth, mitigate  fragility, and build resilience to 

climate change. In the project design, the prism of fragility has been applied so that the main 

sectoral fragility factors identified in the project implementation zone are taken into account by 

project activities, as indicated in annex IV. Finally, the project fits within the strategy of some 

agribusiness companies who have opted for the substitution of imported raw materials with 

local products, which will contribute to the improvement of the country’s trade balance.    

The Bank's intervention through this project is justified by the vision and objectives of the 

transformation strategy for agriculture "Feed Africa" which is part of the High 5s of the Bank. 
The project will indeed contribute to the objectives of the strategy "Feed Africa" by: (i) poverty 

reduction through the financing of investment in facilities, infrastructure and equipment likely to be 

valued for the generation of income by the beneficiaries; (ii) promoting the transformation of agricultural 

products by agricultural value (CVA) chains; and (iii) the promotion of export of agricultural products 

by market development and the implementation of systems of market information. It also integrates the 

priority of the Bank "Improving the lives of people in Africa" insofar as it will contribute to: (i) eradicate 

famine by high quality and high volume food production; (ii) safeguard basic income through 

employment created within the framework of development work and income generating activities 

initiated in particular by households living in extreme poverty. Finally, through activities in support 

of Youth entrepreneurship, the project will contribute to the implementation of the Bank’s 

strategy for Youth employment in Africa 2016-2025. At the national level, the project is aligned 

to the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Burundi (2012-2016) which has been extended to the 

end of 2017, mainly on the Pillar II: Improvement of the infrastructure that integrates related 
activities oriented toward the fight against vulnerability and exclusion of vulnerable groups with the aim 

to contribute to mitigate the factors of fragility. Specifically, the project will contribute to results 4 to 7 

of Pillar 2 namely: (i) contribution to the promotion of food security (ii) protection of the environment 

and sustainable management of soil and water, (iii) creation of jobs and (iv) adaptation to climate 

change. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 
 

1.3.1  The framework for aid coordination is based on the institutional mechanism of follow-

up and evaluation of the LRCS2, articulated around the sectoral groups, which are frameworks 

for synergies and cooperation. Despite suspension of aid by some donors, the  "agricultural and 



 

3 

 

rural development" and "social protection” sectoral groups have remained operational. The 

Bank actively participates in arrangement of consultations and dialogue which brings together 

non-governmental organizations involved in these sectors. The meetings are organised on a 

quarterly basis to facilitate discussions on subjects relating to policies, and to conduct, in a 

concerted manner, discussions relating to planning and programming of various projects and to 

ensuring regular monitoring of  activities in the different sectors. This coordination mechanism 

allows improvement of complementarity of interventions by different PTFs, thus creating a 

natural synergy to multiply the impact of projects on the economic and social development of 

Burundi. 

 

1.3.2  In the agricultural sector, the Bank financed the Bugesera natural region rural 

infrastructure support project which wrapped up its activities in 2016. The other donors 

involved in this sector are the World Bank, IFAD, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and 

Belgium. In the field of social protection, the Bank has financed capacity-building projects in 

the past few years which have allowed the setting up of institutional structures in charge of 

employment and social protection while at the same time supporting a project for strengthening 

entrepreneurial capabilities of the youth and women. The main stakeholders in the social 

protection sector are the World Bank, WFP and UNICEF. With respect to youth employment, 

the only active project is the one financed by IFAD. The table below presents the main amounts 

by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector in Burundi. The table below 

presents the principal amounts by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector 

in Burundi. 

 

 Table 1.1  Principal amounts active in the sector since 2012 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Proportion 

GDP Exports Labour Force 

Agricultural sector 39% (2016)  80% 90% 

Stakeholders - Public Expenditure (programs or projects in progress) 

Government Donors Amounts (USD million ) Duration 

BIF 28.5  billion per year World Bank 155 2016-2022 

(Average 20012-2014) BANK                        - - 

That is 5.2% of the 

National Budget 
BTC 27.8 2011-2017 

 

Kingdom of the 

Netherlands 
                          27.1 2016-2021 

 IFAD                       144 2014-2019 

 FAO 9.7 2013-2018 

Aid Coordination level 

Presence of thematic working groups Yes 

Presence of a global sectoral program No 

 

1.3.3  Burundi and its partners have made progress in terms of aid efficiency, particularly in 
predictability of aid and its inclusion in the budget. Efforts are still to be made with regard to 
incorporation of gender equality into the development plans and in the use of national public 
finance management systems and procurement. In Burundi, the use of national public 
procurement systems by the Bank in its operations remains rather limited. However, since 2013, 
it has begun to use the national procedures for the award of contracts in the framework of the 
national tenders (AON) on a pilot basis. The on-going revision of the Code of Public 
Procurement (CPP) and Standard Bidding Documents for National Tenders (DTAON), which 
benefits from the Bank’s assistance, the World Bank and the Belgian Technical Cooperation, 
will allow the systematic recourse to the national procurement system. In terms of alignment to 
national systems and procedures, all projects are managed directly by permanent structures, 
within the supervising ministries. With regard to capacity building, the Bank works closely with 



 

4 

 

the Government, in organizing training in key areas such as financial management, 
disbursements and procurement with a view to the efficient and effective implementation of the 
portfolio by the CEP.  

 

II. Project Description 
 

2.1 Components of the project 
 

The overall objective PATAREB is to contribute to the improvement of populations 

livelihood through agriculture development and transformation. The specific objective of the 

project is to stimulate inclusive agricultural development in the Bugesera natural region by 

putting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and support to social 

safety nets. Scheduled for 5 years, the project comprises the following three (03) components: 

(i) Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of Populations Livelihood; and (iii) Management and 

Coordination. The activities are summarized in table 2.1 below: 

 

Table 2.1: Components of the project 
 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

A. 

 

SUPPORT  TO AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 

3,384.40 

(28.20%) 

A1. Completion of wetland development 

(i) Development of Nyavyamo swamp (300ha) 
(ii) Development of Kabuyenge swamp (232 ha) 
A.2. Development of the hillside irrigation 

(i) Bugabira municipality (20 ha on Cohoha Lake) 
(ii) Busoni municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha and 10 ha on 

Lake Rweeru) 

(iii) Kirundo municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha) 
. 

B. 

PROMOTION OF THE 

AGRICULTURALTRANSFORMATION 

AND IMPROVEMENT OF 

POPULTATIONS LIVELIHOOD 

 

7 462.95 

(62.19%) 

B1. Support to Development of Value Chains 

(i) Rice, maize and sorghum value chains 
(ii) Horticultural products value chain 
(iii) Subsistence agriculture value chain 
(iv) Blue economy value chain 
(v) Study on promotion of Banana, Maize and Horticulture 

value chains 

B2. Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 

(i) Business incubators; 
(ii) Support for Youth Employability 
(iii) Support to financing of young entrepreneurs; 

B3. Support to Social Safety Nets 

(i) Watershed Management - Labour intensive work  

 Gradual grading and agroforestry 1800 ha at 
Nyavyamo and 1550 ha at Kabuyenge 

(ii) Food security support  for  very poor and vulnerable 
households (few livestock and agricultural inputs) 

(iii) Support for income-generating activities 
(iv) Support to the strengthening of human capital;  



 

5 

 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

C 
MANAGEMENT AND 

COORDINATION OF PROJECT 

1 152.65 

(9.61%) 

 

(i) Organization of  strategic and operational planning of 
project 

(ii) Coordination of the project activities  
(iii) Administrative , accounting and financial management  
(iv) Acquisition of goods, works and services,  
(v) Institutional support, 
(vi) Establishment of a training and communication plan 
(vii) Monitoring and evaluation of project execution 

 TOTAL 12,000.00  

 
 

2.2 Adopted technical solutions and substitution solutions studied  
 

2.2.1  The technical solutions adopted are based on the lessons learned from similar 

achievements, including the PAIRB and the PABVARC, adapted to the specific context of the 

area of intervention of the project.  Thus the choice of gravity irrigation which involves watering 

the crops by dripping water through open conduits connected to a reservoir upstream which 

could be either a dam with a water pipe from the river or a water container has been preferred 

for Nyavyamo and Kabuyenge swamps..  This technical choice was motivated by the fact that 

the cost of construction of a gravity irrigation system is 3 to 4 times lower than that of a 

pressurised one and does not require a source of energy 

 

2.2.2  Regarding hillside irrigation, the chose option was photovoltaic energy on the basis of 

the following benefits: (i) solar energy is inexhaustible and non-polluting (clean and does not 

emit greenhouse gases); (ii) it supplies energy needs in a sustainable manner and with 

significant savings; (iii) the costs of maintenance and operation of a thermal installation are 

relatively low; (iv) the energy performance is positive once configuration has been carried out 

in relation with the irrigation needs. 

 

2.2.3  The choice of the "Cash for Work” approach  has been prioritized with regard to support 

to social safety nets, in order to meet both the needs of protection of watersheds and access to 

income for the most vulnerable households. In addition, the transfer of agricultural inputs and 

support for income-generating activities naturally helps these households to emerge from 

vulnerability in a sustainable way. 
 

Table 2.2: Alternative solutions considered and reasons for rejection 
Alternative solution Brief Description Reason for rejection 

Pressurised irrigation 

system, with an efficiency 

that can reach 80% to 90% 

of irrigation system 

In addition to irrigation system 

install a pumping system to 

distribute water in the reservoirs. 

This option is outside the project framework  which requires 

involvement of individuals and local cooperatives in the 

implementation of hydro-agricultural developments to be 

installed at a community level. In addition, this solution is too 

expensive for all communities 

Pressurised irrigation using 

thermal energy (diesel or 

petrol) 

Pressurised irrigation using a 

pumping station operated by a fossil 

fuel energy source (diesel or petrol) 

This option is considered too expensive, because of the cost 

of fuel. The source of energy is not aligned with the 

framework, in compliance with environmental standards  

Recruit a private provider 

to perform all of watershed 

development works. 

A service provider is recruited to 

complete the watershed 

development works for the benefit 

of inhabitants. 

This option does not allow the service provider company to 

use the local labour force which will then access income 

benefits intended for the most vulnerable households. 

 

2.3 Type of Project 
 

PATAREB is an investment operation financed by a Pillar I grant from the Transition 

Support Fund. Burundi does not implement project and programs using the sectoral approach 



 

6 

 

due to institutional constraints. Consequently, the project approach has been considered more 

axed towards the framework of this proposal, to guarantee achievement of results and ensure 

effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources allocated to the project.  

 

2.4 Cost of project and financing arrangements 
 

2.4.1  Cost of project. The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 12.00 million (BIF 

29.28 billion) excluding taxes and duties. This cost is distributed as follows:  UA 5.76 million 

(BIF 14.06 billion) in foreign currency and UA 6.24 million (BIF 15.23 billion) in local 

currency. This costs includes contingency reserves and for increase in costs which are estimated 

to be at 5% and 4% respectively on average. The provision for an increase in prices has been 

estimated on the basis of  current levels and projected from rates of inflation  in local currency 

and in foreign currencies at 3.2% and 1.8% respectively , per year on average. The provision 

for physical contingencies is estimated at between 0 and 7 %, a summary of the estimated cost 

of the project by component and by expenditure account is presented in Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 

below, while the details are provided in the technical annex of project appraisal report. 
Table 2.3: 

Summary of Estimated Costs by Component 

 COMPONENTS 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 2,710.50 4,734.00 7,444.50 1,110.79 1,940.04 3,050.82 64 28 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 2,410.50 4,034.00 6,444.50 987.85 1,653.17 2,641.02 63 24 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

B AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & IMPROV. 

POP. LIVE 9,841.00 7,022.99 16,863.98 4,032.93 2,878.08 6,911.01 42 63 

 Support to Value Chain Development 4,656.76 2,437.67 7,094.43 1,908.38 998.98 2,907.36 34 26 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 2,486.75 325.00 2,811.75 1,019.09 133.19 1,152.28 12 10 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 2,697.49 4,260.31 6,957.80 1,105.46 1,745.91 2,851.37 61 26 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 

OF PROJECT 1,652.09 1,006.85 2,658.94 677.04 412.62 1,089.66 38 10 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

Table 2.4: 
Summary of Project Cost by Category of Expenses 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 I. INVESTMENT 11,839.33 12,393.36 24,232.68 4,851.87 5,078.91 9,930.78 51 90 

 A. WORKS 3,770.04 8,796.76 12,566.80 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 70 47 

  Developments 2,898.99 6,764.31 9,663.30 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 70 36 

  Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

  Construction & Rehabilitation 32.55 75.95 108.50 13.34 31.13 44.46 70 - 

  Post-Harvest Infrastructure 538.50 1,256.50 1,795.00 220.68 514.93 735.61 70 7 

 B. GOODS 650.91 1,291.69 1,942.60 266.75 529.35 796.10 66 7 

  1. VEHICLES 72.50 217.50 290.00 29.71 89.13 118.84 75 1 

  2. FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT & INPUTS 578.41 1,074.19 1,652.60 237.04 440.21 677.25 65 6 

 C. SERVICES 4,268.38 2,304.90 6,573.28 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 35 24 

  Training 726.00 484.00 1,210.00 297.52 198.35 495.87 40 4 

  Technical Assistant 85.50 484.50 570.00 35.04 198.55 233.59 85 2 

  Studies 150.88 184.40 335.28 61.83 75.57 137.40 55 1 

  Contractual Services 3,249.75 1,083.25 4,333.00 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 25 16 

  Audit 56.25 68.75 125.00 23.05 28.17 51.23 55 - 

 D.MISCELLANEOUS 3,150.00 - 3,150.00 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 - 12 

II. OPERATIONS 2,364.26 370.48 2,734.74 968.90 151.83 1,120.72 14 10 

 A. STAFF 1,849.65 - 1,849.65 758.00 - 758.00 - 7 

 B. TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCE 97.00 - 97.00 39.75 - 39.75 - - 



 

7 

 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 

C. MAINTENANCE, OPERATION AND 

REPAIR 157.73 283.85 441.59 64.64 116.33 180.97 64 2 

 D. GENERAL COSTS 259.88 86.63 346.50 106.50 35.50 142.00 25 1 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

 

 

Table 2.5:  

Expense Calendar by component (in thousands of UA) 

COMPONENTS 
PROJECT YEARS 

Total 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 91.01 1,523.28 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 3,384.40 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 91.01 1,069.46 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 2,930.58 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation - 453.82 - - - 453.82 

B. AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & POP. LIVELIHOOD 

IMPROV. 1,019.76 2,519.72 2,802.57 871.94 248.95 7,462.95 

 Support to Development of Value Chains 376.72 1,550.49 588.78 369.22 211.76 3,096.99 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 628.82 216.42 308.02 18.51 18.54 1,190.30 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 14.22 752.81 1,905.77 484.21 18.66 3,175.66 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF 

PROJECT 449.43 188.83 180.61 165.97 167.81 1,152.65 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 1,560.20 4,231.84 4,566.53 1,130.71 510.73 12,000.00 

 

 

2.4.2 Financing facility: The costs shall be entirely financed by a TSF grant amounting to 

UA 12 million.  Counterpart contributions by the government were not feasible for this project, 

given that Burundi is recovering progressively but with major challenges from the 2015 socio-

political crisis, hardly mobilising contributions for recent and on-going operations.  This 

situation gave the Country-Team no other choice but to recommend a financial arrangement 

without counterpart state funds, if at all feasible. Within this context, the project was designed 

to allow financing of all activities from TSF resources. Distribution of financing of expenses 

by source of funds and list of goods and services is recorded in tables 2.6 and 2.7, here below. 

 
Table 2.6:  

Project Financing Plan 

FINANCING SOURCES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 
Local Cur. For. Exch Total Local Cur. For. Exch Total 

 TSF Grant 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 Government of Burundi 0.00 -0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 

Total 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 
Table 2.7:  

Allocation of Project resources by Source of Financing (in thousands of UA)  

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

A. WORKS 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 

 Developments 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 

 Irrigation 122.94 286.87 409.81 

 Construction and Refurbishment 13.34 31.13 44.46 

 Post-harvest infrastructure 220.68 514.93 735.61 

B. GOODS 266.75 529.35 796.10 

 Vehicles 29.71 89.13 118.84 

 Facilities 237.04 440.21 677.25 

C. SERVICES 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 

 Training 297.52 198.35 495.87 



 

8 

 

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

 Technical Assistance 35.04 198.55 233.59 

 Studies 61.83 75.57 137.40 

 Contractual Services 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 

 Audit 23.05 28.17 51.23 

D. MISCELLANEOUS 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 

E. STAFF 758.00 - 758.00 

F. OPERATION 210.89 151.83 362.72 

Non-allocated 419.04 529.46 948.51 

Total 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 

 

2.5 Area and beneficiaries targeted by the project 
 

2.5.1  The project intervention zone (PIZ) covers the natural region of Bugesera extending 

over all the seven communes of Kirundo Province and the Gitreranyi Commune of Muyinga 

Province.  It is bordered to the North and the West by the Republic of Rwanda and Ngozi 

Province. To the South and East, it shares a common border with Muyinga Province. Its surface 

area of 2,100 km2 represents 75% of the national territory. The population of the Province in 

2017 is estimated at 1,004,907 inhabitants, of whom 519,665 are women. Despite having a high 

agricultural potential, the region’s agricultural yields are low not only because of the limited 

use of chemical fertilisers, but also the rudimentary farming techniques, lack of inputs, 

degeneration of seeds, etc. the dominant cultivation system is the combination of crops with the 

exception of rice cultivation, which is carried out in monoculture in swamps.  

 

2.5.2   The project will directly benefit a population of 900,000 people (51% women) 

composed mainly of agri-pastoralists. The latter will be supported through activities aimed at 

developing rice, maize and sorghum value chains and supporting the development of the blue 

economy. The development of these value chains will also benefit private sector companies 

engaged in the processing of agricultural products. In addition, special attention will be paid to 

vulnerable populations as well as the youth. Vulnerable populations will benefit particularly 

from the “Cash-for-work” approach developed through watershed management, transfer of 

agricultural inputs and support for the development of income-generating activities. This 

population group will benefit from 20% of parcels that will be developed in the Nyavyamo 

swamp. The project will also prioritise youth through related activities related to 

entrepreneurship promotion to enable self-employment. The choice of beneficiaries will be 

made in close consultation with the populations and the local Administration.  

 

2.6 Participatory approach for the identification, design and implementation of the 
project 
 

The Bank has adopted the participatory approach in its assistance to Burundi to 

formulate the request for TSF financing and throughout the project preparation process. This 

has resulted in the organisation of workshops and discussion meetings with public institutions, 

non-state actors, producer organizations, civil society including organizations working in the 

field of gender, private sector, TFPs and beneficiaries. This approach made it possible to better 

understand the major issues, to identify the appropriate solutions, and to reach a broad 

consensus on its design and the implementation modalities of the project. Thus, the producers 

reaffirmed the need to take into account the current rights holders in the allocation of developed 

swamp parcels. Rural women in the PIZ emphasised their access to developed perimeters, and 

new processing and marketing technologies. The Kirundo Governor and Local Authorities 

expressed their specific needs to address the vulnerability of inhabitants, by supporting social 

safety nets, improving agricultural production conditions and mitigating conflicts related to 

land competition. As for the youth, they insisted on vocational training and their successful 



 

9 

 

establishment as modern agricultural entrepreneurs targeting the markets. The project will 

continue this participatory approach so that local actors take ownership of activities and 

implementation during implementation. Good communication will be developed to ensure 

visibility of achievements and impacts and wide dissemination of project achievements. 
 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group experience and lessons learned in project design 
 

2.7.1  In October 2017, the Bank's portfolio in Burundi consisted of 17 operations, of which 8 

were national, at a total amount of UA 121.4 million (USD 171.2 million). The agricultural 

sector does not have an active project, the only project in the sector having closed on 

31/12/2016. The overall performance of the portfolio is assessed as satisfactory with a rating of 

3.5 in scale from 1 to 4.  The portfolio review conducted in 2016 highlighted shortcomings that 

were taken into account to ensure the project's performance. These include:  (i) Lack of 

familiarity with the Bank's procurement and internal control rules and procedures within the 

PIUs delays in setting up key project staff; (ii) delay in setting up key personnel, (iii) delay in 

the development of technical studies and poor synchronization of input procurement and  

weather patterns, (iv) low ownership of project achievements by beneficiary organizations; (v) 

delay in the provision and / or insufficiency of counterpart funds which severely hampers the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. In addition, the project took into account lessons learned 

from the Bank's Strategy and Program Appraisal Report for Burundi 2004-2015, which focused 

on (i) insufficient targeting to ensure that vulnerable populations are taken into account in the 

various projects as well as (ii) a weak integration of job creation support activities, especially 

for the youth and environmental conservation. 

 

2.7.2  The design of PATAREB took into account the lessons learned from the Bank’s projects 

in Burundi and those of the Bank's TSF portfolio, as shown below: 

 

Table 2.8:  
Consideration of the Bank Group experience and lessons learned 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

Lack of familiarity with the Bank's 

procurement and internal control rules 

and procedures within the PIUs. 

Provide proper training in Bank procurement and financial management 

procedures at project launch to PIU members and executives from partner 

administrative structures involved in project management. 

Delay in setting up key project staff. Adoption of the pre-procurement process in order to quickly set up the 

PIU and launch the various procurement processes.  

 
Delays in the development of technical 

studies.  

 

Low synchronisation of agricultural 

input acquisition and the rhythm of the 

seasons. 

The project will adopt community procurement for agricultural input 

acquisitions to ensure compliance with growing seasons. 

 

Low ownership of project achievements 

by beneficiary organisations. 

Right from the start of the project; recruit a local operator (NGO) with 

the necessary expertise to: (i) structure and strengthen the organisational 

capacities of producer organisations, (ii) provide support for improving 

good governance of POs, and (iii) support development of agricultural 

production. 

  

Late and/or insufficient provisions of 

counterpart funds severely handicap the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. 

Limited use of counterpart funds to finance key activities to address 

current fiscal challenges. 

 

Insufficient targeting of vulnerable 

populations. 

The NGO providing support from the beginning of the project will 

support the process of targeting vulnerable households.  



 

10 

 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

 Some fragility factors such as 

environmental protection, employment, 

especially of youth are not sufficiently 

taken into account in Bank operations in 

Burundi. 

A sub-component has been set aside to support the creation of youth 

employment and the protection of the environment will be taken into 

account in watershed management and reforestation.  

 

2.8 Key performance indicators  
 

The main performance indicators to be monitored from the baseline are:  (i) number of 

rehabilitated dams; (ii) developed areas with partial and total control; (iii) level of additional 

production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (iv) number of VA infrastructure completed (market 

sheds, km of farm tracks, warehouses for products and inputs, etc.); (v) number of operators by 

type of development supported disaggregated by gender; (vi) number of technology reviews 

and multi-stakeholder platforms completed and the percentage attributed to women; (vii) level 

of income growth including that of women and youth; (viii) number of youth jobs and women 

created in entrepreneurial initiatives; (ix) number of producers, processors and traders trained 

and organized into cooperatives in accordance; (x) degree of involvement of women in 

decision-making bodies and their rate of access to land after development; (xi) number of 

installed transformation units; and (xii) malnutrition rate in the beneficiary population. All the 

indicators selected for the project have been aligned with the main CSP indicators and those 

retained within the framework of the NAIP.  

 

III. Project feasibility 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  
 

3.1.1  The financial and economic analysis of the project was carried on the basis of 

cost/benefit analysis of the expected outcomes of the project, comparing the with and without 

project situations, over the life cycle of investments in promotion of agricultural transformation 

or project's lifespan  (Project life), estimated at 25 years. The expected benefits of the project 

come from the transformation of agriculture into the project intervention zone (PIZ), based on 

the preservation of natural resources and other livelihoods, including: (i) the sustainable 

promotion of agricultural value chains by intelligent agriculture, for productions in the project 

area such as rice, sorghum, maize, cassava, beans and farm produce. (ii) promotion of the blue 

economy (pond culture, cage and above-ground bins); (i) sustainable promotion of value chains 

of non-timber forest products (NTFPs), such as honey (beekeeping), pods, almonds, seeds and 

natural fruit, leaves and bark used in the traditional pharmacopoeia; (iv) improving the 

ecological balance and maintaining a habitat conducive to wildlife development that also offers 

environmental opportunities; (v) improving the well-being of the population by preventing 

drought and famine, improving food security, reducing the medical bill with the regulation of 

climatic conditions, reducing the hardship of the population; the work of families, especially 

women and vulnerable groups, improving people's life expectancy, better incomes for access 

to health care and education, etc. (vi) improvement of animal and livestock production, because 

of the quality and abundance of pasture and water; (vii) spin-offs from carbon dioxide 

sequestration (carbon credit, including bio-carbon); and (viii) the creation of temporary and 

permanent jobs, resulting from project achievements. The detailed assumptions of the economic 

and financial analysis, the tables of production and exploitation models (situation without and 

with the project) and the financial and economic flows are detailed in the technical annexes 

(Annex B8). 

 

 



 

11 

 

 

Table 3.1: Key economic and financial factors 
 

NPV (baseline scenario) 89.72 billion BIF 

TRI (baseline scenario) 20.17% 

Economic NPV (baseline scenario) 92.01 billion BIF 

TRE (baseline scenario) 23.02% 

 

3.1.2  Financial performance: The additional revenues resulting from the various models of 

development and exploitation retained are the following: (i) development of marshes 

(floodplains with water control) allows double rice cultivation (10 T/ha in total per year), 

corresponding to about BIF 1 509 000/ha, or BIF377 000  per farmer with 51 % of women 

beneficiaries; (ii) facilities also used for market gardening in rotation, for a production value 

BIF 7,474,000/ha or BIF 1,868,500 per male farmer, including women beneficiaries; (iii) 

cultivation of sorghum and maize in family farming on plateaux and watersheds BIF990 000 

/ha per farmer; (iv) the development of fish farming on and around Cohoha and Rweru lakes, 

for an estimated annual income per farmer of BIF845,000  (see Annex B7 for the typology of 

farm size and overall additional revenues released, thus contributing to increased value added 

through the project). The internal financial rate of return (IRR) is estimated at BIF 89.72 billion. 

The sensitivity tests established on the basis of simulations of successive decreases in prices or 

agricultural yields from 2.5% to 35%, show that the IRR falls more slowly than prices and 

yields, with a break-even value that is set at a drastic price reduction of more than 27.25%. As 

a result, the IRR is stable, with the effect of reducing the incidence of poverty in the IPA. 

 

3.1.3  Economic performance: The basic economic rate of return is 23.01% for a net present 

value (NPV) of BIF 92.01 billion. The other economic impacts of the project can be 

summarized as follows: (i) the upstream effects of additional revenues on providers (NGOs, 

companies, suppliers, consulting firms); (ii) the downstream effects of generating additional 

income on traders and processors who are predominantly women, thus contributing to women's 

empowerment and economic empowerment; (iii) lowering foreign exchange costs by 

significantly reducing the import bill for rice in the country's trade balance and currency 

balance; (iv) the impact on wealth creation in the country through the increase in GDP induced 

by the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will 

result, inter alia, in better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age 

and the elderly), a reduction in the medical bill, the arduous task of agricultural workers, 

particularly women, reducing the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty, enhancing 

livelihoods and household resilience to food insecurity and the effects of climate change, and 

in the long run, increase in life expectancy and improvement of the human development index. 
 

3.1.4  The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PATAREB is financially 

and economically viable.  
 

3.1.5  Sensitivity Analysis: The sensitivity analysis was carried out on the basis of scenario 

analysis to simulate the financial performance indicators (NPV, IRR and A/C Ratio) from the 

most sensitive endogenous variables of the analysis model used, namely the price and output 

of the productions. The simulations thus carried out show that, as the prices of products fall , 

the financial performance indicators also drop, but much more slowly. On the basis of this 

result, it can be concluded that the financial performance of PATAREB can be considered as 

stable, although the project's financial results are sensitive to lower prices. In addition, the 

switch-over threshold linked to the price decrease is over -27.5%. Therefore, prices need to fall 

drastically by more than 27.5% for the internal rate of return (IRR) to be equal to the opportunity 



 

12 

 

cost of Capital estimated at 12%. The successive decline in yields is also reflected in a drop in 

the values of the financial performance indicators (IRR, NPV, A/C ratio), as in the previous 

situation with the fall in prices. Similarly, the break-even point of return is -27.88% decline in 

yield. The scenario synthesis is presented in Annex B8, as indicated above. 
 

3.2 Environmental and social impact 
 

3.2.1  PATAREB is a follow-up to the Bugesera Natural Region Rural Infrastructure Support 

Project (PAIRB), which focused on major developments.  The activities planned during this 

second phase of the Project will complement those that were not completed during the first 

phase and will focus on improving value chains, social safety nets and youth entrepreneurship. 

The project is classified in Category 2. In line with Bank procedures, the summary of the ESMP 

was posted at least one month ahead of expected Board consideration. 

 

3.2.2  The planned activities will be mainly carried out in rural areas, outside the dwellings, 

on agrosilvopastal areas. They are not likely to generate negative impacts or major risks, or lead 

to significant asset losses or population displacements. These impacts and effects will be of 

minor magnitude and could be mitigated by application of different mitigation measures and 

good practices. The negative impacts will be small, and will be mainly related to the generation 

of waste, the risks of pollution, the risk of accidents and gas emissions during the realisation of 

certain developments. 

  

3.2.3  An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been developed in line 

with the Bank's environmental and social policies and guidelines, and in accordance with 

Burundi's regulatory framework in the field. The ESMP recommended different measures, 

mitigation and enhancement, but also provisions to be made during the implementation of the 

project, as well as the costs associated with these different measures. 

 

3.2.4  An Ordinance of the Minister in charge of the environment had set up a Technical 

Committee in charge of the implementation of the ESMP of Phase I of the project. This 

Committee could be renewed taking into account the new sub-components (social safety nets 

and youth entrepreneurship), and by integrating the provincial and municipal structures 

responsible for the environment, social development, gender, youth, etc. During the 

implementation of the project, the Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 

coordinating the activities of the Environmental Monitoring Committee and providing them 

with administrative, technical and financial support; etc. 
 

3.2.5  Climate change: CO2 emissions per capita (metric tons) in Burundi are estimated at 

0.03 tons (2013), compared with 1.1 in Africa and 3.0 in developing countries. Burundi is also 

experiencing a significant reduction in ODS (ozone depleting substances) consumption, from 

26.76 tonnes weighted in the 2000-2004 period to 7.0 tonnes in 2015. However, there is a sharp 

decline in forest area on the national territory. From 11.3% in 1990, it represented only 6.7% 

in 2010, and fell to a proportion of just 5.5% in 2015. The current rate is 64.54 square kilometres 

of annual loss of the area covered by forests, or more than 2% of annual average. 

 

3.2.6  In relation to climate change, the project area is mainly confronted with recurring 

droughts, sometimes alternated by periods of heavy rains that have led to swamps flooding, 

lake level rise, siltation some lowlands, soil erosion, etc. These natural phenomena negatively 

impact ecosystems, production systems and food security. In this context, the activities planned 

by the project will to a large extent enhance the resilience of ecosystems and communities to 

climate change, through the implementation of a series of actions that will contribute to the 



 

13 

 

improvement of the production systems , the reduction of the practice of the extensive system, 

the restoration of ecosystems through the application of good agricultural practices, 

reforestation actions, the establishment of green belts, bank protection activities, etc.  

 

3.2.7  The project activities align with the options and priority activities identified in Burundi's 

National Action Program for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAPA). The project should 

benefit from the "SAP-Burundi" project (early warning system) to integrate climate information 

into the agricultural calendar, the management of works, etc. As part of the National Program 

of Reforestation, Burundi is committed to increase carbon dioxide sinks by reforestation of 

4,000 hectares per year for 15 years from 2016. The PATAFI, which has planned a major 

reforestation program and the establishment of green belts, etc., will contribute to achieving the 

set objective.  
 

3.2.8 Gender: Women (about 52%) and youth (average age of the provincial population, 20.5 
years and median age, 16.0 years) represent a large majority of the population in the project 

area. Despite the existence of large hydro agricultural resources and potential, the population 

of the project area is among the poorest in the country (76% on a national average of 64%). 

Farming and farming systems are still traditional and weakly intensified.  

 

3.2.9 The consultations revealed that the agricultural sector, in which a large majority of 
women are involved, faces the following main constraints: very high pressure on land and 

fragmentation of agricultural parcels (average 0.5 ha); difficulties for producers and especially 

for women to access land and inputs; work overload due to household chores, strong 

responsibility for child rearing, household operation and management; weak management and 

programs on improving and diversifying production systems, leadership and entrepreneurship; 

difficulties related to the conservation, the processing and the sale of the products, etc.  

 

3.2.10 Despite the efforts made, there is still inequality and discrimination against women in 
terms of equitable access to land and other factors of production; and decision-making bodies. 

 

3.2.11 The PATAREB, whose main activities target women, in particular, will contribute to 
improving their access to factors of production such as credit and land, conservation, 

processing, production flow, etc. The project will thus make a significant contribution to 

improving women's living conditions by improving agricultural production systems and 

sectors, increasing production and income, and strengthening their capacity; etc.  

 

3.2.12 The consultations also revealed that they spend most of their income on the family, 
especially children. Increasing women's incomes will help improve household food security 

and well-being. The project will ensure that women and women benefit equally from other 

project benefits. 

 

3.2.13 The Ministry of National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender (MSNDPHG) is in 
charge of the promotion of women and gender equality. To carry out its mission, the 

MSNDPHG includes within it a Directorate General for the Promotion of Women and Gender 

Equality, structured in two departments: the Department for the Promotion of Women and the 

Department of Gender Equality. The Ministry also relies on deconcentrated structures called 

Family Development Centers (FDC), which are located at the level of each Province. The latter 

are relays of the ministry to communities on all aspects related to gender and other missions. 

 



 

14 

 

3.2.14  Provincial and municipal bodies and structures dealing with gender issues will have to 
be integrated into the bodies responsible for project management (technical committee, 

monitoring committee, etc.). Gender-related indicators will be taken into account in the project's 

monitoring and evaluation system based on disaggregated data by sex, etc. 

 

3.2.15 Social: With 84.7% for Muyinga and 76.2% for Kirundo respectively, the provinces in 
the area of influence of the project had poverty rates well above the national average (64%). In 

terms of nutrition, the province of Kirundo has a global acute malnutrition rate of 5%, that of 

chronic malnutrition at47.9% which is above the critical threshold of 40% set by WHO. 

 

3.2.16 In such a context of poverty and vulnerability, by improving agricultural production 
systems and the development of value chains, the positive impacts and effects of the project 

will be considerable on local and even national development in different sectors, activities and 

on all social categories (adults, youth, women, etc.). The project will contribute to improving 

agricultural production and incomes, enhance food security, foster the creation of local 

employment opportunities, contribute to poverty reduction and the vulnerability of targeted 

populations, reduce unemployment and youth migration, contribute to the empowerment of 

women, etc.  

 

3.2.17 However, the works could generate nuisances and inconveniences (noise, dust, exhaust 
gases, etc.) that could affect the health (respiratory diseases) of the workers and the populations 

who would be exposed to it. The mixing of populations in the work areas can also contribute to 

the proliferation of sexually transmitted diseases (STI/HIV AIDS). Rigorous safety, awareness 

and good practice measures are advocated to minimize and reduce these risks.  
 

3.2.18 Youth employment and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship: This 
component will help develop the entrepreneurial culture of young project leaders to increase 

incomes and create decent jobs for youth and women. The project will assist the emergence of 

small clusters of young promoters and will directly reach 1,200 young girls and boys trained in 

agricultural entrepreneurship, and installed in all links of the value chain: production activities 

in developed marshes, farms fish farming, processing, trade and services. This initiative aims 

ultimately, by its multiplier effect to reach nearly 3,600 young men and women.  

 

3.2.19 To this end, the project will work in partnership with the Kirundo Trade Centres (CEM 
Kirundo) and the Mutwenzi Centre in the identification, selection and training of beneficiaries.  

These institutions will receive project support, and will work with the Microfinance Institutions 

(MFIs) present in the project area for the financing needed for business development. Thus, the 

supervision of young promoters will be done in the incubation Centres, mentioned above, also 

responsible for mobilising aggregators and private operators. They will help youth to make their 

credit reports more reliable in order to better access the available financial resources. The 

project will also facilitate youth's access to developed perimeters and equipment in the form of 

basic kits, according to their business plans and areas of specialisation. Finally, the project will 

promote partnerships between all actors for better integration of value chains (production, 

processing, inputs, markets, etc.). The operational modalities of agricultural entrepreneurship 

and financial incentives will be defined following a specific study at the start of the project. 

 

3.2.20 Forced relocation: The activities of PATAREB do not induce any displacement of 
populations nor their resettlement. They contribute to the development of the affected territories 

and to maintain the populations in their zones 

 



 

15 

 

IV. Implementation  
 

4.1 Provisions for implementation: 
 

4.1.1 Implementing rules: In line with the Presidential Directives N°02/2015, the Country 
should take all necessary steps to fast-track the start-up of the project. The Ministry of 

Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) will be in charge of the project management and 

coordination.  A multi-sector project steering committee (PSC) will also be established to 

ensure guidance and orientation of the project implementation, as required. As part of the 

coordination of project activities, MINAGRIE will be supported by a full-time Project 

Management Unit (PMU), under the supervision of the Kirundo Provincial Directorate of 

Agriculture and Livestock, which has its headquarters in Kirundo. The PAIRB Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual will need to be adapted to affirm the enhanced 

role of DPAE in the management of PATAREB. 

 

4.1.2 The PMU will be mainly in charge of the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of 
project activities. It will be composed as follows: (i) a Project Coordinator; (ii) an Internal 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist; (iii) an Irrigation Engineer; (iv) a Procurement 

Specialist; (v) an Agronomist; (vi) a youth entrepreneurship specialist, (vii) a socio-economist, 

(vii) an administrative and financial manager; and (viii) an accountant. In addition, there needs 

to be an option for using MINAGRIE's internal expertise for positions whose capacities exist 

within. In accordance with the results of the consultations of the preparation and evaluation 

missions, these positions are those of the Coordinator and the Monitoring and Evaluation 

Specialist. For each of the two positions, three CVs will be submitted to the Bank, which will 

validate the evaluation report of the proposals made by the Ministry. The use of the expertise 

of the previous project was also retained. Thus, the Rural Engineering Expert should be 

reappointed if he is still available to fill this position. This proposal is justified by the fact that 

development and infrastructure development play a significant role in PATAREB. For all other 

positions, recruitment will be done through a call for applications. 

 

4.1.3 The project will also have support staff recruited as needed. In Bujumbura, the PMU 
will be supported by a Project Antenna responsible for liaising with the Home Ministry and the 

technical partners of the project and central services of the Administration to carry out activities 

requiring coordination with these Organisations. The PMU will also be supported by one-off 

technical assistance. 

 

 

4.1.4 Value chain development activities will be carried out under agreements to be signed 
with IRRI for the rice value chain and ISABU for the maize, sorghum and food value chains, 

respectively.  

 

4.1.5 In order to deal with the problems of agricultural financing in the project area, a 
Guarantee Fund will be established and an agreement signed with UCODE and an MFI with 

satisfactory capacities and of which more than 70% of the credits distributed go to the 

agricultural sector to enable beneficiaries to have easy access to credit.   

 

4.1.6 Procurement: All purchases of goods (including non-consulting services), of works 
and consultancy services, financed by the Bank under the project, will be made in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy for Funded Operations by the Bank Group” as of October 2015 

and in accordance with the provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. More specifically, 



 

16 

 

procurement will be carried out according to the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures 

(MPA) based on the relevant standard tender documents (DSAO) for all markets.    

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (ERCA): The risk assessment at the 
country, sector and project levels as well as the acquisition capability of the Executing Agency 

(EA) for the project was conducted and the results were used to guide the decision of the choice 

of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third Party) used for specific activities or a set 

of similar activities in the project. In addition, a market analysis was conducted with a view to 

obtaining information on market characteristics, the factors that may affect competition and the 

main players in the sectoral markets. The results of the evaluations and market analysis notably 

made it possible to carry out procurement planning, market structuring, the choice of the best 

procurement methods and procedures (MPA) adapted to the desired objective, and the 

establishment of the review and supervision framework by the Bank.  

 

4.1.8 Appropriate risk mitigation measures were included in the Procurement Risk and 
Capacity Assessment Action Plan (PERCA) as outlined in Section B.7.9. of Annex B7.    
 

4.1.9 Financial management: The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 
the overall coordination and financial management of the project. Its financial management 

staff will include the Project Coordinator, the Administrative and Financial Officer, the 

Accountant and the Cashier, all recruited in accordance with the procurement provisions of the 

project.  
 

4.1.10 The financial management systems of the PAIRB Management Unit whose structures 
will be used under the PATAREB framework are not generally satisfactory and the overall 

fiduciary risk is substantial due to the absence of: (i) a Coordinator and the financial staff 

indicated above; (ii) an administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual; (iii) an 

operational computerized accounting and financial management software; and (iv) financial 

management tools and terms of reference.  
 

4.1.11 Consequently, the PMU must make the following arrangements: (i) Establish, as soon 
as the Project is launched, a budget plan coupled with the provisional calendar of activities; (ii) 

recruit, from the start of the Project, a consultant responsible for drawing up the Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual (MPCF), and another consultant responsible for 

setting up the computerized accounting and financial management system (CCIS); (iii) allocate 

financial tasks as soon as financial staff are recruited; (iv) put in place the financial management 

framework and instruments (see Annex B 6 of Volume II). 
 

4.1.12 Disbursements: The disbursement methods to be used to mobilize the financing of the 
TSF Grant are: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special account / working capital method 

and (iii) the repayment method. Direct payments will be made in accordance with work 

contracts, goods and services signed between the recipient and the suppliers in accordance with 

the Bank's procurement rules and procedures and the national procurement legislation. The 

special account method will be used for the payment of operating expenses, training costs, field 

mission expenses, and so on. This will result in the opening of a Special Account at the Central 

Bank of Burundi, which in turn will, for all the funds received from the TSF, supply the bank 

account of the CGP opened in a bank acceptable to the AfDB. The repayment method will be 

used when eligible expenditures on the resources of the TSF Grants have been pre-financed 

with the prior approval of the Bank. These disbursements will be done in accordance with the 

list of goods and services and the Bank's rules and procedures as described in the disbursement 

manual. The disbursements modalities are detailed in the technical annexes. 



 

17 

 

 

4.1.13 Audits: An independent and competent external audit firm will audit the reliability of 
the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the CGP once a year and assess the 

functioning of the internal control system for the entire project. He will be recruited according 

to the terms of reference and the competitive bidding procedures recommended by the Bank. 

The audit costs will be financed by the TSFGrants. Audit reports must be sent to the Bank every 

year, no later than 6 months after the end of the audited financial year. Audits will be conducted 

in accordance with IFAC's International ISA Auditing Standards and the Bank's comprehensive 

terms of reference, which will be communicated to the project. 

 

4.2 Monitoring 
 

4.2.1  Monitoring mechanisms: A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up. It is 

chaired by the Minister of Agriculture and Livestock or his representative, and composed of a 

representative of the Ministry of Finance, the Permanent Executive Secretariat of the National 

Commission for Social Protection, the Governor of Kirundo, the DPAE, two (02) Beneficiary 

Representatives, a Private Sector Representative and a Civil Society Representative.  The PSC 

will meet at least twice a year in regular sessions to approve the budget and validate the results 

of the project performance. The PSC Secretariat shall be provided by the DGPAE. The 

responsibilities of the PSC shall be as follows: (i) major guidelines based on the coherence 

between the strategic framework and the execution of the project; (ii) ensuring that the results 

and recommendations of the external evaluation reports are taken into account in the execution 

of the project; (iii) directives to the PMU for the eventual reorientation of the Project; (iv) 

approval of the project's annual work program and budget (AWPB) prior to submission to the 

Bank's no-objection notice; and (v) guaranteeing project development objectives. 

 

4.2.2 Internal monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the Project Monitoring and 

Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring and evaluation will be provided by the DGPAE and 

the Ministry in charge of Finance. The external monitoring and evaluation is to measure the 

effectiveness and efficiency of outputs (products) of the project and their contributions to the 

achievement of development results that are the effects and impacts of the project. This be 

ensured with the involvement of other stakeholders, in addition to the two annual supervision 

missions organized by the Bank. The mid-term review will be conducted in the 3rd year. At the 

end of the project, the Bank and the Government will produce a completion report in due time. 

The main stages of implementation are summarized below. 

 
Table 9: Indicative Project schedule 

No. ACTIVITIES OFFICIALS DEADLINE 

1 Evaluation BANK October 2017 

2 Negotiations GVT / BANK November 2017 

3 Presentation of the  project to the Board  BANK December 2017 

4 
Signing the Memorandum of Understanding for  

TSF Grants  
GVT / BANK December 2017 

5 Fulfilment of conditions GVT January 2018 

6 Authorization of the 1st disbursement. BANK    January 2018 

7 Signing of agreements with  partners GVT    January 2018 

8 Project launch  GVT / BANK January 2018 

7 Submission of deliverables Deliverables 
February 2018-Dec. 

2022 

8 Midterm review GVT / BANK June 2020 

9 Completion of activities Governments / BANK October 2022 

10 Completion report   Governments / BANK December 2022 

11 Audits : GVT Annually 



 

18 

 

 

4.3 Governance 
 

4.3.1 In the area of economic and financial governance, Burundi has achieved encouraging 

results since the 2015 crisis, initiating a number of structural reforms in public financial 

management, and the mitigation of fiduciary risks. However, improvements are needed for 

domestic resource mobilization, programming and allocation of public resources. Although 

there has been progress in bringing the public procurement system up to standard, slowness in 

the procurement system is still one of the major shortcomings in project implementation. At the 

project level, risks related to fiduciary issues will be mitigated, including the use of a public 

financial management system and the strengthening of the PMU's procurement and financial 

management capacity. 

 

4.3.2 With regard to land, the dualism of modern and customary rights is a major handicap in 

promoting investments in agriculture in Burundi and to local peace. PATAREB will improve 

land governance by providing support for land planning and management, as well as 

strengthening municipalities' capacity to manage them. Tripartite agreements will be 

established between land claimants, municipalities and professional organizations, and 

collective agreements will mitigate conflicts.  
 

4.4 Durability 
 

4.4.1  The project is based on a participatory approach for better ownership of activities. Rural 

communities, local authorities and decentralized technical services have indeed been involved 

in the design of the project, and therefore will participate in all the developments they benefit 

from and will be reinforced to prevent and manage conflict linked to resource exploitation. 

They will bring their own knowledge and perceptions on the phenomena of climate change.  

 

4.4.2  The sustainability of the program is also based on the participation of the beneficiaries 

in the project. The PMU will work in collaboration with these organizations to ensure land 

tenure security, strengthen the capacities of farmers' organizations (OPs) for the technical and 

financial management of infrastructure, and initiate sustainable mechanisms for the recovery of 

infrastructure maintenance and renewal costs. Watershed protection activities will be carried 

out as part of the social safety nets. Support for para-agricultural trades (mechanization, 

maintenance, advisory support, etc.) will also help to ensure the long-term provision of services 

necessary for the viability of the activities undertaken. The simplicity of the planned 

infrastructure and the capacity building of the beneficiaries favour the sustainability of the 

investments. In particular, their realization will take into account the reliable climatic 

information collected. 
 

4.4.3  The use of the “value chain” approach with the consideration of aspects of processing, 

storage and marketing of products will make it possible to link production to markets more. 

Thus, the creation of small processing units of economically, financially and technically viable 

products will be a guarantee of the sustainability of the achievements of the project. The project 

will ensure the development of gender sensitive infrastructures and technologies to promote the 

sustainable economic empowerment of vulnerable people (women and youth) and the 

diversification of their sources of income. Sustainability of project interventions will also be 

ensured through the effective involvement of the local private sector, MFIs and aggregator 

enterprises in the approach to achieving sustainable settlement of young entrepreneurs and 

access to markets.  
 



 

19 

 

4.5 Risk management  
Table 10:  

Risks and mitigation measures 

RISKS LEVEL MITIGATION MEASURE 

Unclear land and state-owned land issues can 

lead to difficulties in exploiting the sites to be 

developed and compromise the objectives of the 

project in terms of food security and the fight 

against poverty, especially for women and young 

people. 

Means Project support for planning and land management 

that will result in the establishment of tripartite 

agreements ( having land rights, municipalities, 

professional organizations) and collective 

agreements to mitigate conflicts 

 Climatic hazards that can accentuate the 
degradation of ecosystems (drought, floods, etc.), 

make communities more vulnerable and promote 

conflict. 

 Limited ownership and management of rural 
infrastructure 

Means  Irrigation, the protection of vulnerable areas, the 
opening up of production areas, the integration of 

climate information into the design of works, the 

securing of income, will mitigate this risk; 

 Capacity building of municipalities, 

 Lack of monitoring of technological innovations 
by communities 

 Weakness in monitoring by municipalities 
(MOD), slow procurement, low capacity of 

technical services and low capacity of enterprises 

Means  Participative approach and involvement, 
organization and training of local actors 

 Funding of a stakeholder capacity building 
program 

The institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 

terms of management and monitoring and 

evaluation 

Means The capacity building program of MINAGRIE and 

the PMU on project administration, procurement 

and financial management will mitigate this risk 

 

4.6 Knowledge Development 
 

The project will be a disaggregated database, according to the type of reference that will 

be used to establish the baseline situation. Then a map will be produced with geo referencing 

of the activities carried out. This information will be networked and posted on a website to be 

shared with all stakeholders. The same will be true for the results of the independent (rapid and 

in-depth) impact assessments. The actions included in the project that will also lead to 

knowledge development are the popularization of innovative technologies, technology review 

workshops, innovation / multi-stakeholder platforms and exchange visits and support for 

innovative product processing experiments as part of a private partnership / OP; and promoting 

innovative youth and women's employability actions and resilience building activities for 

vulnerable groups. Finally, the project will put in place an integrated knowledge management 

system on project activities through the regular dissemination of acquired knowledge. 
 

V. Legal framework 
 

5.1 Legal instrument 
 

The legal framework of the project will be a TSF Grant Memorandum of Understanding 

signed between the Republic of Burundi and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the intervention of the Bank  
 

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to entry into force: The entry into force of the TSF Grant 
Memorandum of Understanding is subject to signature by the parties. 
 

5.2.2 Prerequisites for the first disbursement of the donation: The obligation for the Bank 
to make the first disbursement of the donation will be subject to the entry into force of the TSF 

Donation Memorandum of Understanding, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.1.7 



 

20 

 

above, and proof of fulfilment by the recipient, to the satisfaction of the Bank, both formally 

and substantively, of the following conditions: 
 

(i) Provide the Bank with proof of the opening of a Special Account with the Central Bank 
of Burundi for the Project intended to receive the Project funds in US dollars and the 

opening by the PMU with a bank acceptable to the Bank, a BIF Account for the Project 

intended to receive the Grant's resources (see 5.1.10); 

 

(ii) Provide the Bank with evidence of the recruitment of the Coordinator and the Project 
Administrative and Financial Manager, whose qualifications will be submitted for prior 

approval by the Bank (5.1.1); 
 

5.2.3 Other conditions: The Recipient must also provide the Bank with the following, no later 
than six (6) months after the first disbursement of the Grant's resources: 

 

(i) Proof of the recruitment of the Procurement Specialist, the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist and the Accountant, whose qualifications and experience will have been 

previously submitted to the Bank for approval (see 5.1.2); 
 

(ii) Agreements with Partner organisations (ISABU, IRRI, UCODE, CEM & 
MITUWENZI). 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 
 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The Board of Directors is requested to 

approve the TSF Grants. The project will be implemented as part of the Bank's intervention 

strategy in Burundi defined in the 2012-2016 CSP, which was extended at the end of 2017. 

 

VI. Recommendation 
 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the granting to the Republic of 

Burundi of Pillar I resources of the Transition Support Facility (TSF), a Grant of a maximum 

amount of not exceeding UA 12 million, for the purpose and under the conditions set out in this 

report. 



 

I 

 

Appendix I. Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators of Burundi  (March-June 2017) 

                        
  Indicators Unity   2000 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 (e)   

                        

  National Accounts                     

  GNI at current market prices 
US $ 

Million 
  880 2,154 2,430 2,616 2,921 2,907 ...   

  GNI per capita US $   130 220 240 250 270 260 ...   

  GDP at current prices 
Million US 

$ 
  709 2,236 2,333 2,452 2,849 2,836 3,109   

  GDP at constant prices from 2000 US $Million   709 1,028 1,074 1,127 1,177 1,131 1,141   

  GDP growth in real terms %   -0.9 4.0 4.4 4.9 4.5 -3.9 0.9   

  GDP per capita growth in real terms %   -3.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.1 -7.0 -2.4   

  Gross domestic investment % of GDP   7.5 22.6 22.2 23.5 26.4 15.9 15.4   

       Public investment % of GDP   6.4 12.5 14.2 11.6 16.1 10.6 10.0   

       Private investment % of GDP   1.2 10.1 8.0 11.9 10.4 5.3 5.3   

  National savings % of GDP   -4.2 1.0 -3.7 -4.0 -2.7 -4.9 -0.1   

                        

  Price and Currency                     

  Inflation (CPI) %   24.3 9.5 19.4 7.9 4.4 5.5 5.5   

  Exchange rate (annual average) 
local 

currency / 

US $ 

  720.7 1,261.1 1,442.5 1,555.1 1,546.7 1,571.9 1,640.1   

  Money supply, annual changes (M2) %   34.8 10.5 10.3 14.0 9.5 9.0 6.7   

  Speed of money circulation (GDP / M2) %   24.6 29.1 26.9 27.1 25.6 27.6 25.8   

                        

  Public finances                     

  Total revenue and grants % of GDP   22.3 21.9 25.0 27.1 23.8 28.5 21.9   

  Total expenditure and net loans % of GDP   24.7 36.4 37.3 28.5 31.8 30.5 27.9   

  Deficit (-) / Overall surplus (+) % of GDP   -2.3 -11.4 -10.2 -4.6 -3.2 -8.6 -6.7   

                        

  External sector                     

  Change in volume of exports (goods) %   4.7 0.4 32.3 -19.8 23.1 2.6 24.1   

  Change in volume of imports (goods) %   1.7 -19.5 11.0 -1.3 10.8 3.3 -47.6   

  Changes in terms of trade %   -22.0 -9.0 -20.6 -9.6 25.4 15.8 -0.4   

  Balance of current accounts 
Million US 

$ 
  -61 -276 -255 -250 -384 -543 -582   

  Balance of current accounts % of GDP   -8.6 -12.3 -10.9 -10.2 -13.5 -19.1 -18.7   

  International reservations 
Importation 

months 
  2.9 3.6 3.4 3.7 3.5 1.7 2.0   

                        

  Debt and financial flows                     

  Debt service  % of exports   70.1 2.3 7.2 14.6 14.9 18.8 16.7   

  Total external debt % of GDP   155.1 21.8 21.7 22.0 19.5 20.4 24.8   

  Total net financial flow 
Million US 

$ 
  79 566 531 589 539 260 ...   

  Net Official Development Assistance 
Million US 

$ 
  93 572 523 559 515 367 ...   

  Net direct investments from abroad 
Million US 

$ 
  12 3 ... 7 47 7 ...   

                        

                        

                        

  

 

  
 

        

 

  

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

                        
Source: AfDB Statistics Department; IMF: World Economic Outlook, April 2017 and International Financial Statistics, April 2017;   

 Department of Statistics: Data Platform (database), March 2017; OECD, Statistical Systems Division. 

Notes: Data not available '(e) Estimates (p) Projection, Last update: June 2017 

-6,0

-4,0

-2,0

0,0

2,0

4,0

6,0

2
0
0

4

2
0
0

5

2
0
0

6

2
0
0

7

2
0
0

8

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

1

2
0
1

2

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

%

Taux de croissance du PIB réel,
2004-2016

0,0

5,0

10,0

15,0

20,0

25,0

30,0

2
0
0

4

2
0
0

5

2
0
0

6

2
0
0

7

2
0
0

8

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

1

2
0
1

2

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

Inflation (IPC), 2004-2016

-25,0

-20,0

-15,0

-10,0

-5,0

0,0

2
0
0

4

2
0
0

5

2
0
0

6

2
0
0

7

2
0
0

8

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

1

2
0
1

2

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

Solde du compte courant en 
pourcentage du PIB,2004-2016



 

II 

 

Appendix II. Table of the AFDB portfolio in Burundi (amounts in UA): October 2017  

PROJECT TITLE LOAN NO SECTOR 
APPROVAL 

DATE 
SIGNATURE 

DATE OF 

ENTRY INTO 

FORCE 

COMPLETION 

DATE 

FINAL DATE OF 

DISBURSEMENT 

SUM OF VD 

CAP. 
TOTAL LOAN 

BURUNDI - DEVELOPMENT AND 

ASPHALTING OF MUGI ROADS PROJECT 
2100155023016 Transport 06/27/2012 23/07/2012 23/07/2012 12/31/2018 31/12/2017 19,435,293.16  27,500,000.00  

HYDROENERGY JIJI MULEMBWE 5900155006951 Power 06/23/2014 31/07/2014 31/07/2014 12/31/2019 31/12/2019  14,340,000.00  

NELSAP INTERCONNECTION PROJECT - 

BURUNDI 
2100155018519 Power 11/27/2008 16/03/2009 16/03/2009 12/31/2025 31/12/2019 2,845,056.54  15,150,000.00  

PROJECT PREPARATORY STUDY FOR 

DEVELOPMENT OF BUJUMBURA PORT 
5150155001302 Transport 10/14/2013 13/12/2013 13/12/2013 12/31/2017 31/12/2017 650,124.65  825,020.41  

WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND 

ENHANCEMENT PROJECT 
5550155000201 Environment 04/22/2013 28/05/2013 28/05/2013 06/30/2018 31/10/2017 1,915,352.09  2,186,801.09  

  5900155004701 Environment 04/22/2013 28/05/2013 28/05/2013 06/30/2018 30/06/2018 5,491,281.86  6,230,000.00  

NORTHERN NYAKARARO-MW 

DEVELOPMENT AND ASPHALTING 

PROJECT 

2100155028266 Transport 09/24/2014 19/11/2014 19/11/2014 06/30/2018 30/06/2018 8,449,645.70  19,420,000.00  

PROJECT TO SUPPORT THE PROCESS OF 

DEVELOPING STRATEGIES OF 
5900155012201 Social 05/17/2017 (blank) 16/08/2017 06/30/2019 31/03/2019  8,700,000.00  

PROJECT FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND  

ASPHALTING OF THE GITEGA-NYANG 

ROAD 

2100155020566 Transport 06/29/2011 16/03/2012 16/03/2012 11/30/2017 30/11/2017 2,786,338.36  10,000,000.00  

  5900155001852 Transport 06/29/2011 16/03/2012 16/03/2012 11/30/2017 30/11/2017 31,523,905.77  32,000,000.00  

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE SOCIO-

ECONOMIC REINTEGRATION OF YOUNG 

PEOPLE 

5900155010403 Social 05/25/2016 13/10/2016 13/10/2016 12/31/2020 28/06/2019 276,695.06  770,000.00  

  5900155010501 Social 05/25/2016 07/11/2016 07/11/2016 12/31/2020 28/06/2019 118,826.48  380,000.00  

MAKEBUKO RUYIGI ROAD PROJECT 2100155026566 Transport 12/18/2013 18/02/2014 07/07/2014 06/30/2019 31/12/2017 6,744,009.14  8,940,000.00  

PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT AND 

DISTRIBUTION 

5900155006753 Power 04/30/2014 14/08/2014 14/08/2014 03/31/2018 31/03/2018 69,858.47  414,000.00  

PROJECT RN 18 NYAKARARO-MWARO -

GITEGA PHASE II TRONCON KIBUMB 

2100155034067 Transport 02/01/2017 23/05/2017 (blank) 12/31/2020 31/12/2020  9,720,000.00  

5900155011453 Transport 02/01/2017 23/05/2017 (blank) 12/31/2020 31/12/2020  4,080,000.00  

REGIONAL RUSUMO HYDROPOWER - 

BURUNDI 
2100155026516 Power 11/27/2013 18/02/2014 18/02/2014 08/31/2019 31/08/2019 165,725.60  16,700,000.00  

  5580155000001 Power 11/21/2013 23/09/2014 23/09/2014 08/31/2019 31/08/2019 437,865.73  10,620,397.83  

RUZIZI III - SUPPORT FOR COOPERATION, 

REGIONAL NTÉGRATION 
2100155031718 Power 12/16/2015 07/03/2016 07/03/2016 12/31/2022 31/12/2022 105,707.90  1,710,000.00  

RUZIZI III HYDROPOWER PROJECT 

(BURUNDI) 
2100155031719 Power 12/16/2015 07/03/2016 07/03/2016 12/30/2021 31/12/2022  19,290,000.00  

 



 

III 

 

 

Annex III: Summary of Procurement Terms and Conditions  

 

CATEGORIES 

Millions of  UA 

BPS BMP 

Total 
AOO 

AO

N 
Others AOO AON L/R ED Others 

1. Works  

1.1 Wetland 

development 

 

1.2 Hillside Irrigation  
 

1.3 Post-harvest 
infrastructure 

 

Rehabilitation of 

local UGP 

 

1.4 Watershed 
Development 

 

2. Goods 
 

2.1 Agricultural inputs 

 

2.2 Huskers 

 

2.3 Vehicles / 

Motorcycles 

 

2.4 UGP premises 

 

3. Consulting 
Services 

 

3.1  Market studies  

 

3.2 Study 

developments 

 

3.3 Control / 

monitoring works 

 

3.4 Stakeholders 

training 

 

3.5 Training and 

capacity building 

 

 

 

  
 

 

2.66 

[2.66] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.706 

[0.706] 

 

 

 

 

 

0.458 

[0.458] 

 

 

0.822 

[0.822] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.122 

[0.122] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.106 

[0.106] 

 

 

0.038 

[0.038] 

 

 

0.081 

[0.081] 

 

 
0,263 

[0,263] 

0,178 

[0,178] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.048 

[0.048] 

 

 

2.02 

[2.02] 

 

 

 

 

0.018 

[0.018] 

 

 

 

0.026 

[0.026] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.66 [2.66] 

 

0.458 

[0.458] 

 

 

0.822 

[0.822] 

 

0.048 

[0.048] 

 

 

2.02 

[2.02] 

 

 

0.706 

[0.706] 

 

0.018 [0,018] 

 

0.122 

[0.122] 

 

0.026 

[0.026] 

 

 

0.106 

[0.106] 

 

 

0.038 

[0.038] 

 

 

0.081 

[0.081] 

 

 
0,263 

[0,263] 

 

 
0,178 

[0,178] 



 

IV 

 

to beneficiaries of 

safe nets 

 

3.6 Audit of project 

accounts  

 

3.7 Technical 

assistants   

 

3.8 CGP staff 

 

3.9 Procedures and 

execution manuals  

 

3.10  Agreement with 

IRRI 

 

3.11  Agreement with 

ISABU  

 

3.12 Agreement with 

UCODE  

 

3.13 Agreement with 

Kirundo CEM  

 

3.14 Agreement with 

Mutwenzi CAP  

 

4. Operations 

4.1 Operations 

 

TOTAL 

0.055 

[0.055] 

0.097 

[0.097] 

0.758 

[0.758] 

 

 

0.039 

[0.039] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.471 

[0.471] 

 

0.525 

[0.525] 

 

 

1.861 

[1.861] 

 

0.442 

[0.442] 

 

0.285 

[0.285] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.404 

[0.404] 

 

 

 

 

0.055 

[0.055] 

 

 

0.097 

[0.097] 

 

 

0.758 

[0.758] 

 

 

0.039 

[0.039] 

0,471 

[0.471] 

 

0.525 

[0.525] 

 

 

1.861 

[1.861] 

 

0.442 

[0.442] 

 

0.285 

[0.285] 

 

 

0.404 

[0.404] 

 

12.0 

[12.0] 

+ Figures in brackets represent financing by the Bank. 



 

V 

 

Appendix IV: PATAREB: Taking into account Risks Related to Fragility Factors 

 

1. Fragility context in Burundi 

After significant progress in consolidating peace and security, economic and financial reforms 

and improving living conditions of its citizens, in 2015, Burundi underwent a socio-political crisis 

which slowed down the overall progress achieved. Fragility from the 2015 crisis resulted in a 

breakdown of socio-political cohesion. Recommendations from an inter-burundi dialogue launched 

in May 2016 with the help of the international community are slow to be translated into concrete 

actions. Nevertheless, before the present situation, Burundi had experienced more serious and 

intense crises from which arose the launch of a peace process and signature of the Arusha 

Agreements in 2000, cited worldwide as an example of successful social dialogue and peace-

building, This experience conferred upon Burundi internal conflict resolution and peace-building 

capacities which could serve as a basis for moving out from the current crisis. On the economic 

front, a crisis in 2015 led to a GDP decline of 3.9%. Burundi returned to growth in 2016, but at a 

slower pace (0.9%) to improve the living conditions of the population. Relations with technical and 

financial partners (TFPs), in particular the European Union and several of its member countries 

have not improved much since the crisis.  

The country is among the poorest in the world, with a poverty rate of 64.6% in 2014 (67.1% in 

2006). The latest UNDP Human Development Report 2016 ranks Burundi 184th out of 188 

countries and territories. In addition, the country faces a high unemployment rate, estimated at more 

than 50%, which particularly affects young people. In addition, the impact of the political crisis, 

combined with the freeze on external assistance, was further exacerbated in 2016 by the low level 

of service provision, especially in key sectors, following the decrease in budget appropriations. 

(29.8% for education,-54% for health and the fight against AIDS,-13.7% for agriculture and 

livestock and -85.4% for water, environment, urban and physical planning). These declines are 

attributable to freezing of 33% of the non-public financial assistance between 2014 and 2016. This 

resulted in: (i) the shortage of drugs, vaccines and supplies for health facilities; (ii) insufficient 

teaching materials in schools, difficulties in managing basic education and the exclusion of 80,000 

students from the education system in 2016; and (iii) pockets of starvation and high levels of 

malnutrition in some places.  

2. Taking into account fragility in the project 

The various documents available on Burundi (DSP, regional fragility study, briefs, briefing notes, etc.) 

show that the main factors of fragility are political, economic, social and environmental. Annex A5 (Volume 

II) describes how these factors are taken into account by the project. At the sectoral level in the project area, 

PATAREB interventions in response to the main fragility factors identified are summarized below:  

Fragility factors Situation and challenges Measures supported by the project 
intervention 

1. Security 

issues (conflict, 

violence, 

insecurity) 

- physical and psychological 

threats, populations 

- insecurity and violence limit 

safe access to basic social 

services 

- movement limitations due to 

insecurity with a significant 

impact on economic activities,  

- appropriate response to mitigate the socio-

economic impacts of crises and to avoid 

frustrations, tensions and conflicts 

- increase the resilience capacities of vulnerable 

local populations most affected by using local 

labor through immediate occupations such as 

community service work (HIMO)  



 

VI 

 

Fragility factors Situation and challenges Measures supported by the project 
intervention 

 - give priority to mutual aid and solidarity through 
existing mechanisms such as community work or 

solidarity funds  

2. Low 

agricultural 

land security 

 

- many land disputes in the 

country 

- multiple causes of these 

conflicts 

- land tenure dominated by 

patriarchal inheritance 

management 

- Land development based on a legal framework 

- Anticipating conflicts by guaranteeing access to 

justice services and various alternative 

mechanisms of mediation and justice. 

- hydro-agricultural schemes accompanied by the 

establishment of tripartite and collective 

agreements to mitigate conflicts 

3. Taking the 

humanitarian 

dimension into 

account  

- Regional consequences of the 

Burundian conflict at the level 

of refugees and internally 

displaced persons 

- return of Burundian refugees 

- measures to ensure that populations returning from 
exile can be reintegrated 

- coordination with organizations involved in 
facilitating reintegration 

4. Low 

productivity of 

the agricultural 

sector and food 

insecurity 

- Traditional production system. 

- a multitude of small family 

farms 

- use of rudimentary tools 

- production intended primarily 

for self-consumption 

- low yields 

- decrease in pastures 

- Semi-intensive or integrated 

farming 

- Taking into account the issue of agricultural growth 

and its contribution to food security  

- development at the scale centered on: 
o productivity, 

o agricultural yields on areas of optimal size 
and an improved mode of exploitation, 

o professionalization, 
o value chains 
o access to the market 

5. Overfished 

fish resources 

- Overexploitation and pollution 

of lakes aggravated by 

famines 

- tendency to dry up lakes after 

drought 

- Fish ponds scattered in the 

marshes 

- Support for the development of the blue economy 

value chain at:  

o Training and sensitization of fishing 

communities 

o organization and supervision of fishing 

activities 

o creation of lake management committees 

o Collection and destruction of any material 

that does not meet the standards. 

o respect of a buffer zone of at least 50 meters 

o credits through microfinance institutions 

o support for fish farming 

o support for fish farming and fish enlargement 

(fish cage in lakes) 

6. Insufficient 

road and 

energy 

infrastructure 

- Road network of the province 

generally in good condition 

- Rehabilitation of communal 

roads and rural roads partly 

ensured by so-called 

"community works" activities 

- Energy needs covered by the 

use of firewood and charcoal. 

- construction of post-harvest tracks 

- regional planning undertaken in collaboration with 

the relevant services of the other departments 

- use of alternative energy sources 



 

VII 

 

Fragility factors Situation and challenges Measures supported by the project 
intervention 

7. Low 

organization of 

producers, 

processing and 

marketing of 

agricultural 

products 

- beginning of structuring in 

associations, groups or 

cooperatives 

- private sector not developed 

despite some initiatives 

- informal marketing of 

agricultural products 

- sale of products either directly 

to consumers or to 

intermediaries 

-  structuring of producer organizations within 
certain sectors 

- establishment of cooperatives 

- store construction (inputs and post-harvest) 

- training in technology review workshops 

- training in resilient technologies 

- support for improved seed producers 

8. Poverty and 

inequalities 

 

- Families survival difficulties 

- Several categories of 

vulnerable people  

 

 

- ensure food security and basic income security for 

households living in extreme poverty 

- strengthening the management of natural and 

social risks by increasing the resilience capacities 

of vulnerable populations 

- employment and income opportunities for the 

poor, youths and women 

9. 

Consideration 

of gender issues 

 

- importance of women's work 

in agriculture 

- multiple other responsibilities 

of rural women 

- Contribution to women's empowerment 

-  increase in women's income 

- Improvement of women's living conditions and 

environment 

10. 

Management 

of natural 

disasters and 

adaptation to 

climate 

change 

(drought, 

floods, 

bushfires, ...) 

- Combined effect of climate 
change and the El Niño 

phenomenon 

- Degradation of natural 
resources (soils, forests, etc.) 

- drying up and temporary 
flooding of swamps  

- poor access to drinking water 

- Strengthening the resilience of ecosystems and 

communities to climate change through: 

o improvement of production systems, 

o the reduction of the practice of the extensive 

system, 

o restoration of ecosystems 

o reforestation activities, 

o establishment of green belts, bank protection 

actions, introduction of innovative techniques 

into the agricultural system 

o the construction of hydraulic structures 

allowing optimal water management, 

o development of irrigated areas 

o the promotion of hillside irrigation 

o dissemination and extension of high-yielding, 

short-cycle crops, and drought-resistant forest 

and agro-forestry species 

o the promotion of the practice of raising small 

livestock, which makes it possible to fertilize 

the soil 

o introduction and promotion of a pumping 
system using photovoltaic energy around 

lakes 



 

VIII 

 

Appendix V: Economic and Financial Analysis: Summary Table of the Financial Analysis 
 

Synthesis of scenarios 
Scenario 

Values 

Current 

Values : 

Price drop 

 -2.5% 

Price drop 

-5% 

Price drop -

7.5% 

Price drop -

10% 

Price drop -

12.5% 

Price drop -

15% 

Price drop -

17.5% 

Price drop -

20% 

Price drop -

22.5% 

Price drop -

25% 

Price drop -

27.5% 

Price drop -

30% 

Price drop -

32.5% 

Price drop -

35% 

Variable 

cells:                               

Price drop 0,00% 2.50% 5.00% 7.50% 10.00% 12.50% 15.00% 17.50% 20.00% 22.50% 25.00% 27.50% 30.00% 32.50% 35.00% 

Resulting 

cells:                               

VAN 

89,718, 

657.01 

82,833, 

155.96  

76,764, 

654.91  

73,696, 

153.86  

55,627, 

652.82  

34,559, 

151.77  

32,490, 

650.72  

30,422, 

149.67  

28,353, 

648.63  

26,285, 

147.58  

24,216, 

646.53  

22,148, 

145.49  

20,079, 

644.44  

18,011, 

143.39  

15 942 

642.34  

TRI 23.01% 21.95% 21.04% 20.12% 19.19% 18.24% 17.28% 16.31% 15.33% 14.33% 13.32% 12.30% 11.26% 10.20% 9,12% 

Ratio A/C 2.11 2.05  2.00  1.96  1.91  1.86  1.81  1.76  1.71  1.66  1.61  1.55  1.50  1.45  1,40  

*The Current Values column displays the values of the variable cells at the time of creation of the summary report. The variable cells of each scenario are 

located in the shaded columns and the rate of change of the values on the basis of the simulations are graphically represented below. 

 

  

TRI; Valeurs 
actuelles :; 

22,86%
TRI; Baisse Prix -

2,5%; 21,95%
TRI; Baisse de 

Prix -5%; 
21,04%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -7,5%; 

20,12%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -10%; 

19,19%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -12,5%; 

18,24%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -15%; 

17,28%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -17,5%; 

16,31%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -20%; 

15,33%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -22,5%; 

14,33%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -25%; 

13,32%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -27,5%; 

12,30%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -30%; 

11,26%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -32,5%; 

10,20%

TRI; Baisse de 
Prix -35%; 

9,12%

T
a

u
x

 d
e

 R
e

n
ta

b
il

it
é

 I
n

te
rn

e
 (

T
R

I)

Simulation de Baisse des Prix (-2,5% à -30%)

Ratio A/C; 2; 
2,10 
Ratio A/C; 3; 

2,05 
Ratio A/C; 4; 

2,00 
Ratio A/C; 5; 

1,96 
Ratio A/C; 6; 

1,91 
Ratio A/C; 7; 

1,86 
Ratio A/C; 8; 

1,81 
Ratio A/C; 9; 

1,76 
Ratio A/C; 10; 

1,71 
Ratio A/C; 11; 

1,66 
Ratio A/C; 12; 

1,61 
Ratio A/C; 13; 

1,55 
Ratio A/C; 14; 

1,50 
Ratio A/C; 15; 

1,45 
Ratio A/C; 16; 

1,40 

R
a

ti
o

 A
v

a
n

ta
g

e
/C

o
û

t 
(A

/C
)

Simulation de Baisse de Prix (-2,5% à 30%)Price drop simulation (2.5% to 30%) 
Price drop simulation (2.5% to 30%) 

In
te

rn
a
l 
R

a
te

 o
f 

R
e
tu

rn
 (

IR
R

) 

B
e
n

e
fi

t 
/ 
C

o
s
t 

R
a
ti

o
 (

A
/C

) 



 

IX 

 

 

 

 

VAN; 2; 
44 901 657,01 VAN; 3; 

42 833 155,96 VAN; 4; 
40 764 654,91 VAN; 5; 

38 696 153,86 VAN; 6; 
36 627 652,82 VAN; 7; 

34 559 151,77 VAN; 8; 
32 490 650,72 VAN; 9; 

30 422 149,67 VAN; 10; 
28 353 648,63 VAN; 11; 

26 285 147,58 VAN; 12; 
24 216 646,53 VAN; 13; 

22 148 145,49 VAN; 14; 
20 079 644,44 VAN; 15; 

18 011 143,39 VAN; 16; 
15 942 642,34 

V
a

le
u

r 
A

ct
u

a
li

sé
e

 N
e

tt
e

 (
V

A
N

)

Simulation de Baisse de Prix (-2,5% à -30% Price drop simulation (2.5% to 30%) 

N
e
t 

P
re

s
e
n

t 
V

a
lu

e
 (

N
P

V
) 



 

X 

 

 

Appendix VI. Map of the project area 

 
 

Project Intervention zone 



















































Langue : ANGLAIS


 

Translated Document  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

COTE D’IVOIRE 
 

 

BELIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT  

(2PAI-BELIER). 
 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHAI DEPARTMENT 
January 2017 

P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
 

A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

 

 



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 

Currency Equivalents, Fiscal Year, Weights and Measures, Acronyms and Abbreviations, Project Brief, 

Project Summary, Results-Based Logical Framework, Implementation Schedule..........................................  i-viii 
 
I –  STRATEGIC THRUSTS AND RATIONALE ................................................................... 1 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives ......................................... 1 

1.2 Rationale for the Bank's Intervention ...................................................................... 1 

1.3 Aid Coordination ..................................................................................................... 2 
 
II  - PROJECT DESCRIPTION  ................................................................................................ 1 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components ........................................................................ 4 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored ....................................... 4 

2.3 Project Type ............................................................................................................ 5 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement ............................................................... 6 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries ..................................................................... 8 

2.6 Participatory Approach …...……………………………………………………...10 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned .. ………...…...…………...……….9 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators .................................................................................... 9 
 
III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY ................................................................................................. 10 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance ................................................................... 10 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact ......................................................................... 11 
 
IV – IMPLEMENTATION ....................................................................................................... 14 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements .............................................................................. 14 

4.2 Monitoring ............................................................................................................. 16 

4.3 Governance ............................................................................................................ 17 

4.4 Sustainability ......................................................................................................... 17 

4.5 Risk Management .................................................................................................. 18 

4.6 Knowledge Building.......................................................................................... …20  
 
V –  LEGAL FRAMEWORK ................................................................................................... 19 

5.1 Legal Instrument.................................................................................................... 19 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Involvement .................................................... 19 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies ............................................................................ 19 
 
VI – RECOMMENDATION ..................................................................................................... 20 
 
Annex I   Côte d'Ivoire's Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators 

Annex II  Bank Group Portfolio in Côte d'Ivoire 

Annex III  Note on Consideration of the Country's Fragility   

Annex IV    Rationale for the Level of Counterpart Contribution to the ADB Window 
Annex V  Map of the Project Area  
 
 



 

i 

Currency Equivalents 
(December 2016) 

 

UA 1 = CFAF 834.987  = USD 1.35376  = EUR 1.27293 

USD 1  =  CFAF 616.791 

EUR 1 =  CFAF 655.957 

 

Fiscal Year 
1 January - 31 December 

 

Weights and Measures 

1 metric tonne  = 2204 pounds  

1 kilogramme (kg) = 2.20 pound 

1 metre (m)  = 3.28 feet 

1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inch 

1 kilometre (Km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 
 

 

Acronyms and Abbreviation 

AFD    : French Development Agency 

AGEROUTE   : Road Management Agency 

ANADER  : National Rural Development Support Agency 

ANSUT    : National Universal Telecommunication Service Agency  

BD    : Bidding Documents 

BOAD    : West African Development Bank  

CEPICI    :  Investment Promotion Centre in Côte d’Ivoire 

DGPSP    : General Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Projects 

DPSP    : Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Programmes 

ECOWAP  :  ECOWAS Agricultural Policy  

ECP    : Project Coordination Team 

ESMP    : Environmental and Social Management Plan 

EU    : European Union 

FAO    : United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization  

GIZ    : German Technical Cooperation 

HVA    : Improved Village Water Supply System  

IFAD    : International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IsDB    : Islamic Development Bank 

INP-ESA  : National Polytechnic Institute – Advanced School of Agriculture 

JICA    : Japanese International Cooperation Agency 

MINADER  : Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

MIRAH    : Ministry of Animal and Fishery Resources 

MPMEF                     :          Ministry under the Prime Minister in charge of the Economy and Finance 

MSHP                        :          Ministry of Public Health and Hygiene 

OCPV    : Foodstuffs Marketing Support Authority 

ONDR    :  National Rice Sector Development Authority 

PAIA-ID  : Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project in Indénié-Djuablic Region 

PARFACI  : Agricultural Sector Recovery Support Project 

SIPRA    : Ivorian Livestock Production Company 

SME    : Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises   

TFPG    : Technical and Financial Partners Group  

UA    : Unit of Account 

WAAPP  : West African Agricultural Production Programme 



 

ii 

Project Brief 

Client Information 

DONEE/BORROWER    : Côte d’Ivoire 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY  : Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 

Development (MINADER) 
 
Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UAM) Instrument 

ADF 26.04 Loan  

ADF 03.40 Grant 

ADB 50.56 

 

Loan 

Government and Beneficiaries 17 Own Resources 

TOTAL COST 97 
 

 
Key ADF Financing Information 
 
Loan Amount UA 26.04 million 

Commitment Fee (Loan) 0.50% per year of the 

undisbursed amount 

Service Commission (Loan) 0.75% per year of the 

outstanding amount 

Interest Rate 1% 

Maturity (Loan)  30 years  

Grace Period (Loan) 5 years    
 
Key ADB Financing Information 
 

Loan Amount                          EUR 64,360,000 (UA 50,560,000) 

Type of Loan  Loan with fully floating rate 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years, including the grace period) 

Grace Period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Average Loan Maturity To be determined (according to the amortization structure) 

Reimbursement To be determined (Half-yearly payments after the grace period) 

Interest Rates Base rate +funding cost margin+ loan margin+ premium at maturity, if 

applicable 

Base Rate Floating base rate (LIBOR USD 6-months, reviewed on 1 February and 1 

August). A free-fixing option for determining the base rate is available 

Funding Cost margin The Bank’s funding cost margin determined on 1 January and 1 July and 

applied at the base rate on 1 February and 1 August 

Loan Margin 80 basis points (0.8 %) 

Premium at Maturity To be determined as follows: 

- 0% if average loan maturity is 12.75 years or less 
- 0.10% if average loan maturity is over 12.75 years, but lower or equal 

to 15 years 

- 0.20% if average loan maturity is over 15 years 

Initial Commissions 0.25% of loan amount payable latest on signature of the loan agreement 

Commitment Fees 0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees are callable 60 days 

following the signature of the loan agreement and payable on the payment dates 

fixed. 

Option for Base Rate Change* In addition to the free-fixing option for the floating base rate, the Borrower may 

change the fixed rate to a floating rate or incorporate in whole or in part the 



 

iii 

disbursed amount. Fees are levied on such transactions. 

Option to set the Base Rate 

Ceiling or Tunnel* 

The Borrower may set the ceiling or floor to be applied on part or all of the 

amount disbursed. Fees are required for such transactions. 

Option for Loan Currency 

Conversion 

Borrower can convert the loan currency into another Bank loan currency, both 

for undisbursed amounts and those already disbursed either in whole or in part. 

Fees are levied on such transactions. 
* Currency conversion options and the related fees must comply with the Bank guidelines for the exchange, available at the following link: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

  

Project Performance  

NPV (12% rate) CFAF 123 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) 30% 

  

Time Frame – Key Milestones (expected) 
 
 

 
 

Concept Note approval 17 October 2016 

Project approval  25 January 2017 

Effectiveness date 30 April 2017 

Completion date 31 December 2021 

Closure of the grant and the loans 31 December 2022 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


 

iv 

Project Summary  

 

Overview. 2PAI BÉLIER was identified during the dialogue with the Government of Côte 

d’Ivoire to transform the agricultural sector, using an innovative approach. It aims to lay down 

the prerequisite conditions for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in the country’s 

heartland and as the first agropolis for the transformation and modernization of Ivorian 

agriculture. It concerns the Bélier administrative region and the Autonomous District of 

Yamoussoukro - a once prosperous zone that has experienced economic decline for three 

decades despite its significant potential. The project prioritizes the integrated approach to 

revive promising value chains and tackle a number of impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector. This innovative approach is a clean break from the 

sector-based approach, and is reflected in a critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

sustainably transforming economic activity at the grassroots. The project’s sector objective is 

to contribute to food and nutritional security. The specific objective is to contribute to the 

emergence of an agro-industrial pole in Bélier Region by revitalizing promising agricultural 

sub-sectors (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, pork and fish) and further involving the private 

sector, youth and women.  

 

The UA 97 million project cost will be financed by an EUR 64.36 million ADB loan, a UA 

26.04 million ADF loan, a UA 3.4 million ADF grant (a total of UA 80 million to be borne by 

the Bank) and by the Government and beneficiaries to the tune of UA 17 million. The project 

has three components: (i) Restoration of productive capital; (ii) Development of value chains; 

and (iii) Project management. The first component aims to endow the region with key 

infrastructure for the development of agricultural and agro-industrial activities (irrigation 

schemes, roads, storage and marketing facilities, livestock infrastructure, electric lines, ICT), 

while also ensuring the best living conditions for the population concerned (DWS 

infrastructure, classrooms, school canteens, health structures). The second component aims to 

support all actors for them to operate dynamically around value chains in a more integrative 

and inclusive environment. The concern will be to: strengthen land security; better structure 

farmers’ organizations and build their technical and managerial capacity; support 

mechanization; develop employment and the recruitment of young graduates, by supporting in 

particular INP-ESA; promote agri-business especially by strengthening the Yamoussoukro 

industrial zone and ICT development; ensure better access to agricultural financing and enable 

better contribution to nutrition. The last component will ensure that the project is managed 

according to schedule and through sound implementation and monitoring arrangements. 

  

The project will benefit 461,600 people (64% of project area residents), 112,000 of them 

directly, 800 young graduates and 200 SMEs (including 50 in produce processing). It will 

benefit about 230,000 women, including 4,300 farmers, 400 young girls and 25 processing-

operators and traders. With estimated additional production of 465,000 tonnes per year, 

additional income per beneficiary is estimated at about CFAF 1.2 million for Model 1 

(representing rice farmers), CFAF 7.2 million for Model 2 (representing market garden 

operators), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 3 (representing rain-fed activities), CFAF 4.8 million 

for Model 4 (representing young farmers), and CFAF 20 million for Model 5 (representing 

SMEs), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 6 (representing pig farmers) and CFAF 4.5 million for 

Model 7 (representing fish farmers). The project will benefit about 112,000 persons directly, 

107,000 of whom would be lifted out of poverty. Thanks to the setting up and organization of 

processing units (50% run by women), 120,000 tonnes of cassava tubers will be processed into 

several by-products. The project will help to raise the agricultural produce processing rate from 

119,000 tonnes currently (51% of total production) to about 581,000 tonnes (85%). It will 

create the equivalent of approximately 19,000 permanent jobs.   

 



 

v 

Needs Assessment: The project area has a population of about 702,000 and covers a land area 

of 11,695 km2. Average population density is 60/km2. It is about 200 km to the North of 

Abidjan. Two out of three people in Bélier Region live with less than one dollar a day (the 

poverty rate in the region is 61.8%, compared to 46.3% nationally). The rationale for the 

intervention is the high level of poverty and the need to revive the region around the once 

prosperous administrative capital that is now in the throes of economic decline, due mostly to 

insufficient investments linked to the socio-economic crisis of the 2000 decade (PADER-Lakes 

approved by ADF in 2000 was not implemented). Therefore, this intervention is urgent since 

it will contribute to establishing a development pole to tap the area’s high potential and meet 

the great expectations and pressing needs expressed by the youth and women.  

 

Bank’s Value Added: The establishment of a technical and financial framework to support 

agri-business is consistent with the Bank’s Medium-Term Intervention Strategy in Regional 

Member Countries, Pillars 1, 2, 3 and 5 of the High 5s (Light up Africa, Feed Africa, 

Industrialize Africa and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) and the Bank’s 

new “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025”. The Bank 

provided the Government technical assistance to identify and prepare the project, and expertise 

to develop financial inclusion and technical support in line with CSP 2013-2017. Besides, 

through this operation, the Bank will support Côte d’Ivoire’s efforts to rebuild the country and 

transform its economy - a priority objective of Government’s National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020). Unlike previous standard agricultural interventions, this Bank intervention 

will in particular fulfil all necessary conditions for setting up an agro-industrial pole to ensure 

the dynamism of promising agricultural sub-sectors in a given territory. Tangible and intangible 

infrastructure will be integrated to create local value added, improve the productivity of 

agricultural sub-sectors, and spur the produce processing dynamic to ultimately establish a true 

agro-industry as a prerequisite for agricultural sector development.  

 

Knowledge Management: The project will widely disseminate experience and good practice 

garnered during the management of units for agricultural produce production/processing. Thus, 

farmers of both sexes, artisans, processing operators, traders, youths and girls, as well as local 

authorities will acquire new techniques and skills enabling them to better manage their affairs 

and improve their living conditions. Thanks to the project, actors will gain experience on 

managing sub-sectors around inter-professions at the local level. INP-ESA’s involvement in 

helping young graduates to settle will help to endow it with new expertise and offer 

beneficiaries new opportunities in operational and managerial fields. The dissemination of 

knowledge via the monitoring/evaluation system will be done with the involvement of value 

chain actors. State officials involved will have the opportunity to be trained and broaden their 

experience in promising and innovative intervention sectors currently inexistent in the region 

(financial inclusion and framework of technical support to private initiatives).  



 

vi 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

(*): Indicator data on the baseline situation will be updated at the end of the baseline study 

PROJECT COUNTRY AND NAME: Côte d’Ivoire: Bélier Agro-Industrial Pole Project 

PROJECT GOAL:  The general objective of 2PAI Bélier is to contribute to increasing food and nutritional security of the population 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicators (including CSIs) 
Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

  2016 

 

2021 and Beyond  

 

 

1. Food and nutritional security is improved. 
1.1 Percentage of households living in food insecurity 1.1     12,6% 1.1      3%  Assessment of PND 

 

 

1.2 Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition 1.2     32% 1.2      20%     

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

      

The conditions for the emergence of an agro-
industrial pole in Bélier Region are fulfilled 

through the revitalization of promising 

agricultural sub-sectors and greater involvement 
of the private sector, youths and women. 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural sector volumes. 
 

2.2 Increased volumes of processed agricultural 

products. 
 

 

 
2.3 Increased crop yields. 

 

 
 

 

2.4 Increased income for sector actors. 
 

 

 

 

2.5 Revitalized SMEs.  

 
2.6 Accelerated industrialization. 

 

2.7 Improved employment level. 
 

2.1   Volume of agricultural production (tonnes)    Cereals assessment and 
MINADER statistics.  

 Mid-term assessment of 
PNIA 

Periodic project 

monitoring/evaluation 

report 

 Mid-term review report and 
project completion report 

Risks :   
(i) Climate change related risk 
(ii) Risk of land-related conflicts  
(iii) Risk of conflicts linked to 
transhumance 
Mitigation Measures:  

(i) A project conducted alongside 

2PAI BÉLIER fully addresses the 

underlying issue of climate change.  

(ii) Land security of target sites to be 

developed envisaged in Component 

B. 

(iii) Support to communes to 

accompany endogenous conflict 

management mechanisms  

2.1.1 Volume of paddy rice (tonnes) 2.1.1    60,000 2.1.1   91,500 

2.1.2  Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.1.2     2000  2.1.2   11,500  

2.1.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.1.3 120,000 2.1.3 460,000 

2.1.4   Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.1.4   50,000  2.1.4  123,000  

2.2    Volume of processed agricultural production (tonnes)   

2.2.1 Volume of polished rice (tonnes) 2.2.1  36,000 2.2.1   55,000 

2.2.2 Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.2.2     1,000  2.2.2     9,200  

2.2.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.2.3  48,000 2.2.3 384,000 

2.2.4  Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.2.4  10,000  2.2.4   97,600  

2.2.5   Production of pigs for slaughter and pork (carcass equivalent tonnes) 2.2.5       517 2.2.5      1,400 

2.2.6   Fish production (tonnes) 2.2.6         27 2.2.6        900 

2.3   Crop yields (tonnes/ha)   

2.3.1  Paddy rice 2.3.1        5 2.3.1         8 

2.3.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.3.2       10  2.3.2       18  

2.3.3  Cassava  2.3.3       13 2.3.3       20 

2.3.4  Maize (off-season) 2.3.4         2 2.3.4         5  

2.4     Farmers’ income (CFAF/ha)   
2.4.1  Polished rice  2.4.1  370,000 2.4.1    2.5 million 

2.4.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.4.2   1.1 

million 
2.4.2    4 million  

2.4.3  Rain-fed crops (maize, cassava) 2.4.3   90,000 2.4.3    250,000 

2.4.4   Income of pig producers (CFAF) 2.4.4  700,000 2.4.4    3 million 

2.4.5    Income  of fish producers (CFAF) 2.4.5  500,000 2.4.5   5 million  

2.4.6   Income of established youths, at least 50% of them women 

Filles (FCFA/an) 

2.4.6   1,200 2.4.6    6 million 

2.5      Number of SMEs/agro-industrial units (many in processing) 2.5          0  2.5       100 (20) 

2.6      Operational industrial zone  2.6          0 2.6           1 

2.7      Number of equivalent job positions created            2.7         0 2.7           19,000 

      

 
 

                       P
R

O
D

U
IT

S
 

I.  RESTORATION OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL 

1.1 Irrigation schemes 

 

1.2 Socio-economic infrastructure 

 

1.3. Storage and marketing infrastructure 

1.1.1  Number of dams rehabilitated 1.1.1        0 1.1.1             3  PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 
with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 

 

1.1.2  Rehabilitated land areas for irrigation  (ha) 1.1.2        0 1.1.2         2,170  

1.1.3  Number of beneficiaries (including women) 1.1.3        0 1.1.3      4,400 
(2200) 1.2.1  Linear distance of rehabilitated roads (km) 1.2.1        0 1.2.1        700  

1.2.2 HVA with built borehole equipped with a committee, of which 50% women 1.2.2        0 1.2.2        10 

1.2.3 Extension/rehabilitation of schools 1.2.3         1.2.3       +20 



 

vii 

 
1.4 Other infrastructure 

 

 

II. DEVELOPMENT OF  VALUE CHAINS 

2.1     Land security  

2.2    Organization and structuring of actors 

 
2.3 Support for employment of young graduates  

2.4 Technical and managerial support of actors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.5 Value chain development fund 
2.6 Promotion of agricultural mechanization 

2.7 Promotion of the agro-food industry 

 
2.8 Promotion of ICTs  

2.9   Support for nutrition  

 
2.10 Support for marketing 

 

 
2.11  Institutional support  

1.3.1 Number of storage facilities constructed (50% allocated to women) 1.3.1        0 1.3.1       10 (5) contractors 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contacting 
authority’s report 
 

 

 

 PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 

with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 
enterprises 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contracting 
authority’s report 

1.3.2  Number of rural markets rehabilitated/modernized (gender-sensitive design) 1.3.2        0 1.3.2        17 

1.3.3  Number of consolidation centres built (gender-sensitive) 1.3.3        0 1.3.3          4 

1.4.1  Development of pastoral areas 1.4.1        0 1.4.1          2 

1.4.2  Rehabilitation of slaughter houses and areas 1.4.2        0 1.4.2          8 

1.4.3  Construction of butcher’s shops 1.4.3        0 1.4.3          6 

1.4.5  Linear distance of electric lines (linear km) 1.4.5           1.4.5        +52 

2.1.1  Number of land certificates issued (including for women)    2.1.1      ND 2.1.1    100 (50) 

2.2.3  Number of village territories demarcated  2.2.3      ND 2.2.3        10 

2.2.1  Number of cooperatives organized (50% women) 2.2.1      ND 2.2.           42 

2.2.2  Number of groupings (50% women)  2.2.2      ND 2.2.2         40 

2.3.1  Number of incubators supported in Yamoussoukro     2.3.1       0 2.3.1          5 

2.3.3  Number of young graduates trained and established (50% girls)  2.3.3       0 2.3.3    800 (400) 

2.4.1  Quality seeds programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.2  Support counselling programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
  2.4.3  Research-development programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.5  Support programme for mainstreaming gender in ESA/INP curricular 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.6  Gender monitoring report in the project area drafted 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.7  Technical assistance for investment promotion 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.5.2  Guarantee fund 2.5.2       0 2.5.2         1 

2.6     Mechanization programme prepared and implemented 2.6         1 2.6            1 

2.7.1  Industrial zone revitalization programme implemented 2.7.1      0 2.7.1         1 

2.7.2  SME support programme (at least 30% managed by women) 2.7.2      0 2.7.2         1 

2.8. 1 Telephony, internet and mobility structure in place  2.8.1      0 2.8.1         1   

2.9.2  Training of health workers, doctors and nurses 2.9.2      0 2.9.2         1 

2.9.3  Health control system and bio-fortification 2.93       0 2.93          1 

2.10.1 Agricultural market information system (SIMA) completed 2.10.1    0 2.10.1       1 

2.11   Institutional support programme is implemented 2.11       0 2.11          1 

III. PROJECT MANAGEMENT 3.1    Number of technicians trained 3.1         0 3.1          100 
PCU report 

PCU report 

PP 
SAP system 

Audit reports 

Progress reports 
Mission aide-mémoire 

Risk: 

 MINADER’s weak institutional 
capacity 

Mitigation Measures: 
The project envisages a programme 

of institutional support to 

MINADER and various structures 
involved in the project’s 

implementation, especially in 

monitoring/evaluation. 

3.2    Number of work plans and budgets (PTBA) produced and implemented 3.2         0 3.2            5 

3.3    Number of quarterly reports/annual audit reports approved 3.3         0 3.3           20/5 

3.4    Number of PPs produced and updated 3.4         0 3.4            5  

3.5    Number of steering committee meetings held 3.5         0 3.5           10 

3.6    Number of Supervisory Authority/Bank supervision missions undertaken 3.6         0 3.6           20 / 10 

3.7    Number of mid-term review/completion reports produced 3.7        0/0  3.7          1/1 

 3.8   Installation of project website 3.8         0 3.8             1  

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Component 1: Restoration of productive capital:  UA 57.07 million (59%) 

 Component 2: Development of Value Chains:                  UA 32.88 million (34%) 

 Component 3: Project Management:                                  UA 7.05 million (7%)  

 TOTAL:                    UA 97.00 million 

ADF (Loan/Grant):                  UA 29.44 million   

ADB (Loan):                         EUR 64.36 million          

Government/Beneficiaries:       UA 17.00 million  

Total:                                    UA 97.00 million 

 
 



 

viii 

Implementation Schedule 
  

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Board Approval 
                        

2 
Publication of General Procurement 

Notice 

                        

3 
Signature of Financing Agreement 

(ADB and ADF) 

                        

4 Loan Effectiveness 
                        

5 1st Disbursement Authorization 
                        

6 Commencement of Project 
                        

7 Bid Invitation 
                        

8 Contract Award 
                        

9 Works Implementation 
                        

10 Procurement of Goods 
                        

11 
Implementation of Capacity-

building Activities 

                        

12 Mid-Term Review 
                        

13 Audits 
                        

14 Government’s Completion Report 
                        

15 Completion of Activities 
                        

16 Closure 
                        

 



 

1 

BÉLIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT (2PAI-BÉLIER) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend 

an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADB loan of EUR 

64.360 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE  

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 After a period of economic recession caused by the armed conflict of 1999-2011, the 

Ivorian economy gradually picked up thanks to political stability and the support of International 

Technical and Financial Partners. After a negative growth of -4.7% in 2011, GDP growth rose 

to 9.8% in 2012 and 8.3% in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Concurrently, the poverty rate at the national 

level dropped slightly from 48.9% in 2008 to 46.3% in 2015. The National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020) that followed the previous PND 2012-2015, is a unique frame of reference 

for public action. It hinges on five strategic thrusts: (1) Strengthen the quality of institutions and 

good governance; (2) Speed up human capital development and promote well-being; (3) Speed 

up structural transformations and industrialization; (4) Develop infrastructure spread 

harmoniously across the country and preserve the environment; and (5) Strengthen regional 

integration and international cooperation. In the area of gender, it intends to promote enrolment 

and literacy among young girls/women and women’s empowerment. Strategic Thrust 3 involves 

developing the agricultural sector as a means for the structural transformation of the country, 

especially by: (i) improving the quality of agricultural produce; (ii) speeding up the 

modernization and enhanced productivity of the agricultural sector; and (iii) speeding up 

product processing. The project is in line with Pillar 2 (Development of support infrastructure 

for economic recovery) of the CSP (2013-2017), confirmed during the March 2016 mid-term 

review.  

1.1.2 The National Agriculture Investment Programme (PNIA-2010-2016) covers priority 

activities in the crop, livestock and fisheries development sectors. It fits into a common global 

ECOWAS Agricultural Policy Framework and Comprehensive African Agriculture 

Development Programme (ECOWAP/PDDAA). On 13 October 2016, Government launched 

the process to prepare the second-generation PNIA (2017-2025) with NEPAD and ECOWAS 

support, to be implemented by PND 2016-2020. The authorities aim to guide and support 

regional and national efforts in the agricultural sector to guarantee that the 6% growth target is 

met and at least 10% of the budget is allocated to the sector (Maputo Commitment). The 

Government plans to increase this allocation rate from 5.4% in 2016 to 7-8% from 2017, and at 

least 10% from 2018. The Government adopted the agropoles development approach in 

designing this new programme and intends to organise a Donors’ Roundtable to ensure its 

financing.  

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 During the implementation of PNIA, the Government identified a programme jointly 

with the Bank for the transformation of the agricultural sector based on the agropoles approach. 

Given the availability of resources, the country’s absorptive capacity and the security situation, 

dialogue with the authorities led to the planning of this programme, which is divided into three 

agropoles projects whose order of priority was adopted by common agreement during the 

preparation of CSP 2013-2017, and confirmed during the mid-term review. The first project 

titled “Bélier Region Agro-Industrial Pole Project” benefited from a Project Preparation Facility 

(PPF) advance. The second, the Agro-Industrial Support Project in the North of Côte d’Ivoire, 

will be the subject of a PPF advance being studied. The third project concerning the Tonkpi 



 

2 

Region will be studied subsequently. This report is for the first selected project covering the 

Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro and Attiégouakro Départements) and 

the Bélier administrative region (Didiévi, Djékanou, Tiébissou and Toumodi Départements). 

This zone is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan, covers 11,695 km2 and has 702,000 

inhabitants. It has significant agricultural potentials that is yet to be fully tapped, highly 

degraded infrastructure and several private agro-industrial initiatives being developed. This 

zone has been marked by economic recession for three decades, after the decline of the cocoa-

coffee sub-sector (1980s and 90s) and the military-political crisis of 2000 to 2010, then the post-

electoral crisis of 2010-2011 (see Annexes A, B and C).  

1.2.2 Various Bank missions to the project area and the concerted approach highlighted a 

number of major constraints: (i) serious degradation and insufficiency of irrigation and pastoral 

infrastructure (dams, schemes) as well as socio-economic infrastructure (roads, markets, storage 

facilities, schools, drinking water, etc.); (ii) insufficient social cohesion and organization of 

actors, making it impossible for farmers/processing operators/traders to optimize their joint 

activities; (iii) weak land security; (iv) poor mastery of production techniques; (v) inadequate 

access to the factors of production (e.g. quality seeds); (vi) poor mechanization of agricultural 

activities; and (vii) inexistence of a framework of technical and financial support to private 

initiatives, industrialization and value chains integration, particularly those that are promising 

for youths. A few development projects exist in the region and private initiatives are emerging 

(SIPRA, INTERVALLE, Aurore, etc.). These offer opportunities for ultimately developing 

PPP-type operations. Although local development is constrained by farmer/grazier conflicts and 

climate change, the region (whose headquarter is Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative 

capital) has first-class infrastructure suitable for economic revitalization, particularly with the 

commissioning of the Abidjan-Yamoussoukro motorway in 2014, the existence of an 

international airport and the presence of a world-class university complex. By virtue of its 

integrated approach, the project is consistent with four (4) of the Bank’s High 5s: (1) Feed 

Africa; (2) Light up Africa; (3) Industrialize Africa; and (5) Improve the quality of life for the 

people of Africa. In particular, it is in line with the Bank’s new Feed Africa: Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, which implements Pillar 1 focused inter alia 

on higher investments in tangible and intangible infrastructure, mobilization of agricultural 

financial flows, agricultural produce processing, youth employment, the development of 

agropoles and agro-food industry. It is also consistent with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-

2018), especially its second pillar aimed at strengthening women’s economic empowerment, 

and the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience, 2014-2019. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 The Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in Indénié-Djuablin 

Region (PAIA-ID) is the Bank’s only active project in the agricultural sector. It was approved 

in March 2012 (UA 21.6 million grant) and, since October 2016, benefited from a 

supplementary NTF loan of UA 4 million to strengthen agri-business activities. The project 

status is satisfactory since the disbursement rate in November 2016 was 57%. Apart from the 

Bank, many development partners have interventions in the agricultural sector in Côte d’Ivoire 

including the FAO, the World Bank, WADB, the EU, AFD, WFP, IsDB, IFAD, BADEA, JICA, 

GIZ, Spanish Cooperation, Chinese Economic Cooperation and the Indian Government. These 

partners belong to the “Agriculture, Rural Development and Environment” Sector Group, which 

seeks to facilitate consultation and dialogue with the Ivorian Government. Another partner 

group, the Nutrition Sector Group, also works closely with the Agriculture Sector Group.  

1.3.2 FAO supported the Government in several post-crisis operations as well as in the 

design of development thrusts and operationalization of PNIA, especially in the area of rural 

land. In particular, the World Bank finances a multi-national Research Programme in West 

Africa (PPAAO/WAAPP, 2013-2016) that promotes agricultural sector productivity. Its 



 

3 

innovative outcomes can be capitalized in 2PAI-Bélier, especially in terms of new food 

processing technologies for vegetables and cassava. Since 2013, AFD has been financing the 

Project for the Acceleration of Agricultural Sub-Sectors in Côte d’Ivoire (PARFACI) and co-

finances with the World Bank the Agricultural Sector Promotion Project in Côte d’Ivoire 

(PSAC). PARFACI supports the market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors as well as the land 

sector in Bélier, Gontougo, Poro and Tchologo regions. On completion in mid-2017, it will be 

relayed in its foodstuff component in Bélier region by 2PAI-Bélier especially by supporting the 

market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors. The EU interventions are in the cash crop/food 

crop sub-sectors, rural land security, agricultural training, the fight against infectious animal 

diseases (epizooty), as well as the health safety of export products. JICA intervention in Bélier 

Region via the Local Rice Promotion Project (PRORIL) is in the form of a technical assistance 

operation to strengthen the capacity of actors in the local rice sub-sector. JICA also supported 

Government to prepare an agricultural mechanization strategy and is preparing a project for its 

operationalization. 2PAI-BÉLIER will forge synergies with all ongoing projects, including 

PARFACI, PRORIL and PPAAO/WAAPP. 

1.3.3 FAO and AFD play a leading role in the “Agriculture, Rural Development and 

Environment” Technical and Financial Partners Group (TFPG). This group has an internal land 

security sub-group with the EU as lead agency and the AfDB, AFD, WB and FAO as members. 

As part of the TFPG, regular consultations are organized in Abidjan, with Bank participation. 

 
Table 1.3: Aid Coordination 

 

Sector or Sub-Sector* 
Scale  (in 2015) 

GDP Exports Labour  

Agriculture and Rural Development 26.5% 36.9% 66% 
Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF)** 

Government (Average 2013-2015) Donors (Averages 2013-2015) 

CFAF 7.6 billion 

(4.83% of total expenditure)* 

IsDB 10,469,647,585 

IDA 2,005,098,519 

IFAD 9,974,171,755 

AfDB 7,779,132,814 

BOAD (WADB) 5,617,649,943 

GIZ 9,467,612,936 

EU 44,618,527,507 

AFD 22,126,947,537 

AMB Spain 2,572,000,000 

EXIMBANK GROUP 3,160,233,060 

WAEMU 1,606,560,235 

OTHERS 30,163,941,069 

Total 149,561,522,960 

Level of Aid Coordination 

 Existence of thematic working groups [Yes, established under PNIA] 

 Existence of a global sector programme [No, PNIA prepared along with detailed investment plan   

 Role of AfDB in aid coordination Member (not lead agency) 

(*) Sources: Detailed Investment Plan for the implementation of PNIA, MINADER, 6 April 2016 

(**) Source : DPPF, MINADER, 2016 

 

  



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 The project’s sector objective is to contribute to enhancing food and nutritional 

security. The specific objective is to contribute to the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in 

Bélier Region through the revitalization of promising agricultural sub-sectors and greater 

involvement of the private sector, youths and women.  

 

2.1.2 Project Design Elements. The project aims to put in place the prerequisite conditions 

for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole to transform and modernize agriculture in the 

erstwhile prosperous Bélier Region, which has experienced economic decline for three decades, 

despite its significant potential. To revive agriculture around promising value chains, the project 

prioritizes an integrated approach to resolve the many impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector (infrastructure, factors of production, organization of 

actors and sub-sectors, market integration, access to financing, etc.). The paradigm underlying 

the project’s design is to consider the agricultural and rural sector as a system with mutually 

inter-acting constituent elements. The novelty of this approach, which represents a clean break 

from the sector-based approach, lies in the critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

reviving and sustainably transforming economic activity at the local level. The project is 

founded on the value-chains and sector-integration approach to create a conducive environment 

for private sector involvement, development of community initiatives and employment of 

youths and women. It will bring about the region’s industrialization through the creation of a 

technical assistance framework, a financial arrangement, the promotion of private investments 

and the implementation of several ambitious mechanization, technical innovation, youth 

employment and human capital development programmes. The financial arrangement to 

accompany the approach will comprise: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity 

of banks and decentralized financing systems through a refinancing line; (ii) a Guarantee Fund 

to contribute to mitigating the risk; (iii) an interest rate improvement fund; and (iv) technical 

assistance to financing institutions and targeted beneficiaries (the details of this component are 

given in paragraphs C3.47 to C3.52 of Annex C3 of Volume 2). 

 

2.1.3 Summary of Components: Project implementation will span five years. It will have 

three components whose main outputs are described in Annex C3 and summarized in the table 

below:   
 
Component Cost Description 

Component A 

Restoration of 

productive capital 

UA 

57.07 

million 

(59%) 

Irrigation schemes: Rehabilitation of 3 dams, about 1,835 ha of irrigated areas/marshy rice-growing 

land and 335 ha of market gardening areas. Socio-economic infrastructure: Rehabilitation of 700 km 

of tracks; Rehabilitation/extension of classrooms and canteens in 20 schools; Equipment of 30 health 

structures with malnutrition screening equipment; Establishment of 5 therapeutic nutrition units, 20 

mobile therapeutic nutrition units, and 28 nutrition and supplementation units; Repair of 100 manual 

pumps; Installation of 50 new boreholes equipped with hand pumps; Rehabilitation of 10 HVA systems; 

Establishment of 15 new HVA systems; Extension of 2 DWS systems; Construction of 30 latrines. 

Storage and marketing infrastructure: Construction of 4 agricultural produce consolidation 

centres; Rehabilitation of 17 rural markets; Construction of 10 foodstuff storage facilities, 20 rice 

drying areas and 15 premises for warehousing market gardening products. Stock-breeding 

infrastructure: Development of two pilot pastoral zones; Construction of one slaughter-house; 

Rehabilitation of 3 slaughterhouses and laying out of related cattle markets; Construction of 4 

modern butcher’s shops, 4 pig slaughter areas and 2 pork sales points; Distribution of backyard 

rearing kits to 250 women; Development of 2 fingerlings multiplication farms; Operationalization 

of fish markets; Installation of 50 fish-farmers and about two rice-cultivation/fish-farming parcels; 

Provision of feed manufacture equipment. Energy component: Laying of a 33kV underground 

electric line from the current Yamoussoukro-Industrial Zone sub-station to raise capacity in the 

industrial zone and laying of a second 33 kV line (32 km) from the current Yamoussoukro sub-

station to the Didiévi sub-station to secure the power supply of the Département.   

  



 

5 

Component B 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

32.88 

million 

(34%) 

Land security: (i) Support to mechanisms in place for land clarification and issuance of land 

certificates; (ii) Training of actors of both sexes; Demarcation of some ten village territories. 

Organization and structuring of actors: Strengthening of the capacity of about 42 SCOOPs and 

40 farmers’ groupings including unions at regional level as well as inter-professions (rice, maize, 

cassava) being created. Support for the employment of young graduates: Implementation of a 

programme to employ 800 young boys and girls in line with Enable Youth Côte d’Ivoire: (i) increase 

the teaching facilities and technological infrastructure of 5 vocational training institutions in the 

region (including INP-ESA); and (ii) set up an incubator for young entrepreneurs and project 

developers in the agricultural value chains to foster the emergence of very small enterprises. 

Technical and managerial support of actors: Supply of quality seeds (design and implementation 

of a seed production programme, technical assistance to MINADER’s seed service); Advisory-

support (design and implementation of a programme to disseminate production good practice based 

on an innovative approach). Research-development (in partnership with CNRA and ANADER); 

Technical support for investment promotion (technical assistance to support developers refine their 

feasibility studies and business plans). Value-chain development fund: Put a financing mechanism 

in place comprising: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity of partner decentralized 

financial systems through a medium-term refinancing line called Refinancing Facility as well as a 

Guarantee Fund to contribute to mitigating bank risks in financing agricultural SMEs; and (ii) 

technical assistance aimed at supporting the project’s partner financing institutions for the 

development and marketing of new financial products. Agricultural mechanization: Design and 

implementation of a mechanization support programme, including promoting tried and tested 

technologies; Support for innovation and for procurement of agricultural machines (including 

manufacturers, public utility companies and financial services); and Strengthening of users’ 

technical and organizational capacity. Promotion of the agro-food industry: Support for the 

revitalization of the Yamoussoukro industrial zone and private initiatives (reinforcement in power, 

water and ICTs); Support to community agro-industrial units, including those run by women (rice 

steaming, cassava processing, etc.); Support for contacts/contracting between industrialists and 

producers; Study on the creation of a technopolis around the University of Yamoussoukro and the 

industrial zone. Promotion of information and communication technologies: Establishment of 

core infrastructure in terms of telephony, internet and mobility; Creation of a GIS; Putting in place 

of IT/media resources; Support for the agricultural market information system; Establishment of 

SMS-based communication services; and Building on the major achievements and contributions at 

national level of the e-agriculture programme implemented since 2012 and steered by ANSUT. 

Nutrition support: Training of 60 health workers, medical doctors, nurses and mid-wives; 

Establishment of structures for management and tools for malnutrition screening; Organization of 

malnutrition screening campaigns; Promotion of maternal breast-feeding; Broadcast of local-

language radio programmes on good nutritional practices; Technical support (training, technical 

assistance, logistics) for establishing a food health control system and a bio-fortification programme. 

Marketing support: Modernization of markets (component A); Organization of markets and 

support for their functionality; Support for the procurement of suitable means of transport, 

conservation and warehousing; Support to the agricultural markets information system (ICT sub-

component); Study of the wholesale market in the city of Yamoussoukro. Complementary support 

for gender promotion: Strengthening of actors’ technical capacity to mainstream gender; 

Strengthening of literacy among women; Support for the empowerment of women and young girls; 

and Development of women’s entrepreneurship. Institutional support: Support for the project’s 

partner structures to make them more efficient and enable them ensure in a sustainable manner the 

implementation of activities assigned.  

Component C : 

Project 

management 

UA 7.05 

million 

(7%) 

Coordination of project activities with stakeholders; Equipment and operation of the project; 

Rehabilitation of ECP premises; Procurement of goods, services and works; Administrative, 

accounting and financial management; Project’s internal and external monitoring/evaluation; Audit; 

Information and communication activities. 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

 

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for infrastructure are based on standards ensuring the 

sustainability of investments at acceptable costs and targeting good beneficiary ownership. 

Rural roads will be rehabilitated in accordance with the technical standards defined by the Road 

Management Agency (AGEROUTE). Special attention will be given to the treatment of critical 

points as this will allow for an uninterrupted flow of traffic in all seasons to and from most 

localities. For irrigated areas, the project prioritized the rehabilitation of existing gravity-based 

structures upstream the dam, extending somewhere available water so allows. Some degraded 

dams will also be consolidated to avoid the risk of submersion or rupture. As regards the 

development of marshy areas and market gardens, the traditional techniques used will be 

improved and modernized to lighten the work and introduce greater efficiency. For marshy 

areas, the concern will be to better regulate high-water levels and gravity-based distribution of 



 

6 

water through suitable works. For gardens, this will involve ensuring water drainage while 

promoting localized irrigation techniques (drip method, spray irrigation, etc.). New areas will 

be irrigated to encourage private community initiatives and meet different market needs. 

Marketing buildings will be constructed according to standards usually applied in the country 

through various projects. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternative Solutions Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Solution Brief Description 

 

Reason for Rejection 

 

Construction of new dams 

with schemes downstream 

Creation of new retention dams by 

developing irrigated areas. 

 Numerous existing dams with under-developed schemes 
downstream whose rehabilitation is priority, considering 

the available financial resources. 

 Costly investments not justified given the potential already 
in place but not fully tapped. 

Laying out of large 

schemes fed via pumping 

Develop new irrigated areas of 

several hectares while ensuring 

water supply through pumping 

 High cost of maintaining schemes than for gravity-based 
networks. 

 Priority given to medium-sized and insufficiently 
developed gravity-based schemes. 

Light re-profiling of roads Light treatment of wearing course 

in place 

 Life cycle generally below one year. 
 Unsuitable solution for roads not having been the subject 

of initial rehabilitation. 

 Accessibility not assured because of many critical points 
and crossings. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

 

2PAI-BÉLIER is an autonomous operation in the form of a Loan/Grant for an investment 

project. The country is far advanced in the PDDAA process with the existence of PNIA and 

preparation of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Pending completion of the 

process, most donor interventions in the sector are undertaken through targeted investment 

projects.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

 

2.4.1 The project’s total cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at UA 97 million 

(approximately CFAF 80.99 billion), including UA 32.50 million (CFAF 27.14 billion) in 

foreign exchange and UA 64.49 million (CFAF 53.85 billion) in local currency. A rate of 5 to 

10% for physical contingencies on works and equipment, making a total of UA 4.4 million for 

this heading or 4.5% of the total project cost, was also factored in. A provision of 3% for 

composite price escalation was applied to all components. Summary cost estimates by 

component and by expenditure category are presented in the tables below. Detailed tables of 

project costs and the list of goods and services are attached as Annexes D5 and D6 of Volume 

2. 
Table 2.3: Cost Estimates by Component 

Components 

 

(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local 

Cur. 

For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Restoration of productive capital 22,709,325 18,787,485 41,496,810 27,197 22,500 49,698 51.2 

Development of value chains 21,594,780 2,848,370 24,443,150 25,862 3,411 29,274 30.2 

Project management 3,078,450 2,168,450 5,246,900 3,687 2,597 6,284 6.5 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

 

 

 



 

7 

Table 2.4: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

Expenditure Categories 
(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Works 20,495,560 18,704,500 39,200,060 24,546 22,401 46,947 48.4 

Goods 1,698,400 1,081,000 2,779,400 2,034 1,295 3,329 3.4 

Services 9,886,345 3,607,755 13,494,100 11,840 4,321 16,161 16.7 

Miscellaneous* 11,220,900  11,220,900 13,438  13,438 13.9 

Staff 321,425  321,425 385  385 0.4 

Operating costs 3,073,425 255,950 3,329,375 3,681 306 3,987 4.1 

PPF 686,500 155,100 841,600 822 186 1,008 1.0 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

  (*) Value Chains Development Fund and settlement of customary rights. 

  

2.4.2 Project Financing. The project will be financed by: (i) an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 

million (UA 50.56 million), an ADF Grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADF Loan of UA 26.04 

million, making a total of UA 80 million (82.5% of total cost); and (ii) the counterpart 

contribution by the Government and beneficiaries amounting to UA 17 million (CFAF 14.1 

billion), or 17.5% of the total cost. The grant includes the Bank’s UA 998,000 PPF advance to 

the Ivorian Government in February 2015 as well as the service fee. This advance will be 

reimbursed in accordance with PPF’s operational guidelines. Government’s counterpart 

contribution will finance the cost of irrigation schemes, the routine maintenance of roads 

(RMF), the settlement of customary rights in the industrial zone, the rehabilitation/extension of 

the erstwhile PADER-Lakes buildings to serve as project offices and part of operating costs. 

Beneficiaries’ contribution of UA 267,000 (CFAF 223 million), or 3% of the total project cost, 

will be used for irrigation scheme and human water works. The distribution of project financing 

is indicated in Table 2.5 below while Tables 2.6 and 2.7 show the distribution of the grant and 

loans by expenditure category. 

 
Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

Sources 

Amount (CFAF '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For Exch. Local Cur. Total 

For. 

Exch. 

Local 

Cur. 
Total 

ADB loan 19,004,459 23,212,706 42,217,165 22,760 27,800 50,560 52.1 

ADF loan 5,389,115 16,354,187 21,743,302 6,454 19,586 26,040 26.8 

ADF grant 262,677 2,576,444 2,839,121 315 3,086 3,400 3.5 

   Including PPF 155,100 686,500 841,600 186 822 1,008 1.0 

Total AfDB Group 24,656,251 42,143,337 66,799,588 29,529 50,472 80,001 82.5 

Government  2,485,128 11,485,663 13,970,791 2,977 13,755 16,732 17.2 

Beneficiaries - 223,353 223,353 - 267 267 0.3 

Total 27,141,379 53,852,353 80,993,732 32,506 64,494 97,000 100.0 

 

 

  



 

8 

Table 2.6: Distribution of ADF Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories 

ADF Loan (UA Thousand) ADF Grant (UA Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total L.C. 

For. 

Exch. Total 

Works 2,405 1,300 3,705    

Goods 1,148 801 1,949    

Services 7,691 3,912 11,603 2,156 125 2,281 

Operating costs 3,491 201 3,692    

Miscellaneous 3,944  3,944    

PPF   ,, 822 186 1,008 

Not Allocated 906 241 1,147 107 4 111 

Total 19,585 6,455 26,040 3,085 315 3,400 

 

Table 2.7: Distribution of ADB Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories  
ADB (UA Thousand) ADB Loan (EUR Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local Cur. For. Exch. Total 

Works 22,643 20,413 43,056 28,823 25,985 54,808 

Goods 1,042 452 1,494 1,327 575 1,902 

Services 2,554 692 3,246 3,251 880 4,131 

Not allocated 1,561 1,203 2,764 1,987 1,532 3,519 

Total 27,800 22,760 50,560 35,388 28,972 64,360 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area covers the Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro 

and Attiégouakro Départements) and Bélier Administrative Region (Diediévi, Djékanou, 

Tiebessou and Toumodi Départements). It is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan and covers 

11,695 km2. The climate is of the humid tropical or Sudano-Guinean type. Recent studies on 

rainfall in this region over a period of 30 years (1980-2010) show an irregular distribution of 

rain with annual values ranging between 1,000 and 1,200 mm. The effects of climate change 

are increasingly felt, leading to disruptions in the planting/harvest calendar. Nevertheless, the 

project area has high agricultural and water potential, characterized by a fairly flat relief crossed 

by a dense hydrographic network (Bandama, N’Zi and Kan Rivers) This hydrography offers the 

region good opportunities for rice cultivation, fishing and fish-farming, which remain untapped. 

According to the 2014 General Population and Housing Census (RGPH 2014), the project area 

has a population of 702,000 of which 51% male and 49% female. Poverty rose from 41.4% in 

2002 to 61.8% in 2015 in Bélier Region and from 25% to 39.4% in Yamoussoukro District 

(INS-ENV2015). Average annual income per capita is CFAF 373,504 in urban areas and CFAF 

246,122 in rural areas. These values are lower than at the national level where they are CFAF 

467,080 and CFAF 256,538. The prevalence of chronic malnutrition stands at 30.4% (SMART 

2011) and underweight at 17.3% (EDS 2012). These ratios reflect a very preoccupying 

nutritional situation, considering that the acceptable threshold of chronic malnutrition is 20%.  

2.5.2 Due to the major constraints for the region’s development and economic recovery (see 

1.2.2), Bélier Region was prioritized during the identification mission undertaken with Bank 

support (see Annex B of Volume 2). This choice was also guided by the significant potential 

that exists but which remains untapped, the existing anchor infrastructure (motorway, airport), 

the existence of a world-class university complex (INPHB), the need to revitalize the region 

around Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative capital, which has experienced economic 

decline for several decades. It was also guided by the urgency to help the region’s population 

who expect a far-reaching development intervention (the Lacs Region Rural Development 

Support Project assessed by ADF in 2000 was not implemented because disbursements were 



 

9 

suspended in 2002 at the start of the armed conflict in Côte d’Ivoire). The project’s beneficiaries 

are value chain actors, organized as groups or cooperatives, as well as private operators with 

SME status. The project will directly benefit about 112,000 people in all. Its impact on 

employment is significant due to the creation of the equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs 

(approximately 4.8 million workdays). 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

The project was the subject of wide consultations at all stages of its study. Contacts made during 

the identification mission in March 2013 were continued during the preparatory (June 2015) 

and appraisal (June 2016) phases in Bélier Region, Yamoussoukro District and Abidjan. 

Meetings were held with the administrative authorities, local communities, technical structures, 

farmers’ organizations, women’s groups, private partners, ongoing projects and TFPs involved. 

Several workshops were organized during PPF implementation to select irrigation sites and road 

sections to be rehabilitated. Moreover, the project’s implementation will require the putting in 

place of mechanisms closely involving and empowering the various value chain actors. Since 

the sustainability of interventions, especially those concerning irrigation infrastructure, would 

require the full ownership of the parties concerned, the option was taken to target in priority the 

most committed communities that also fulfil the selection criteria (explicitly made request, land 

security, organization method, contributions and commitments, etc.). For the different sub-

sectors affected, the project will support the establishment of platforms to facilitate synergy 

among stakeholders and by systematically involving those of the private sector. Periodic 

meetings and information campaigns will be financed by the project to ensure proper 

communication and enable participatory decision-making by the actors. 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in Project Design 

The Bank finances the Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in the Indénié-

Djuablin Region (see 1.3.1). Lessons drawn from the project’s mid-term review were considered 

in the design of 2PAI-BÉLIER, including: (i) greater consideration of the value chains approach 

and promotion of private investment; (ii) optimization of the performance of delegated 

contracting authorities through a better definition of roles and tasks; (iii) expected improvement 

of the procurement process by enhancing the quality of procurement dossiers with a view to 

recruiting competent contractors and firms; and (iv) establishment of competent human 

resources for an efficient management of activities, including cross-cutting aspects 

(environment and gender). The table in Annex C1 details measures taken to reflect the lessons 

learned. An additional NTF financing in the form of a UA 4 million loan was approved by the 

Bank Board of Directors on 21 October 2016 to support agri-business activities. Value chains 

and the role played by the private sector was reflected in the project design. Overall, the project 

design benefited from the pilot initiatives of the Feed Africa Strategy in terms of the 

development of agropoles, youth employment and agriculture financing with shared risks.  

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The key performance indicators presented in the logical framework will be refined 

through the project’s baseline situation. The outcome indicators include: (i) outputs and 

production; (ii) additional production processed and marketed; (iii) higher revenue and income 

generation for farmers and settled youths; (iv) the number of women and youths having 

benefited from project support; (v) the average time of electricity cuts in the industrial zone and 

in the town of Didiévi. The main output indicators are: (i) the irrigated surface area laid out, 

rehabilitated or developed; (ii) the number of infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 

(consolidation centres, rural markets, storage facilities, etc.); (iii) the number of bore holes and 

pumps for rehabilitated DWS; (iv) the linear distance of roads and electric lines restored; (v) 

the number of agricultural groupings and professional organizations (OPA), youths and women 



 

10 

trained or settled in various fields; (vi) the effectiveness of support systems in place 

(mechanization programme, development fund, ICT, etc.); and (vii) the number of senior staff 

and agents of technical services trained.  

2.8.2 Other gender-specific indicators will be added during finalization of the 

monitoring/evaluation system and establishment of the baseline situation, according to the 

results-based management approach. These include: (i) the proportion of women in each 

beneficiary group; (ii) the involvement of women and youths in farmers’ and infrastructure 

management groupings; (iii) the number of land certificates issued to women and youths; (iv) 

the number of women and young graduates settled; and (v) the number of people benefiting 

from the bio-fortification programme. Special emphasis will be laid on the monitoring of socio-

economic impacts (gender- and youth-disaggregated data, monitoring of FO performance, 

turnover of very small enterprises, etc.).  

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic performance was assessed over a 25-year 

period. The calculation of project benefits was based on an estimation of additional outputs 

under the project combined with the effects of an increase in the sown land surface due to works 

(Component A) and the technology package adopted (Component B). The analysis took into 

account the characteristics of agricultural plantations in a without-project and with-project 

scenarios, and the trend of the technical level illustrated by activity fact sheets. More precisely, 

the project benefits come from: (i) the increase in productivity (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, 

pork and fish); (ii) the increase in the productivity and surface area of rain-fed cultivation; (iii) 

and the increase in the income of youths and SMEs benefiting from the project’s technical and 

financial support.  

3.1.2 In terms of economic profitability, the project has an economic rate of return (ERR) of 

30% and Net Present Value (NPV) of CFAF 123 billion at an opportunity cost of capital of 

12%. These results are deemed satisfactory in light of project activities. The project is more 

sensitive to a decrease in production than to an increase in investment costs. A 10% decrease in 

expected production induces an ERR of 26.8% and a 10% increase in investment costs gives an 

ERR of 28.7%. A 10% decrease in production at the same time as a 10% increase in investment 

costs gives an ERR of 24.9%, which is still above the opportunity cost of capital (12%). The 

assumptions and detailed calculation of financial and economic analyses are presented in Annex 

E1 of Volume 2.  

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

Outcome Assessment Economic 

NPV (baseline scenario: discount rate: 12%) CFAF 123 billion 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 30% 

3.1.3 The analysis of the project’s financial performance shows positive additional income 

for all operating models studied. The project will benefit about 11,900 farmers including about 

1,600 for irrigated areas, 8,500 for rain-fed crops and 800 young graduates, as well as 200 SMEs 

(50 of them in produce processing), 150 pig breeders and 100 fish farmers. The project’s impact 

is significant for all plantation types studied, returns being higher for models representing 

irrigated agriculture. The additional income by model are as follows: CFAF 1.2 million for 

Model M1 representing farmers in rice-growing areas (about CFAF 1.2 billion in all), CFAF 7.2 

million for Model M2 representing market gardening farmers (CFAF 4.9 billion in all), CFAF 



 

11 

2.5 million for Model M3 representing rain-fed activities (CFAF 22 billion in all), CFAF 4.8 

million for Model M4 representing young farmers (CFAF 3.8 billion in all), and CFAF 20 

million for Model M5 representing SMEs (CFAF 2 billion in all), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 

M6 representing pig breeders (CFAF 375 million in all) and CFAF 4.5 million for Model M7 

representing fish farmers (CFAF 450 million in all). The project will directly benefit about 

112,000 people with 107,000 of them are expected to be eased out of poverty. It will create the 

equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs in the region (see Annex E1 of Volume 2).  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment. The project was classified in Environmental Category 2 since it has 
negligible impact on the environment and will not require population displacement. The 

Environmental and Social Management Plan was approved by ORQR and published on the Bank’s 

website on 18 November 2016. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and 

social impacts. The rehabilitation of irrigated areas (dykes and networks) will cause little 

destruction to ecosystems. Possible scheme extensions will lead only to the felling of a few 

shrubs and uprooting of secondary bushes made up largely by pennisetum purpureum. The same 

is true for impacts of the construction zone of the Raviart mini-dam where: (i) the water storage 

area has deteriorated greatly due to frequent bush fires and illegal logging of the gallery forest; 

and (ii) the poor exploitation of marshy areas by farmers who are not accustomed to it; the few 

cashew nut trees planted close to the marshy areas cover small areas that can easily be 

compensated by the activities of the Climate Change Based Project undertaken concurrently in 

the 2PAI-BÉLIER zone. Socially, the rehabilitation of structures can lead some land owners, 

most of whom are settlers, to over-price agricultural plantations in marshy zones. The 

rehabilitation of rural roads will not cause significant environmental impacts. The same is true 

of the rehabilitation and extension of socio-economic infrastructure (markets, health centres, 

schools and canteens, energy and ICT, fishing and livestock infrastructure, etc.). This 

infrastructure can only improve and ensure the sustainability of the positive impacts expected 

from the implementation of 2PAI-BÉLIER Project activities. The analysis of negative impacts 

reveals two major observations: (i) project activities will neither cause population displacement 

nor seriously undermine biological diversity; and (ii) negative impacts can be mitigated or 

minimized through the measures defined in the 2PAI-BÉLIER ESMP that was prepared during 

the appraisal mission (Annex E of Volume 2). 

3.2.2 Climate Change: Spatial and temporal variations in rainfall patterns are a real cause 

for concern for the conduct of activities in the project area as well as across the country. 

Activities directly concerned are rain-fed agriculture and activities undertaken in lowlands 

developed as water catchment in case of pronounced water shortages. For lowlands on dams to 

be rehabilitated, technical measures will be taken during works to minimize the effects of high-

water level in case of abundant rains (overflow for excess water and networks of drains). To 

mitigate erosion of the banks of lowlands, the project will ensure that good agricultural practices 

are applied, while encouraging farmers to build anti-erosion strips. Tools for implementing alert 

procedures (i.e. collection and processing of climate data and mechanisms for their 

communication to actors) are inadequate and/or obsolete. The project will contribute to 

improving these procedures in the region by: (i) increasing the number of rain gauges in the 

sub-prefectures and villages hosting project sites; and (ii) providing more equipment, 

strengthening capacity to collect and process data and means of communication. The emphasis 

on the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes is in itself a contribution to build the resilience of 

agricultural production systems. The project will support all activities already undertaken in the 

region by WAAPP/PPAAO and CNRA concerning the dissemination of reputedly drought-

resistant plant varieties. The energy component will help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

by resorting less to diesel generators (the alternative source when power supplied by the national 

grid becomes unavailable). Besides, as part of the Global Climate Change Initiative (FIP, 

REDD+) financed by the Climate Strategy Fund (SCF), the Bank will support agroforestry and 



 

12 

the creation of forest plantations in the Centre, including in Bélier Region. This intervention 

will be in the form of a project whose appraisal will take place in the first quarter of 2017. This 

project is to be implemented in synergy with 2PAI BÉLIER. It will help to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions, increase carbon sequestration and build the resilience of production systems. 

3.2.3 Gender Impacts. Women make up 49.6% of the population in the project area. Most 

of them engage in agriculture, in particular in the food value chains (cassava production and 

processing, market gardening produce production and marketing, rice steaming, etc.). Women 

are often confined to less fertile and less irrigated parcels due to the difficulty they encounter in 

accessing landed property. In general, women farm extensively on small areas (about one ha), 

practicing shifting cultivation with few factors of production. Often, agricultural outreach is 

undertaken at their expense because it targets cash crops and organized sub-sectors that are 

dominated by men. Women use old and precarious processing equipment. Most of them do not 

know their rights, are poorly organized and are victims of all manners of violence (sexual, 

physical, psychological, economic, harmful traditional practices, denial of opportunities). 

3.2.4 Considering these constraints and the concentration of 2PAI Bélier on food sub-

sectors, the project’s gender strategy will promote women’s empowerment and gender equality 

in access to project services and resources, the implementation of each of its components, 

community representation and decision-making. In this regard, the project will facilitate 

women’s access to land by facilitating the access of close to 2,200 women to the restored 

irrigated areas. Furthermore, 50% of land certificates, the issuance of which will be facilitated 

by the project, will be set aside for women. The project will lay special emphasis on promoting 

women’s equitable access to technologies, mechanized equipment, inputs (seeds, fertilizers and 

pest-control products), supervision services and financing on a par with men. It will support 

women to procure modern cassava processing and rice-steaming equipment. Rehabilitated 

markets will take into account the specific needs of women, especially cold rooms, and include 

gender-separate sanitation facilities, day care facilities and literacy centres. The project will 

facilitate the evacuation and sale of agricultural produce by establishing platforms, setting up 

farmer/trader contracting systems and rehabilitating rural roads. The project’s “Youth training 

and settlement programme” component will reach about 400 young girls, or 50% of the 

beneficiaries of the said programme. In addition, at least 40% of enterprises managed by women 

will be integrated in the project’s “SME support” component.  

3.2.5 At the strategic level, specific measures and actions will be taken to develop women’s 

leadership and remedy the significant illiteracy rate. A package of integrated services aimed at 

building suitable technical and social capacity, as well as life skills (family planning, HIV/AIDS 

control and violence against women, etc.) necessary for their empowerment will be provided. 

The project will also work to better structure women’s organizations around selected sites by 

ensuring that woman represent 50% of members of various committees and bureaus of 

cooperatives or professional organizations targeted. The project will also work to endow the 

selected support, supervisory or training structures and agricultural professional organizations 

and management units with real technical capacity in gender mainstreaming/inclusion based on 

a gender organizational audit. The Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (Advanced School of 

Agronomy, ESA) will be supported to incorporate gender-based modules in its training 

curriculum to enable the country have agronomy and agricultural specialists who are sensitive 

to gender issues. The project will produce the gender profile of the Bélier Region agricultural 

sector, including Yamoussoukro District, which will serve to define indicators for measuring 

gender equality. A gender specialist within the Project Management Unit will monitor gender 

activities. 

3.2.6 Achieving this project’s gender-mainstreaming objectives depends on the knowledge 

and capacity of different sector actors. Therefore, it is necessary from project commencement, 

to undertake training, sensitization and communication actions for a change of behaviour. 



 

13 

Furthermore, the project must sustain the achievements of women in their sectors of activity. In 

this regard, a strict monitoring must be undertaken so that women are not excluded in their 

production sectors (these sectors are bound to become more attractive for men due to the 

modernization of factors of production and an increase in income accruing therefrom).  

3.2.7 Women will benefit from all project activities for a cost amounting to approximately 

UA 58 million. Moreover, a budget of CFAF 1.4 billion (or UA 1.7 million) will be allocated 

specifically to implement targeted actions to empower women and promote gender in the project 

area’s agricultural sector. 

3.2.8 Youth Employment and Inclusion: The project area had 702,000 inhabitants in 2014 

(RGPH data), a third of whom are youths. Despite their predominance in the labour force, 

youths are less occupied and the most vulnerable on the labour market. The national 

employment situation prepared by AGEPE based on 2014 employment data reveals that youths 

are the least active in terms of occupation (59.2% against 66% for the entire labour force), the 

most unemployed (8.3% against 7% for the whole) and the most inactive (32.7% against 2.7%). 

Young men are relatively more occupied (53.5%) whereas young woman are relatively more 

unemployed (58.6%). The level of education of youths is higher (average duration of studies of 

8.8 years against 6.6 years for the entire population of working age). Furthermore, the level of 

education is higher among unemployed youths than among active employed youths (average 

duration of studies is 9.9 years against 7.9 years). Further, youths aged 14-24 years constitute a 

significant percentage of labour in the informal sector compared to the entire population 

(91.1%), more so for young men (94.1%).  

3.2.9 The project will contribute to improving youth employment indicators. It will also 

enhance production and marketing conditions (irrigation infrastructure, roads, markets, etc.), as 

well as access to innovative technologies and factors of production (inputs, equipment, etc.). 

This material capacity building, coupled with stronger technical and financial capacity, will 

boost the productivity of activities undertaken, increase income and prompt the youths to return 

to farming. Besides, during the establishment and/or rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, youths 

will be called up to provide labour. The young artisans of the region will also see their capacity 

strengthened and will thus ensure better services to the satisfaction of producers. This capacity 

building will be undertaken jointly with the Regional Trades Chamber. The platforms envisaged 

by the project for different sub-sectors will help to increase the number of clients and young 

artisans, and resolve issues of unpaid services due to poor produce sales. The project will 

facilitate the implementation of a specific study on the situation of artisans in Bélier Region, 

including Yamoussoukro District. This will provide exhaustive and relevant data for the 

professionalization of the sector, and a better participation of artisans in the establishment of 

the envisaged agro-industrial pole.  

3.2.10 Under its “Support to entrepreneurship” component, the project will foster youth self-

employment. Ongoing initiatives in different local communities (Yamoussoukro Autonomous 

District, Tiébissou mayor) to establish young entrepreneurs will be supported by the project. To 

that end, grants for the establishment of youths will awarded for the conduct of short-duration 

(at most three months) qualifying training programmes. For that, the project will build on the 

expertise of École Supérieure d’Agronomie (ESA). A consultancy firm will be solicited to 

support young entrepreneurs to prepare their feasibility studies. Young girls will make up at 

least 30% of young entrepreneurs supported. The installation of agro-industrial units will also 

contribute to increasing youth employment, as is the case with the Toumodi cassava industrial 

processing unit. Therefore, the project should support access to financing to develop ongoing 

initiatives and facilitate the establishment of new operators. 

 



 

14 

IV IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1 Implementation Arrangement 

4.1.1 Implementation Arrangements: The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

(MINADER) will be the project executing agency. The day-to-day management of the project 

will be ensured by the project coordination team, which will be under the supervision of the 

General Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Projects (DGPSP) based in the vacant premises 

of defunct PADER-Lakes that will be enlarged. The project is in line with Presidential Directive 

No. 02/2015 particularly paragraphs 3, 4 and 4.1. Staff for the coordination team are being 

recruited and studies and BDs of flagship components (rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and 

roads) are available, thanks to activities undertaken under the PPF advance (see Annex C). 

4.1.2 The main tasks of the team are the coordination, control and monitoring of all project 

activities, as well as the information and contact of the different actors. The team will comprise 

a Coordinator, a specialist in charge of technical operations, an Administrative and Finance 

Specialist, a Monitoring/Evaluation Specialist, a specialist responsible for the farmers’ 

organizations support service, a Procurement Specialist, a Rural Engineering Specialist, a 

Specialist in Agri-business, a Specialist in the Livestock and Fisheries Sub-sector, a Specialist 

in Agricultural Credit, an Environmentalist Specialist, a Gender Specialist and support staff. 

The members of the coordination team being recruited as part of the PPF advance will sign 

performance contracts with the implementation unit. Renewal of such contracts shall be subject 

to annual review. Only senior staff whose performance is deemed satisfactory will be 

maintained. The Borrower will submit to the Bank evidence of appointment of the project 

coordinator (“Condition Precedent to First Disbursement”) within at most six months after 

effectiveness and evidence of the designation of the rest of the team (“Other Condition”). A 

technical committee will support DGPSP in activities to render the loan effective and implement 

the project (monitor the recruitment of the coordination team, etc.). It will comprise members 

from MINADER, technical directorates of Ministries in charge of youth employment and 

livestock/fishery resources and technical advisers from Ministries in charge of the Budget, 

Economy and Finance. The committee’s mandate shall not exceed six months following the 

signature of Agreements. The travel expenses of members of this committee will be borne by 

the State’s counterpart contribution to PPF.  

4.1.3 Steering: The project will be steered by a national committee bringing together the 

representatives of the following Ministries: (i) Ministry of Planning and Development; (ii); 

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; (iii) Ministry in charge of the Economy and 

Finance; (iv) Ministry in charge of the Budget; (v) Ministry of Trade; (vi) Ministry of Economic 

Infrastructure; (vii) Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development; (viii) Ministry 
of the Family, the Woman and the Child; (ix) Ministry of Livestock and Fishery Resources; (x) 

Ministry of Youth Promotion and Employment and Civil Service; (xi) Ministry of Industry and 

Mines; (xii) General Confederation of Enterprises of Côte d’Ivoire; (xiii) the National 

Association of Agricultural Professional Organizations; and (xiv) the Group of Women’s 

Organizations for Gender Equality. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the 

representative of the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, and its technical 

secretariat will be managed by the Directorate in charge of Planning in the DGPSP. An inter-

ministerial order will be signed in this regard. This committee will meet at least twice yearly to 

consider the outputs and outcomes obtained, approve progress reports and annual work 

programmes and budgets, clear possible blockages and constraints, and ensure that activities 

implemented are consistent with national strategies and policies. The Borrower will submit to 

the Bank evidence of creating a National Steering Committee latest six months following 

effectiveness of the loans. This constitutes the “Other Condition”. 

 



 

15 

4.1.4 Regional Consultative Framework (CRC): This framework targets the harmonization 

of development interventions, local arbitration and the quest for regional balance. It will be 

chaired by the Préfet of the region. The Regional Director of Agriculture will handle the 

technical secretariat. A ministerial order will be signed to that end (Annex D1.3 of Volume 2). 

4.1.5 Associated Agencies: The project will forge partnership or delegated supervisory 

(MOD) relations, through agreements, with specialized experienced agencies to execute or 

monitor tasks falling within their spheres of competence. These include the National Rural 

Development Support Agency (ANADER) for agricultural supervision and outreach; ONDR 

for monitoring works in rice-growing areas; the Foodstuffs Marketing Assistance Authority 

(OCPV) for marketing related arrangements; the Roads Management Agency (AGEROUTE) 

for the delegated supervision of roads; the Territorial Directorate of Human Water Management 

(DTHH), for the supervision of drinking water works; the Investment Promotion Centre of Côte 

d’Ivoire (CEPICI) to monitor the projects of agricultural enterprises; the National Polytechnic 

Institute – Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (INP-ESA) and the Youth Employment Agency for the 

implementation of the youth training/incubation/settlement programme and some technical 

directorates of MINADER, MIRAH, Ministries in charge of the environment, women’s 

advancement and the child and the Ministry of Industry for activities falling within their 

respective spheres of competence.  

4.1.6 Procurement Procedures: The procurement of goods (including services other than 

those of consultants), works and consultancy services financed by the Bank as part of this 

project, will be done in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded 

Operations, October 2015 edition and pursuant to the terms of the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, procurements will be done in accordance with: (i) Côte d’Ivoire’s procurement 

system (SPM): Procurement methods and procedures (MPA) as part of the procurement system 

of Côte d’Ivoire comprising its laws and implementing decrees (Decree No. 2009-259 of 6 

August 2009 instituting the Public Procurement Code as amended and supplemented by 

Decrees No. 2014-306 of 27 May 2014 and No. 2015-525 of 15 July 2015 and various 

implementing orders), using standard national bidding documents (DNSAO) or other bidding 

documents approved during project negotiations for various types of activities envisaged; (ii) 

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): standard Bank procurement methods, 

based on relevant standard BDs for consulting service contracts deemed to be most suitable.  

4.1.7 Risk Assessment and Procurement Capacity (RAPC): The risk at country, project 

and sector level, and executing agency’s capacity in project-related procurements were assessed 

and the results are reflected in Table D2.20 of Annex D2. Deemed moderate, the risk guided 

the choice of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank or Third Party) used for given activities 

or all similar activities under the project. The appropriate risk mitigation measures identified 

were included in the PERCA action plan indicated in para. D.2.30. of Annex D2. 

4.1.8 Waiver of Eligibility: Considering that part of this project’s financing is through the 

ADB Window and that some procurements will be done pursuant to the Côte d’Ivoire 

procurement system, a formal request is made to the Board of Directors of the Bank to waive 

the rule of origin for procurements made pursuant to the national procurement system. Since 

the public procurement eligibility rules in Ivorian law are not the same as those of the ADB 

Window, it is necessary to prevent any practical incompatibility. For project procurements using 

the national system, the eligibility rules are national ones in addition to the provisions of 

paragraph 5.c of the Bank Policy on Procurement. Consequently, even using the national 

system, Bank resources cannot serve to finance a contract awarded to a bidder under sanctions 

by the African Development Bank Group. If or in spite of these provisions, a contract is 

concluded with a bidder under sanction by the Bank Group, such contract shall not be financed 

with Bank resources. However, procurements made pursuant to the Bank’s Procurement 

Methods and Procedures will comply with the rule of origin as defined in Article 17 (1) (d) of 

the Agreement Establishing the African Development Bank. 



 

16 

4.1.9 Financial Management and Disbursement: The overall fiduciary risk of the 

project executing agency was assessed and deemed moderate. Côte d’Ivoire issued Decree 

No. 2015-415 in July 2015 to organize the preparation, implementation and closing of projects 

co-financed with Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs). It is in line with the Paris Declaration 

on Development Aid Effectiveness, especially the use of the recipient’s national procedures. 

The decree determines all administration and management structures that must be established 

before the Bank Board of Directors rules on the project, especially the Project Coordination 

Team (ECP) and the recruitment or appointment of its members as well as the National Steering 

Committee (CNP). The project budget will be incorporated fully in the State budget and 

implemented following the simplified expenditure procedure. Project accounts will be kept with 

the SIGFIP (Integrated Public Finance Management System) software, which handles only the 

budgetary module. To have complete accounts bringing together budgetary, cost and general 

accounting modules, a private management software will be procured. Financial reports and 

statements will be published for the public as well as private systems. A procedures manual 

harmonizing public and private procedures will be prepared for the project’s management and 

financed by PPF funds.  

4.1.10 Disbursements. Project resources will be disbursed using the reimbursement, direct 

payment and revolving fund methods, pursuant to the provisions of the Bank’s Disbursement 

Manual. Four accounts will be opened in a bank acceptable to AfDB Group to receive ADF 

resources: a special account to receive revolving funds serving for the operation of the project 

coordination and three accounts to receive resources for the Value Chains Development Fund: 

(i) a dedicated account for the operations and operating expenses of this Fund; (ii) a 

“Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance banks and project partner SFDs, and to 

guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SMEs; and (iii) an account meant for interest rate 

subsidies. These accounts have only one signatory, the public accountant who is personally 

responsible for funds entrusted to him. He/she must be sworn-in and pay a deposit in the public 

Treasury before assuming duty. Expenses linked to the services of consultants, contractors and 

suppliers will be settled by direct payment. Counterpart funds will be used to pay for expenses 

either by direct payment or by a project account opened for that purpose. 

4.1.11 Audit: An independent auditor will be recruited through competitive bidding for the 

annual audit of project accounts. He/she will be recruited based on terms of reference approved 

by the Bank for a maximum period of three years. The auditor’s continued services will be 

contingent on the approval of his/her first report. Audit reports must reach the Bank latest six 

(6) months after the close of the fiscal year. In parallel, the project is subject to control by the 

General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF) and verification by the Court of Auditors, as indicated in 

Decree No. 2015-475. 

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 Project implementation will span five years from the second quarter of 2017. Once the 

project team is recruited, the Bank will organize the start-up mission to put in place all 

requirement for a rapid and efficient commencement of project activities. 

4.2.2 The project’s internal Monitoring/Evaluation Service (SSEI) will monitor the project 

internally at the physical and financial level, and by expenditure category as well as assess the 

project’s impact on beneficiaries and the environment based on relevant and jointly established 

indicators. It will be aligned on a geographic information system (GIS) included in the project’s 

ICT components. At start-up (PPF budget), SSEI will be supported by a consultant to set up the 

baseline situation and establish a monitoring/evaluation system, including verifiable indicators. 

The baseline situation study will include the gender profile in agriculture, to deepen knowledge 

of beneficiary groups especially with regard to socio-economic aspects (income, capital, 

agricultural activities). This system is expected to be functional latest six months following 



 

17 

project commencement. On that basis, the project will produce quarterly and annual progress 

reports indicating especially the implementation rates and outcomes of the different 

components, linked to the performance indicators of the logical framework. 

4.2.3 External monitoring/evaluation will be undertaken by the Directorate of Projects 

Evaluation (DEP), working closely with the directorates in charge of projects of technical 

ministries involved as well as the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). Half-yearly 

external monitoring/evaluation reports will seek to measure progress made, identify possible 

constraints and make recommendations to resolve problems encountered. DEP will involve 

technical directorates of ministries in external monitoring missions to consider particular 

technical problems and compliance with sector strategies. Considering the project’s linkages 

with ECOWAP, external monitoring/evaluation will ensure harmonization with indictors 

selected for PNIA. The project will place at the disposal of DEP, DPPF of MINADER, the 

Directorate of Public Debt and the directorates of technical ministries involved, the necessary 

means to enable them accomplish this mission. A mid-term review is planned to establish the 

interim implementation situation, ensure the overall good progress of the project and, if 

necessary, propose adjustments. A final joint evaluation is also programmed towards project 

completion to draw lessons and build on project achievements. 

4.2.4 The project implementation schedule is presented in Table 4.7 below. 

Table 4.7: Implementation and Supervision Schedule 

N° ACTIVITIES RESPONSIBILITY TIME FRAME 

1 Approval of loans and the grant ADB/ADF January 2017 

2 Signing of agreements (loans and grant)  ADB/ADF/Government 1st quarter 2017 

3 Effectiveness of loan agreements ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

3 Fulfilment conditions 1st disbursement ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

4 Start-up mission ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

5 Publication BD/DCR  ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

6 Start-up of works and services Government 2nd half of 2017 

7 Mid-term review ADB/ADF/Government 1st half of 2020 

8 Completion report ADB/ADF/Government 2nd half of 2019 

9 Completion of activities ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2021 

10 Closing of project ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2022 

4.3 Governance 

Under Pillar I of the Bank’s CSP 2013-2017, the Bank supports the connection of the Integrated 

Local Government Management System (SIGESCOD) to the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System and the Integrated Public Procurement Management System within the 

framework of the Economic and Financial Management Support Project (PAGEF 2017-2019). 

The aim is to reduce the risk of financial loss during the management of public finances and 

support the capacity building of actors of sector ministries and local governments. This project 

will also support local governance by better securing land tenure systems, establishing concerted 

systems to limit farmer/grazier conflicts, and strengthening the capacity of local communities 

and organs to manage infrastructure whose competencies are sometimes weak. The other 

measures adopted concern: (i) the conduct of annual financial audits; (ii) efficient coordination 

by the Project Coordination Team (ECP); and (iii) the conduct of at least two supervision 

missions per year. 

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 The project aims to initiate truly sustainable development by placing local 

stakeholders, including farmers, at the heart of decision-making while also strengthening their 

capacity to assume new responsibilities. During PPF preparation and site identification studies, 

an intervention process was adopted governed by a number of eligibility criteria to ensure the 



 

18 

effective commitment of the farmers concerned and the absence of potential conflicts. The 

communities concerned will provide financial or in-kind contribution for all support 

infrastructure, based on good governance mechanisms in force. The project will accompany 

them to engage a process aimed at sustaining infrastructure put in place. They will be supported 

to strengthen their capacity at the technical and organizational level, which will create expertise 

and greater ownership at their level. In particular, committees will be created or revitalized at 

each of the sites to ensure sound management and regular maintenance of community 

infrastructure. Mayors will be involved and accompanied in the management of communal 

infrastructure (markets, slaughter areas, etc.). Private sector involvement in processing and 

marketing actions is also a guarantee of the sustainability of actions undertaken through value 

chain dynamics and actor networking. 

4.4.2 The issue of the sustainability of actions implemented, especially infrastructure 

maintenance and management, is a central concern in the project’s design. For each type of 

infrastructure, specific measures will be taken to ensure management and maintenance under 

good conditions: (i) the maintenance of rehabilitated rural roads is ensured by budgeting related 

works on counterpart funds (FER financing) and piloted programming by AGEROUTE (global 

agreement with 2PAIA-Bélier); (ii) gravity-based operation of rice cultivation works, limiting 

management and maintenance costs; (iii) involvement and training of local structures to manage 

markets with higher receipts due to increased activities and sensitization; (iv) training and 

revitalization of committees for the management of HVA systems and irrigation sites, including 

water rates based on recognized practices and activities; (v) support of settled young farmers 

with tracking of trading accounts etc. Regarding the conservation of the physical environment, 

targeted actions will not have negative effects on the environment, which will foster the 

sustainability of actions undertaken. 

4.5 Risk Management 

4.5.1 The main risks that might limit results and measures for mitigating them are as follows: 

climate change related risk: Bélier Region faces serious climatic impacts, including: (i) 

recurrent flooding; and (ii) drought and its repercussions on the farming calendar and choice of 

varieties. The project will undertake mitigation measures including: (a) structures that can resist 

high intensity swells; (b) promotion of varieties and practices suited to drought cycles; (c) the 

dissemination of knowledge of climate-related risks and data; and (d) sensitization and 

communication at the level of the population of zones concerned. 

4.5.2 Risk of land-related conflicts: To ensure non-discriminatory access to works 

undertaken (gravity-based irrigation works, lowlands, market gardens, stores, etc.), the project 

will support the process of social evaluation on all sites to be developed before any intervention 

is undertaken. On development sites with full water mastery and lowland sites, the project will 

finance the land security of sites to be developed. Capacity-building support will also be 

provided to communes for better dissemination of land transaction tools and issuance of 

exploitation certificates.  

4.5.3 Risk of transhumance-related conflicts: With regard to the prevention of 

transhumance-related conflicts, the project will support devolved structures and communes to 

accompany endogenous transhumance-related conflict management mechanisms by setting up 

consultative frameworks and drafting local agreements for natural resources management. Two 

pilot sites integrating structuring works will also be selected in the region. 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Particularly through its development of the value chains component, 2PAI-Bélier will contribute 

to train different actors and disseminate new knowledge primarily to farmers, thanks to the 



 

19 

support and training offered by operators and technical services in advisory support, structuring 

and organization. It will come up with technical innovations based on research outcomes and 

also enable youths and women inclusively to develop technical and entrepreneurial capacity and 

settle on land equipped with infrastructure and modern means of operation. As part of training 

and settling of youths, the project will support agricultural training centres and INP-ESA by 

introducing new curricula and training modules to better respond to the requirements of 

agricultural entrepreneurship and promote the emergence of technological innovations. Lastly, 

the project will set up an integrated system for managing and sharing knowledge on project 

activities through the regular dissemination of knowledge and experience acquired on its 

website and that of MINADER. 

V LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework will be a Loan and Grant Agreement between the Republic of Côte 

d’Ivoire and the African Development Fund and a Loan Agreement between the Government 

of Côte d’Ivoire and the African Development Bank. These documents will comprise the terms 

and conditions of the loans and grant. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Involvement  

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to the Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loans and the ADF 

Grant: Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB loans shall be contingent on the fulfilment by the 

Borrower of the conditions stipulated in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to 

Bank Loan and Guarantee Agreements (sovereign entities). Effectiveness of the ADF grant shall 

be subject to signature by the Donee and the Bank of the related Agreement. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The first disbursement of the ADF and 

ADB loans and the ADF grant shall be subject to the effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loan 

Agreements and the ADF Grant Agreement in accordance with the above provisions and 

evidence of fulfilment to the satisfaction of the Bank Group in both form and substance of the 

following conditions: 

i. Forward to the Bank evidence of the appointment of the 2PAI-BÉLIER Coordinator 
whose qualification and experience will have been judged satisfactory by the Bank 

Group (par. 4.1.1); 

ii. Forward to the Bank evidence of opening a special account in a bank acceptable by the 
latter to receive revolving funds from ADF resources. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions 

In addition, the Borrower shall: 

i. Show to the Bank latest six months following signature of the Agreements, evidence 
of the appointment of the rest of the Project Coordination Team, comprising a specialist 

in charge of technical matters, a specialist responsible for administrative and financial 

matters, a monitoring/evaluation specialist, a specialist responsible for support to the 

service in charge of farmers’ organizations, a public procurement specialist, a rural 

engineering specialist, a specialist in agribusiness, and specialist in the livestock and 

fisheries sub-sectors, a specialist in agricultural credit, an environmentalist and a 

gender specialist (par. 4.1.1);  

ii. Provide, latest most six months following loan effectiveness, evidence of establishing 
the project National Steering Committee (par. 4.1.2);  



 

20 

iii. Provide evidence of opening a special dedicated account for the operations and 
operating expenses of the Value Chains Development Fund, not more than six months 

following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10);  

iv. Provide evidence of opening a “Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance 
project partner banks and SFDs and to guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SEs, not 

more than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10); and  

v. Provide evidence of opening a dedicated account for interest rate subsidies, not more 
than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10). 

5.2.4 Commitments  

The Borrower commits to:  

i. Implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and have it 
implemented by co-contracting parties pursuant to: (a) Bank rules and procedures; (b) 

national laws; and (c) the recommendations, prescriptions and procedures contained in 

the ESMP; and 

ii. Submit to the Bank annual reports on the ESMP implementation, including where 
applicable, weaknesses and corrective actions taken or to be taken. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

The project is aligned on Thrusts 1 (Light up Africa), 2 (Feed Africa), 3 (Industrialize 

Africa) and 5 (Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) of the High 5s, the Strategy 

for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, as well as the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 

(LTS 2013-2022) and the Gender Strategy, 2014-2018. Furthermore, the project is in line with 

Presidential Directive No. 02/2015 relating to the process of consideration of operations. Studies 

of the project’s flagship components are available and staff of the project coordination team are 

being recruited thanks to a PPF advance.  

VI RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Boards of Directors: (i) exceptionally grant a waiver 

on the application of the rule of origin mentioned in Article 17 (1) (d) of the Agreement 

Establishing the African Development Bank and, to enable procurements to be made using the 

national public procurement system of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, authorize the application 

of the eligibility rules contained in this system in addition to the provisions of paragraph 5.3 (c) 

of the Procurement Policy for operations funded by the Bank Group, October 2015 edition; and 

(ii) approve the proposal to extend an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 

million and an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the 

Bélier Region Agro Industrial Pole Project. 



 

I 

Annex I    Côte d’Ivoire’s Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators 

 

 

Year
Côte 

d'Ivoire
Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2016 322 30 067 94 638 36 907
Total Population (millions) 2016 23,3 1 214,4 3 010,9 1 407,8
Urban Population (% of Total) 2016 51,4 40,1 41,6 80,6
Population Density  (per Km²) 2016 73,1 41,3 67,7 25,6
GNI per Capita (US $) 2014 1 460 2 045 4 226 38 317
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2016 67,0 65,6 63,9 60,3
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2016 52,5 55,6 49,9 52,1
Gender -Related Dev elopment Index  Value 2007-2013 0,468 0,801 0,506 0,792
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 187 countries) 2014 172 ... ... ...
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2008-2013 29,0 42,7 14,9 ...

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2016 2,4 2,5 1,9 0,4
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2016 3,6 3,6 2,9 0,8
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2016 42,3 40,9 28,0 17,2
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2016 3,0 3,5 6,6 16,6
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2016 83,0 79,9 52,9 51,2
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2016 103,4 100,2 103,0 97,6
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2016 23,5 24,0 25,7 22,8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2016 52,3 61,5 66,2 79,4
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2016 53,2 63,0 68,0 82,4
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2016 36,6 34,4 27,0 11,6
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2016 13,1 9,1 7,9 9,1
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 66,6 52,2 35,2 5,8
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 92,6 75,5 47,3 6,8
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2016 4,9 4,5 3,5 1,8
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 645,0 495,0 238,0 10,0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2016 21,1 31,0 ... ...

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 14,4 47,9 123,8 292,3
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 48,3 135,4 220,0 859,8
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2015 59,4 53,2 68,5 ...
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 81,9 71,6 89,3 99,5
Healthy  life ex pectancy  at birth (y ears) 2013 47,0 54,0 57 68,0
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 22,5 39,4 61,2 99,4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2014 3,5 3,8 ... ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2014 165,0 245,9 160,0 21,0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2014 84,0 84,1 90,0 ...
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2014 63,0 76,0 83,5 93,7
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2014 15,7 18,1 16,2 1,1
Daily  Calorie Supply  per Capita 2011 2 799 2 621 2 335 3 503
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2013 1,7 2,6 3,0 7,7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2015 89,6 100,5 104,7 102,4
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2015 83,6 97,1 102,9 102,2
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2015 40,1 50,9 57,8 105,3
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2015 33,2 48,5 55,7 105,3
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2015 25,7 47,6 50,6 82,2
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2015 43,3 66,8 70,5 98,6
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2015 53,3 74,3 77,3 98,9
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2015 32,7 59,4 64,0 98,4
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2014 4,7 5,0 4,2 4,8

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2013 9,1 8,6 11,9 9,4
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2013 64,8 43,2 43,4 30,0
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2013 32,7 23,3 28,0 34,5
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2012 0,3 1,1 3,0 11,6

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Côte d'Ivoire

August 2016

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

C ôt e d' Ivo ir e A fr i ca

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

GNI Per Capita US $

C ôt e d' Ivo ir e A fr i ca

0,0

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

3,0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Population Growth Rate (%)

C ôt e d 'I voi re A fr ic a

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

C ôt e d' Ivo ir e A fr i ca



 

II 

Annex II    Situation of Ongoing AfDB Portfolio in Côte-d’Ivoire (UAM)  

(end-October 2016) 

 

Project Name 

Loan/Grant 

Amount in 

UA Million 

Approval 

Date 

Signature 

Date 

Disbursed 

Amount in 

UA Million 

Disbur. 

Rate  

Closing 

Date 

PUBLIC SECTOR PROJECTS       

1. Gourou Basin Integrated 
Management Project 

23.00 24-Nov.-10 10-June-11 17.14 74.51% 30-June-17 

2. Agricultural Infrastructure 
Support Project in Indénié-

Djuablin Region (PAIA-ID) 

21.60 01-Mar-12 20-Mar-12 12.18 56.41% 28-Feb.-18 

3. Liquid Waste Recycling Support 
Project (African Water Facility) 

1.00 4-Sep-13 13-June-14 0.03 2.91% 31-Dec-17 

4. Industrial Sector Competitiveness 
Strengthening Support Project 

(PARCSI) 
10.00 

30-Sep-

2015 

11-Dec-

2015 
0.15 1.56% 

30-Nov-19 

5. Social Cohesion Support 
Programme 

30.00 13-June-14 25-June-14 30.00 100.00% 31-Dec-16 

6. Bélier Region Agro Industrial 
Pole Project (PPF) 

1.00 17-Oct-14 9-Feb-15 0.29 29.11% 30-June-17 

7. Entrepreneurship Development 
Support Project in Côte d’Ivoire 

0.7 16-Dec-14 4-Sep-15 0.03 3.89% 15-Dec-16 

8. Emergency Humanitarian Aid 
against Avian Flu 

0.7 
23-Dec-

2015 
6-Apr-2016 - - 31-Mar-17 

9. Value Chains Development 
Support Project in Indénié Region 

4.0 21-Oct-2016 - - - 31-Dec-20 

       Sub-total Public Sector 92.00   59.82 65.00%  

       

MULTINATIONAL PROJECTS       

10. Project to Interconnect the 
Electricity Networks of Côte 

d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone 

and Guinea (CLSG).  

33.00 6-Nov-13 22-Nov-13 2.18 6.60% 31-Dec-18 

11. Road Development and Transport 
Facilitation Programme within 

the Mano River Union 

96.63 17-Dec-14 4-June-15 - - 30-June-20 

12. Ebola Response Programme 6.00 1-Oct-2014 1-Oct-2014 6.00 100% 
31-Dec-

2016 

13. Bamako-Zantiebougou-
Boundiali-San Pedro Road 

Corridor Project (CI/Mali) 

70.00 26-Nov-15 
3- May- 

2016 
- - 

30-June-

2021 

14. Africa Trade Insurance 
Adherence Programme (ACA-

ATIA) 

10.00 23-Sep-15 
3- May -

2016 
- - 

31-Dec-

2016 

15. Abidjan-Lagos Motorway 
Development Project Study 

1.0 
21-Sep-

2016 
- - - - 

   Sub-total Multinational Projects 216.63   8.78 4.05 %  

       

PRIVATE SECTOR PROJECTS       

16..MicroCred Côte d'Ivoire (FAPA: 

Technical Assistance)            
0.7 16-Apr-10 11-June 0.49 69.96% 31-Dec-16 

17.Electricity Plant Extension Project 

(CIPREL) 
40.02 24-July-13 14-Aug-13 31.64  78.74%  31-Dec-16 

       Sub-total Private Sector 40.7   32.13 78.94%  

GRAND TOTAL 349.33   100.73 29.00%  

 



 

III 

Annex III    Matrix of Consideration of Fragility Factors 

      

Fragility 

Factors 

Identified by 

the Fragility 

Assessment 

Situation, Challenges and Resilience Measures Supported 

by General State Policies with the Support of Technical and 

Financial Partners (TFP)  

Measures supported by 2PAI-

BÉLIER Bank Intervention for 

(2017-2022) 

Political, 

institutional 

and Security 

Factors 

 

 

1. Legitimate Policies and Political Governance (Legitimacy, Inclusion, State Building and 

Trust in its Institutions 

Legitimacy: Côte d’Ivoire made significant progress that 
undoubtedly placed it on the path of sustainable resilience. These 

achievements include the strengthening of security and stability, 

economic recovery with impressive growth rates, the 

implementation of major institutional reforms, an upsurge of 

stability, the consolidation of social cohesion and strengthening 

of regional cooperation, among others. The international 

community continues to laud the Ivorian Government generally 

for its efforts to restore the institutions and State authority, 

rebuild infrastructure and revive the country’s economy since it 

came into office in May 2011. Despite these improvements, the 

post crisis reconstruction is far from over. Ethnic and religious 

divisions between the mostly Muslim North and the mainly 

Christian and animist South continues to undermine political 

stability and underpin the political divide among actors of the 

Ivorian political stage. Ivorians had less than one month to 
examine the draft text for the revision of the Constitution, which 

seriously hampered the public’s ability to understand the text 

before it was passed on 30 October 2016. Ultimately, these 

constitutional reforms are an opportunity to treat the profound 

causes of the diverse crises experienced by Côte d’Ivoire. In this 

regard, all sectors of civil society would have been able to 

participate in a consensual approach based on an enlightened 

and inclusive debate. This would have led to less criticism of the 

text, which would in turn have eased political tensions and lent 

fresh impetus to the reconciliation process. 

The Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project (2PAI-Bélier) will 

contribute to restore anchor 

infrastructure, which is the 

bedrock of economic recovery, and 

lift a number of exclusiveness-

related obstacles and reduce inter-

community tensions generated by 

land conflicts. The nature of 

actions that the project plans to 

support will consolidate 

Government action nationwide 

through development activities.  

Governance: Over these past years, Côte d’Ivoire undertook a 
series of actions to improve governance. This process 

coordinated by the National Secretariat for Governance and 

Capacity-Building (SNGRC) made it possible to prepare several 

instruments, including an ethics charter and code of professional 

ethics for State employees, as well as draft laws on the prevention 

and fight against corruption, the establishment of a High Anti-

Corruption Authority and the establishment of anti-corruption 

courts. In 2012, an Anti-corruption Squad was set up and a Code 

of Ethics and Deontology of Treasury employees adopted. On 4 

January 2013, Government adopted a National Good 

Governance and Anti-Corruption Plan (2013-2017). However, 

the Ivorian administration’s capacity remains weak at central 

and local level in the area of procurement, design, 

implementation and monitoring of development programmes or 

projects, and assimilation of the principle of accountability. 

Transparency: Furthermore, despite remarkable progress, the 
perception of corruption remains high according to 

Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index 

(107
th
 position in 2015 against 130

th
 out of 180 countries in 2012) 

and the recent diagnostic on governance in Côte d’Ivoire carried 

The Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project (2PAI-Bélier) will 

contribute to improving land 

system governance in the project 

target area through land security. 

It will also strengthen the capacity 

of the Bélier Region regional 

directorate of procurement. 

 

2PAI BÉLIER will strengthen the 

Ivorian administration’s capacity 

to award PPP-type contracts 

through PPF-funded technical 

assistance. 



 

IV 

Fragility 

Factors 

Identified by 

the Fragility 

Assessment 

Situation, Challenges and Resilience Measures Supported 

by General State Policies with the Support of Technical and 

Financial Partners (TFP)  

Measures supported by 2PAI-

BÉLIER Bank Intervention for 

(2017-2022) 

out by the World Bank which revealed that over 90% of 

respondents consider corruption as one of the most serious 

problems of the Ivorian society today. Public-private 

partnerships (PPP) suffer from the lack of a formal consultative 

framework and are sometimes used unadvisedly for private 

agreements. Other challenges include the lack of transparency in 

the management and concession of natural resources, land rights 

and, increasingly, the State’s inability to fight drug trafficking, 

organized crime and corruption. In fact, the lack of transparency 

and good governance in public procurements and the extensive 

land allocated for agricultural, mining operations and forest 

resource exploitation based on the misuse of private permits are 

symptoms of major unsolved problems, weak governance of 

natural resources and persistent weaknesses of the land tenure 

framework. These issues continue to pose significant challenges 

for peace and security in rural areas.   
2.    Issues of Security and Violence, Capacity and Performance of the Security Sector 

Security: Although the security situation in Côte d’Ivoire has 
greatly improved since 2011, there are still occasional incidents 

with a destabilization potential that justify continuous efforts to 

reform the security sector (RSS). Government has shown great 

political commitment in supporting the implementation of an RSS 

process. Although progress with this process is staggered, the 

creation of a National Security Council (CNS), endowed with a 

secretariat and the publication of “strategies” giving set 

objectives for the reform allowed for achieving sustained 

progress. The (flawed) assessment system notably prompts all 

sector institutions concerned by the reforms to step up their 

efforts. The passing of the “security and defence” programming 

laws is an indication that the pace of reforms will be accelerated 

during President Alassane Ouatarra’s second term, for the time 

being focused on less problematic segments. What now remains 

is to improve relations among the different security forces and 

especially reform the army to reduce the role of ‘comzones’ 

(former zonal commanders) who still exist even though the most 

influential ones have been partly marginalized. The army will 

also be made more representative of the Ivorian nation and its 

cohesion therein strengthened. Like elsewhere, the difficulty for 

Côte d’Ivoire is overhauling security institutions without 

politicizing the issue. This problem is real in a country where the 

last three presidents came to power in a context of armed 

violence. It is legitimate henceforth to ask oneself how candidates 

desiring to succeed the current president can be persuaded to 
abandon this option.  

Although the Bélier Region Agro-

Industrial Pole Project (2PAI-

Bélier) does not contribute directly 

to the security factor, it provides 

solutions that mitigate risks that 

would have worsened the security 

situation in the project area. By 

preventing transhumance-related 

conflicts, the project will support 

communes to accompany 

endogenous mechanisms for 

managing transhumance-related 

conflicts by putting in place 

consultative frameworks and 

drafting local natural resource 

management conventions.  

3. Justice Sector (Inclusive Access to Justice, Rule of Law and Independence of Justice, 
Checks and Balances Mechanisms) 

A weakened judicial system: The crises that occurred in the 

region had a significant negative impact on the judicial 

machinery. Already de-structured by diverse causes of fragility, 

it was manipulated for political ends by all political actors, and 

seemed thwarted by a lack of independence, corruption, and 

Although the Bélier Region Agro-

Industrial Pole Project (2PAI-

Bélier) does not contribute directly 

to the justice system, it treats the 

underlying issue of inclusion, 



 

V 

Fragility 

Factors 

Identified by 

the Fragility 

Assessment 

Situation, Challenges and Resilience Measures Supported 

by General State Policies with the Support of Technical and 

Financial Partners (TFP)  

Measures supported by 2PAI-

BÉLIER Bank Intervention for 

(2017-2022) 

inadequate technical and material resources. Thus, after the 

crises, there was a glaring lack of trust between the system and 

the people. Aware of this state of affairs, the region’s leaders 

initiated projects at the level of each member country for the 

reform of the justice sector. To date, significant progress has 

been achieved even if it remains humble compared to the 

people’s expectations. 

source of social injustice, by 

bringing on board the vulnerable 

segments of the population, 

especially women and youths 

Economic and 

financial 

factors 

 

4.    Strengthening the Bases of the Economy and the Resilience of the Population (Equitable 

Access to Infrastructure and the Benefits of Natural Resources) 

Natural resource management: The management of Côte 

d’Ivoire’s significant natural resources is still far from the 

desired target for giving its population a better life. The people 

remain poor although paradoxically the country is rich in 

natural resources. Côte d'Ivoire is relatively rich with a Gross 

Domestic Product (GDP) of about USD 31.75 billion in 2015. 

The current growth trend is mainly attributable to a new 

extraction of natural resources. As long as firm collaboration 

measures are not taken to better manage natural resources, the 

country risks falling victim of the “Dutch disease”. Also, the 

nature of the growth engendered by natural resources is 

characterized by high, isolationist and fragmented income 

inequalities. 

The Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project (2PAI-Bélier) 

strengthens technical and 

managerial capacity to tap land 

and water resources, which will 

contribute to improving natural 

resources management. The 

project envisages measures to 

support the capacity building of 

institutions involved in water and 

soil management as a means of 

improving resource management 

in the project area (irrigation 

schemes and drinking water point 

users groups). 
Social 

Factors: 

Poverty and 

Inequality 

4. 5. Greater Mobilization of Resources to Develop Job- and Income-Generating Opportunities 
and Inclusive Access to Basic Social Services, Based on the Crucial Role of the State, Better 

Financial Governance and an Appropriate Refocusing of the State’s Functions 
Inequalities: The widening social gap created by years of crisis 

fanned the embers of identity/ethnic tensions and land conflicts. 

Despite the return to calm and appeals for national 

reconciliation made by the new authorities and the international 

community, the social fabric remains fragile in some regions and 

urban areas. Wide disparities are observed between areas and 

regions. Regional disparities are flagrant and rural areas are the 

hardest hit by poverty. Similarly, the regions of the North, West 

and North-West experience similarly precarious conditions. 

Youths and women are particularly affected by socio-economic 

difficulties. 

Hence, it is necessary to pursue efforts for a lasting 

reconciliation, a return to social cohesion and inclusive growth, 

the guarantee of stability and prosperity for all Ivorians. Apart 

from that, the thorny issue of articulation between rural land and 

ethnicity feeds feelings of insecurity in local populations 

confronted by the illegal occupation and appropriation of their 

land. Thus, in spite of the law, control over land is a source of 

community and inter-generational tensions. This time bomb must 

be treated urgently at the political, legal and cultural levels to 

prevent it from becoming a source of another crisis in the 

country. 

 The Bélier Region Agro-
Industrial Pole Project (2PAI-

Bélier) provides answers to 

correct the spatial inequalities 

accumulated over the last twenty 

years and create a new impulse for 

balanced regional development. It 

will contribute to implement the 

1998 land tenure law to reduce 

tension on land. Moreover, the 

project will strengthen the 

capacity of local authorities to 

fully play the role conferred on 

them by the law on 

decentralization. 

Sources of revenue: The economy’s dependence on the cocoa-
coffee sector is a source of fragility. Cocoa is Côte d’Ivoire’s 

main economic resource, accounting for 40% of global 

The Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project (2PAI-Bélier) focuses 

essentially on food sub-sectors, 



 

VI 

Fragility 

Factors 

Identified by 

the Fragility 

Assessment 

Situation, Challenges and Resilience Measures Supported 

by General State Policies with the Support of Technical and 

Financial Partners (TFP)  

Measures supported by 2PAI-

BÉLIER Bank Intervention for 

(2017-2022) 

production. Coffee and cocoa contribute 20% and 40% 

respectively to GDP formation in export earnings. Both products 

are a stake for the survival of about 4 million people, or 25% of 

the Ivorian population. The sector occupies over half of the 

country’s labour force, including a high proportion of women, 

and remains one of the key drivers of economic growth. Although 

the Ivorian State has re-instated the guaranteed price for 

producers, the volatility of world market prices of cocoa-coffee 

can always hurt the country’s economy, with serious social 

consequences. Many studies have revealed that “countries 

whose economies depend on the export of a limited number of 

primary commodities are more likely to be politically fragile” 

and marked by conflicts. That has been demonstrated in Côte 

d’Ivoire where, in a context of scarcity of land, the race for the 

forest for the production of coffee and cocoa stands as one of the 

main causes of land conflicts and hence of the Ivorian social 

malaise.  

which will contribute to 

diversifying the sources of revenue 

for the Ivorian economy. The high-

potential agro-industrial sub-

sectors targeted by the project 

(rice, maize, cassava, market 

gardening) will be the engines of 

growth with the processing of 

primary products, which will 

contribute to reducing the 

economy’s dependence on the 

coffee-cocoa sector. 

Regulatory framework (Role of the State in the provision of 
services): Côte d’Ivoire has the advantage of having a stock of 

infrastructure that has historically been of good quality even if 

its quality has deteriorated due to the conflict. Obstacles to the 

development of infrastructure to improve the quality of services 

provided by the State vary in importance depending on the sector 

of activity. Although progress is noted in the ICT sector despite 

still significant regional disparities, sectors referred to as public 

utilities (water, wastes, electricity and transport) are struggling 

to take off due to the absence of rapid and efficient actions and 

late financing. The unbalanced distribution of public services 

among the regions and segments of the population is another 

factor of fragility that can, in the long run, jeopardize the 

ongoing consolidation of social cohesion if corrective action is 

not taken. 

The Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project (2PAI-Bélier) is in 

line with a multisector-based 

approach whose activities will 

increase the number of socio-

economic infrastructure in the 

project area and the number of 

persons or households having 

access to public easements 

regarding drinking water, 

electricity, information and 

communication technologies, 

transport, education, health and 

markets.  



 

VII 

Annex IV    Justification of the Level of Côte d’Ivoire’s Counterpart Contribution to the 

Project Financing 

 

The proposed project will be financed jointly by the Bank and the Ivorian Government. The Bank’s 

contribution covers 82.5% of the total project cost, net of taxes and customs duty, through an ADB 

loan of UA 50.56 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million. 

The counterpart contribution is estimated at UA 17 million, or about 17.5% of the project cost. The 

level of the counterpart contribution was determined by mutual agreement with the Government 

based on three criteria enumerated below, pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.2.2 of the Bank 

Group Policy on Expenses Eligible for Bank Group Financing (revised version of 19 March 2008) 

namely: 

 

i) Country commitment to implement its development programme 
 

After implementing the first National Development Plan (PND 2012-2015, extended to 2016) 

whose objective was to lay the foundation for emergence after the 2011 post-electoral crisis, Côte 

d’Ivoire recently adopted its second National Development Plan (PND 2016-2020) whose main 

objective is to take the country to emergence by 2020, thanks to a workable strategy. PND 2016-

2020 hinges on the following strategic thrusts: (i) Strengthen the quality of institutions and 

governance; (ii) Accelerate human capital development and social welfare; (iii) Accelerate 

structural economic transformation through industrialization; (iv) Develop infrastructure 

harmoniously distributed across the country and preserve the environment; and (v) Strengthen 

regional integration and international cooperation. The cost of PND 2016-2020 is estimated at 

CFAF 30,000 billion.  

Actions undertaken in the agricultural sector under PND 2012-2015 via the National Agricultural 

Investment Programme (PNIA), made it possible to strengthen the institutional framework, ensure 

the alignment of interventions and undertake infrastructure development works. Thus, 8 out of 12 

dams and 130 of the 200 planned water catchment works were built, 1,050 ha of marshy areas 

developed and 21,100 km of roads rehabilitated. Furthermore, reforms in the cocoa-coffee and 

cotton-cashew nut sub-sectors allowed for their better structuring and higher income distributed to 

farmers who henceforth receive 60% of the CIF price. As part of land management, 969 land 

certificates representing a total surface area of 44,429 ha were issued. These reforms enabled the 

agricultural sub-sectors to register robust growth in terms of production, farmers’ income and 

creation of direct jobs (633,562 jobs in 2014). Food production increased from 10,946,604 tonnes 

in 2011 to 15,256,030 tonnes in 2015, corresponding to an average annual growth rate of 13%. 

Cocoa exports rose from 1,429,011 in 2012 to 1,570,000 in 2015, and cashew nuts from 400,000 

tonnes in 2011 to 661,000 tonnes in 2015 (which makes the country the world’s leader). The 

agricultural sector benefited from 5% of public investments during the 2012-2015 period. The 

growth rate of the agricultural sector was about 5.7% between 2011 and 2015, and is getting close 

to the objective of 7% set by 2017.  

 

ii) Financing that the country allocates to sectors targeted by Bank assistance  
 

The estimated cost of PND 2016-2020 is CFAF 30,000 billion, of which CFAF 11,284 billion for 

the public sector (including non-profit-making institutions). Private investments absorb CFAF 

18,716 billion or 62.4% of total investments. Strategic Thrust (iii) ‘Accelerate the structural 

transformation of the economy through industrialization’ adopts agriculture as the growth-bearing 

sector that generates the most jobs and contributes to the structural transformation of the economy, 

especially through: (i) an improvement of the quality of products; (ii) agro-industrial activities with 

a greater potential to create jobs and value added; and (iv) acceleration of agricultural sector 

modernization and productivity improvement. For the 2016-2020 period, it envisages growth rates 

of 2.4%, 1.2% and 7.3% respectively for foodstuff, cash crops (coffee, cocoa, rubber) and agro-



 

VIII 

food products with an objective of transforming 50% (against 30% currently) of agricultural 

produce by 2020, with the agro-food sector growing by 7.3%. The National Agricultural 

Investment Programme (PNIA-2010-2016) covers priority activities in development sectors for 

crop, livestock and fishery products. It falls within the global framework of the common 

ECOWAS/PDDAA agricultural policy, which aims to guide regional and national efforts in the 

agricultural sector so as to guarantee a 6% growth and at least 10% budgetary allocation to the 

sector (Maputo Commitment). PND resources to strategic thrust (iii) stand at CFAF 12,400 billion 

including CFAF 1,659 billion to the agricultural sector and CFAF 3,780 billion to agro-industry 

and mines.  

 

iii) Country’s budgetary situation and debt level  
 

The fiscal policy, inscribed in a medium-term expenditure framework, is based on an increase in 

expenditure necessary for financing infrastructure and other development needs in a post-conflict 

context. The primary balance has virtually been at equilibrium over the last couple of years, while 

the global balance stands at around 3% of GDP, financed by recourse to regional and international 

financial markets. The country’s post-conflict context will continue to overstretch public finances, 

given the enormous social and economic (re)construction and (re)integration works but also the 

accelerated development plans listed in the PND 2016-2020. 

 

The tax pressure ratio estimated at 15.3% of GDP at end-2015 is expected to improve based on 

2016 estimates. Revenue forecasts of the 2016 budget comprise 80.3% of domestic resources and 

19.7% of external resources. Expected external resources are CFAF 988.5 billion – of which 69.8% 

from project loans and 30.2% from budget support.  

 

Debt restructuring undertaken as part of the HIPC Initiative made it possible to keep the debt-to-

GDP ratio at 45.6% in 2015, with external public debt servicing representing 12% of State receipts. 

The country’s debt remains sustainable judging from the debt sustainability analysis undertaken by 

the IMF in 2015 and the country risk assessment conducted the same year by AfDB. The 2015-

2019 Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (SMDT), adopted in 2014, will help to preserve 

debt sustainability even if future accumulations, in particular of non-concessional debts, must take 

into account the need to avoid the concentration of maturities around the mid-2020, and explore 

solutions for mitigating the refinancing risk. 

 

Côte d’Ivoire’s financial resources will be insufficient to sustain its economic growth and make it 

an instrument for improving the living conditions of the population as planned by Government in 

PND 2016-2020, given the huge financing needs to fund necessary investments. More substantial 

contributions coming from development partners, including the Bank, will allow for mitigating the 

risk of not carrying projects through due to State budgetary difficulties. 

 



 

IX 

Annex V    Map of the Project Area  

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 



















































Programme de Sauvegarde et de Développement des Oasis du Sud du Royaume du Maroc


 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 
 

 

 
 

 

PROJECT :  TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL 

TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY AND PROMOTION OF YOUTH 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND 

AGRIBUSINESS 
 

COUNTRY : GABON 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

January 2017 

Appraisal Team 

 

Team Leader:                  Khaled LAAJILI,  Principal Agricultural Economist, AHAI.2 

Team Member:                Aissatou BA,  Principal Technical Assistance Officer, PITDD.1 
                                         Seliatou KAYODE-ANGLADE,  Senior Investment Officer, PITD.2 

                                         Jean Louis MOUBAMBA Agricultural Economist, AHAI.3/COGA 

                                         Eric DIRABOU YAPI,  Investment Officer, COGA 

                                         Naouel  MRAIHI JABBES, Consultant, Specialist in Entrepreneurship and 
                                         the Development of Agricultural Sub-Sectors 

Sector Director :              Chiji OJUKWU, Director, AHAI 

Sector Division:              Patrick AGBOMA, Officer-in-charge, AHAI.2 

Regional Director:           Marlene KANGA, Director, RDGC  

Director General:             Ousmane Dore, RDGC 
  

Peer Reviewers 

 

M. AYACHI                   Country Programme Officer, COGA 

S. TOUNKARA             Chief Fisheries Expert, AHAI.3 

A. SOW                          Rural Infrastructure Engineer, AHAI.2 

M. OULD-TOLBA        Chief Agricultural Expert, AHAI.1 

L. GARBA                     Environmental Protection Expert, AHAI.3 

N. THIOYE                    Regional Financial Management Coordinator, ORPF.2 

R. HANNEDIALLO        Senior Procurement Officer, COGA 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Translated Document 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 
 

 

 
 

 

GABON 

 

 
TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION 

STRATEGY AND PROMOTION OF YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE 

AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND AGRIBUSINESS 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This report was prepared in close consultation with the Ministry of Sustainable Development, Economy, Investment Promotion 

and Forecasting and the Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship, responsible for implementation of the 

GRAINE Programme. It was written by the OSAN.2 Appraisal Team. For further information, please contact the Drafting Team 

Leader (Extension 2760), Mr. Patrick AGBOMA, Ag. Division Manager OSAN.2 (Extension 1540) or Mr. C. OJUKWU, Director 

OSAN (Extension 2042). 

 

AHAI/PGCL 

January 2017 

P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
 

A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

 

 



Table of Contents 

1 .  I N T R O D U C T I O N … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … 1  

1.1          Basic Information …………………………………………………………..................1 

1.2 Operation’s Objectives…………………………………………………………………3 

1.3 Departments Responsible for Preparing the Operation………………………………...3 

1.4 Justifications for use of MIC Fund……………………………………………………..3 

 

II. DESCRIPTION ………………………………………………………………………4 

2.1  Description of Preparatory Activities for which Resources have been Requested…….4 

2.2 Description of Expected Outcomes…………………………………………………….7 

 

III. THE STUDY………………………………………………………………………….7 

3.1 Guiding Principles…………………………………………………………………..…7 

3.2  Financing Plan………………………………………………………………………….8 

3.3.         Project Schedule and Duration…………………………………………………………9 

 

IV. DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY CONTENT……………………...9 

4.1  Methods for the Procurement of Consultancy Services………………………………..9 

4.2 Methods for the Procurement of Goods……………………………………………..…9 

4.3 General Procurement Notice and Review Procedures…………………………………9 

 

5.    IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE…………………………………………………....10 
5.1  Scheduling of Planned Activities……………………………………………………..10 

5.2  Draft Annual Work Programme and Procurement Schedule…………………………10 

5.3       Study Organization and Management………………………………………………....10 

 

6.    FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS…………………………………………………..…11 
6.1  Financing/Disbursement Conditions and Audit………………………………………11 

6.2 Financial Management………………………………………………………………..11 

6.3 Suspension of Disbursements…………………………………………………………11 

6.4  Letter of Agreement and Annexes…………………………………………………….11 

 

7.    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS………………………………………12 

 

VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS SUBMITTED FOR 
          CONSIDERATION BY THE BANK…………………………………………………12 

8.1.     Conclusion………………………………………………………….…………………...12 

8.2.     Recommandations………………………………………………………………………12 

 

Annex 1 Government’s Request for Financing  

Annex 2 Request for Financing Form  

Annex 3 Draft Letter of Agreement  

Annex 4 Terms of Reference for Technical Support  

Annex 5 Key Development Indicators  

Annex 6 Detailed Costs of Technical Support   

Annex 7 Map of Gabon  

 



 

 

 

LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Estimated Costs by Component  8 

Table 2: Summary of Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category 8 

Table 3: Operation’s Financing Plan 9 

Table 4: Breakdown of Financing by Expenditure Category 9 

Table 5: Operation’s Activity Schedule 10 
 

 



 

i 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
August 2016 

 

UA 1  = EUR 1.25383 

UA 1 = XAF 822.459 

UA 1  = USD 1.39338 
 

 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 
 

CFA Franc :  BEAC CFA Franc (XAF) 

CSP  : Country Strategy Paper  

DD  : Detailed Designs 

ESA  : Environmental and Social Assessment 

ESIA  : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

ESMP  : Environmental and Social Management Plan 

GDP  :  Gross Domestic Product 

GRAINE  :  Gabonaise des Réalisations Agricoles et des Initiatives des Nationaux Engagés 

(Gabonese Initiative for Achieving Agricultural Outcomes with Engaged 

Citizenry) 
HDI  : Human Development Index                                        

IITA  : International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 

LDC  : Least Developed Countries 

MAEAPG : Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship responsible for 

Implementation of the GRAINE Programme 

MIC  : Middle-Income Countries  

MIC-TAF : Middle-Income Countries Technical Assistance Fund 

NPP  :  National Procurement Procedures 

NWFP  : Non-Wood Forest Products  

PNIASAN : National Agricultural Investment and Food and Nutrition Security Plan 

PP  :  Procurement Plan 

PSGE  : Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan  

QCBS  : Quality and Cost Based Selection 

TFPs  :  Technical and Financial Partners 

UA  :  Unit of Account 

UNDP  : United Nations Development Programme 

 

 



 

ii 

Recipient/Country/Department: Republic of Gabon 
Proposal Title: Support to the Green Gabon Initiative by financing the preparation of a Project to Support Agricultural Transformation and Youth Entrepreneurship Promotion in the Agricultural sector and 

Agribusiness (PASTA-PEJA),  

Support Operation’s Goal: Contribute to the reduction of Gabon’s food dependency and the improvement of the population’s living conditions through support to growth-bearing sub-sectors and youth 
entrepreneurship. 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS AND MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicator 

(including CSI) 

Baseline 

Situation 
(2014) 

Target for 2025 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

 

Contribute to the improvement of food 

security and living conditions of the 

population by promoting growth-bearing 
sub-sectors and agricultural 

entrepreneurship 

- Degree to which demand 

for basic foodstuffs is met  

-Contribution of agriculture 

to GDP 

-Additional direct and 
indirect jobs in agriculture 

40% in 

2014 

 

3.7% in 

2014 
12000 in 

2014 

 

100% in 2025 (bananas, cassava, tomatoes, chili 

peppers, etc.) 

 

 

20% in 2025 
 

60.000 jobs by 2025 

 
 

Ministry of 

Agriculture and 

PSGE reports 

 

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 Living standards of beneficiaries are 

improved  

Increase in marketed food crop 

production  

Daily income of women 

traders  

Additional food production 

marketed 

CFAF 3700   

in 2014 
 

N/A 

 

Daily income of women traders is 100% higher in 

2025 
 

20,000 T in 2025 

Ministry of 

Agriculture 
reports 

Risk: Delay in the procurement of 

consultancy services. 
Mitigation Measures:  

-Establishment of a Study 

Coordination Unit strengthened by 
an expert with sound experience of 

the Bank’s procurement procedures 

will mitigate this risk. 

-The existence of a procurement 

expert at GAFO will help to build the 

capacity of the coordination unit and 
reduce the time taken to process 

documents. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

 

PASTA-PEJA project studies  

 
 

Construction drawings for PASTA-PEJA 

infrastructure  
 

Baseline situation studies for the PASTA-
PEJA project and establishment of a 

monitoring and evaluation system. 

 
 

Administrative, Accounting and Financial 

Procedures Manual, and establishment of 

the PASTA-PEJA accounting management 

system 

 

Availability of feasibility 

study 
 

Availability of DD and ESIA  

Availability of study on 

baseline situation and 
establishment of the 

monitoring/evaluation system 
 

 

Availability of procedures 

manual and accounting 
system is installed 

 

N/A 

 
N/A 

 
 

N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

N/A 

 
 

 

 

Project feasibility study approved 
 

 
DD and ESIA approved  
 

 

Pasta-PEJA baseline situation approved and 
monitoring/evaluation system installed  

 

 
 
PASTA-PEJA Procedures Manual is approved and 

the management system is operational  

 

 

 
 

 

Status reports on 
grant activities 

 

 
 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 

C
L

E
S

  

 
Component 1: Conduct of study,  establishment of baseline situation and a monitoring/evaluation system, procedures manual as well as the 

accounting management system 

 
Component 2: Capacity building (procurement of office automation and IT equipment for the Coordination Unit) 

 

Component 3: Study management (final audit, experts’ fees, operating costs, steering committee costs, etc.) 
 

 
Total Cost: UA  1,110,795 

Sources of Financing:  

 
-MIC Grant: UA 991,095 

-Government : UA 119,700 



 

1 

1. INTRODUCTION 
 

1.1 Basic Information 
 

1.1.1 Locate on the Gulf of Guinea, Gabon straddles the Equator and covers an area of 

267,667 km2. The country is bordered to the North by Cameroon, to the North-West by 

Equatorial Guinea and to the South-East by Congo-Brazzaville. It has a coastline of 800 km 

along the Atlantic Ocean. Its relief is linked to the equatorial nature of its climate, its 

hydrography and vegetation. It comprises three distinct geomorphological areas:  the coastal 

plains, mountain ranges and plateaus in the interior. Annual rainfall varies between 1,500 and 

3,000 mm.  Dense, rich equatorial forest covers 85% of Gabon’s territory. In addition, there are 

16 million hectares of fertile land, only 495,000 ha of which are farmed. Gabon also has a 

significant waterways and maritime domain, a 10,000-km2 network of inland waterways, parks 

and reserves covering 11% of the territory, and an exceptionally rich biological diversity of 

almost 9,000 animal and plant species. 
 

1.1.2 Gabon’s economy is heavily dependent on oil, which accounts for 31% of GDP, 49% 

of fiscal revenue and 85% of export revenue. The fall in world oil prices has caused a significant 

loss of revenue for the country and led to slower growth averaging about 5% over the past few 

years. Gabon faces a socio-economic paradox: although belonging to the group of Middle-

Income Countries (MIC) because of its income per capita, it is also classified among Least-

Developed Countries (LDC) because of its social indicators, with a poverty rate of 32.7% and 

an unemployment rate of 35.7% for young people between the ages of 15 and 24 (26% for the 

labour force aged 25 to 341). Gabon’s average Human Development Index (HDI) of about 0.684 

ranks it 112th out of 187 countries (UNDP, 2014). Thus, Gabon’s economy has all the 

characteristics of a rent economy which creates few jobs and is focused on exports of 

unprocessed primary commodities (after oil, wood is the country’s second most important 

economic resource), despite a strong diversification potential.  
 

1.1.3 Gabon’s agricultural sector (excluding the forestry sector) plays a marginal role in the 

country’s economic and social life. Over the past five years, its contribution to GDP has 

declined and is now about 3% compared to 16% in 1970. The downward trend in the sector’s 

value added is mainly due to the dominance of the oil sector in the economy (39% of GDP, 

49% of fiscal revenue and 85% of export earnings) resulting in rural-urban migration to the 

centres for petroleum-related activities.  Agriculture, stockbreeding and fisheries under the 

combined impacts of this rural-urban migration and an ageing farming community have 

declined by almost 80% in terms of annual food production. This has created chronic food 

deficits and insecurity, which are threatening a high proportion of Gabon’s population. This 

deficit is offset by imports, about 20% of which come from neighbouring countries. In fact, 

Gabon imports over 275,000 tonnes of food products and 80% of its imports consist of wheat, 

rice and poultry meat. The food import bill is currently estimated at CFAF 350 billion per year. 

As a result, Gabon is now heavily dependent on food imports with an import dependency ratio 

of almost 60%. 

 

1.1.4  However, the agricultural sector has strong potential such as: (i) a wealth of natural 

resources and the availability of arable land; (ii) favourable agro-ecological conditions; (iii) a 

favourable equatorial climate; (iv) strong demand for food, market garden and livestock 

products; (v) a relatively high literacy rate; and (vii) the recent emergence of associations and 

individual initiatives in rural areas to tackle the economic crisis. However, development of the 

agricultural sector has been impeded by many constraints, which have led to a shift from family 

agriculture to subsistence farming systems. The main constraints are: (i) low population density 

with wide regional disparities; (ii) an ageing, unskilled and scarce rural labour force; (iii) 

                                                 
1  2013 World Bank Report on Growth and Employment- http://documents.banquemondiale.org/curated/fr/2013/01/24373273/report-

growth-employment-gabonese-republic-create-conditions-inclusive-growth-rapport-sur-la-croissance-lemploi-en-republique-gabonaise-
creer-les-conditions-dune-croissance-inclusive 



 

2 

traditional, non-intensive production systems; (iv) an unfavourable economic environment 

(remoteness of production areas, which results in high transport costs between those areas and 

areas of high consumption as well as a lack of decentralized trading facilities); (v) weak 

organization of producers; (vi) a poorly organized agricultural research system that is barely 

operational and weak institutional capacity of advisory and support services; and (vii) lack of 

coordination among the different actors operating in rural areas. 

 

1.1.5 Having recognized its heavy dependency on the oil sector and food imports, Gabon in 

2010 launched its Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan 2025 (PSGE 2025). Focused on three pillars 

(Green Gabon, Industrial Gabon and Services Gabon), PSGE is a roadmap that will guide the 

transformation from a rent-based economy to a high value-added and diversified economy 

while preserving the country’s vast natural wealth. The Government’s declared ambition, 

through the PSGE and, in particular, its ‘Green Growth’ pillar is to transform the agricultural 

sector into one for economic diversification and a driver of inclusive growth. In future, the 

agricultural sector will have to meet the country’s food requirements, achieve food trade 

balance, create more jobs and promote least-cost marketing of primary food products by 

producing them locally. The significance of agribusiness in absolute terms in GDP and 

employment remains relatively low in Gabon at 1.5% and 4.7%. This situation is due to low yields 

and post-harvest losses of about 30%, little processing of agricultural products and marketing of 

agricultural produce that is severely handicapped by the lack of transport infrastructure as well as 

logistic and distribution centres for the storage and redistribution of agricultural products.  

 

1.1.6 Therefore, an Agricultural Development Strategy was prepared in order to achieve 

Government’s objectives then set out in a Green Gabon Operational Plan, whose proposals were, 

among others, based on an integrated sector and project-based approach.  The economic 

potential of Green Gabon will be fully realized through the plant, animal, fisheries and 

aquaculture sub-sectors to be developed via programmes and projects organized around three 

tiers of actions: the core elements (protection, knowledge and regulation), the drivers of 

competitiveness (vocational training, research and business framework) and actions to add 

value (conservation, processing, marketing and certification, etc.). Reforms have been initiated, 

for instance the professionalization of existing actors, the contribution of new actors, including 

unemployed youth and agri-business developers, new profiles and new skills. Furthermore, the 

transformation of agriculture will create new needs and innovating trades linked to the 

development of value chains for which active preparation must be made by both the public 

(vocational training, training of officials, innovative financing tools, etc.) and private sectors.  
 

1.1.7 This request made by the Government of Gabon for assistance under MIC-TAF is in 

keeping with this context.  Its purpose is to finance a study with the following objectives: 

preparation of a project to implement the agricultural development and transformation strategy 

(PASTA) and the promotion of youth entrepreneurship in the agricultural sector and 

agribusiness (PEJA). The first component of this study (PASTA) will make a comprehensive 

analysis of the different challenges and formulate a project to support public action to create an 

incentive framework and enabling environment for the development of the agricultural sub-

sectors slated for promotion. In its second component, the study of which is the subject of this 

request, will also design specific support for entrepreneurship through the formulation of a 

project to promote youth entrepreneurship in agriculture and agro-industry (PEJA).  

 

1.8  Therefore, the aim of this operation is to support the transformation of the agricultural 

sector by developing the value chains of growth-bearing sub-sectors and promoting youth 

employment in the agricultural sector and agribusiness. It is consistent with the two pillars of 

the Country Strategy Paper (2016-2020 CSP) for Gabon, namely: Pillar 1 “Support for 

economic diversification through infrastructure development and business climate 

improvement”; and Pillar 2 “Support for the Human Development Strategy”. The main thrusts 

of the project to be formulated are in keeping with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) 



 

3 

as well as with the strategic directions of the Bank’s new agricultural sector strategy, which 

prioritizes the development of value chains and agricultural entrepreneurship. They are also in 

line with the High-5 priorities, which aim to feed Africa by 2025 and improve the quality of 

life of the people of Africa. They are closely aligned on the post-Dakar strategic directions, 

namely to: (i) develop agribusiness areas and agricultural corridors to accelerate investment in 

integrated infrastructure; (ii) obtain new private sector investments in agriculture; (iii) develop 

solid value chains for key basic products; (iv) improve farmers’ access to agricultural inputs; 

(v) establish a financing facility for the operating cycle of agricultural cooperatives with high 

potential in terms of youth employment in agriculture; and (vi) transform the education and 

training system into development tools that will provide training in trades that meet the 

economy’s needs. 
 

1.2 Operation’s Objectives 
 

Strategic and Specific Objectives: The objective of this technical support is to: (i) contribute to 

Gabon’s food security by achieving self-sufficiency in food products by 2025; (ii) make Gabon 

a top industrial crop product exporting country; and (iii) improve the population’s living 

conditions by promoting profitable and job-creating agriculture for young people. More 

specifically, the operation aims to prepare an Agricultural Transformation Strategy Support 

Project with the following complementary components: (i) development of value chains of 

promising sub-sectors; (ii) promotion of youth entrepreneurship in the agricultural sector and 

in agribusiness-PEJA, (iii) formulation of a support project for the Ministries and institutions 

responsible for PASTA-PEJA; and (iv) establishment of the PASTA-PEJA management 

mechanism. 
 

1.3 Departments responsible for the Preparing the Operation 
 

1.3.1 The two Departments responsible for preparing this technical operation include the 

Agriculture and Agro-Industry Department (OSAN), through the Agriculture and Agro-

Industry Division (OSAN.2) and the Regional Centre Operations Department (ORCE), in close 

cooperation with the Bank’s Field Office in Gabon (GAFO). This operation will be jointly 

monitored by OSAN.2 and GAFO. 
 

1.4 Justifications for use of MIC Fund 
 

1.4.1. The technical support requested will facilitate the preparation of a project to implement 

the operations identified in the Green Gabon Operational Plan 2025, which is aligned on the 

country strategy (2016-2020 CSP). This project should contribute to the diversification of 

Gabon’s economy and improvement of the population’s living conditions by developing 

selected value chains and promoting youth employment in the agricultural sector. It will enable 

the Bank to support Gabon in its agricultural sector transformation strategy with a view to 

boosting its contribution to the national economy  
 

  



 

4 

1.4.2 In particular, the Bank’s assistance will help to: (i) increase the supply of locally 

produced food crop products at prices the people of Gabon can afford; (ii) boost exports of 

industrial agricultural products; (iii) create jobs along the value chains of targeted agricultural 

sub-sectors; and (iv) build the capacity of both public and private sector agricultural sector 

actors. 
 

1.4.3 The operation is in keeping with the Revised Guidelines for the Administration and 

Utilization of the Middle Income Country Technical Assistance Fund: (i) preparation of 

investment projects and sector studies (see par. 2.3.2, 2.3.5); (ii) capacity building and 

institutional support activities (see par. 2.3.3 and 2.3.4); (iii) private sector promotion activities 

(see par. 2.3.6). 
 

 

2. DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS 
 

2.1 Description of Preparatory Activities for which Resources have been Requested 
 

2.1.1 Guiding Principles: The preparation study on the Project to Support the Agricultural 

Transformation Strategy and the Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship in Agriculture and Agri-

Business (PASTA-PEJA) will be guided by a number of principles: 

 

 Capitalization on the achievements and lessons learned from implementing 

previous  agricultural projects and programmes, but also the search for 

successful examples and new technologies developed and mastered in the 

country that should be scaled up to produce a significant impact in terms of the 

sector’s development, 
 

 The reference frameworks for PASTA-PEJA will be the Agricultural Sector 
Development Strategy (2014), the Green Gabon Plan (2015), PNIASAN, in 

addition to other agricultural sector and sub-sector studies, 
 

 The exit and sustainability strategy: the project’s interventions will be made in 
line with predetermined roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders, in 

particular manufacturers, local communities, users and deconcentrated 

government services concerning the maintenance and sustainability of 

investments and the supply of services to communities. 
 

2.1.2 Study’s Main Activities: The objective of the PASTA-PEJA study is to formulate two 

sub-projects: PASTA and PEJA. It will be organized in four components:  
 

2.1.2.1. The first component proposes support to the Agricultural Transformation Strategy 

(PASTA) by drawing on a comprehensive inventory of the analyses and studies already carried 

out. The aim of this component is to design a sub-project that will contribute to the 

transformation of Gabon’s agriculture by promoting growth-bearing sub-sectors that will 

diversify Gabon’s economy (both in the case of essential basic products and agro-industrial 

products), particularly by focusing it on the promotion of value chains and operationalization 

of the multiservice hub concept developed by the Government for wealth creation. The 

operation’s objectives are in line with the Bank’s High-5 priorities, which aim to feed Africa 

by 2025 and improve the quality of life of the people of Africa. They are particularly aligned 

on the post-Dakar strategic directions, namely to: (i) obtain new private sector investments in 

agriculture; (ii) develop solid value chains for key basic products; (iii) improve farmers’ access 

to agricultural inputs; (iv) develop youth employment in agriculture; and (vi) transform the 

education and training system into a development tool that will provide training in trades that 

meet the economy’s needs. Therefore, the formulation of the support will incorporate key 

elements linked specifically to: (a) capacity building for public, private and community 

institutions in the sector; (b) the development of facilitating infrastructure, both material (tracks, 

markets, warehouses, drinking water supply and sanitation, training structures and agricultural 



 

5 

support services, etc.) and immaterial (in particular, ICT, which may have positive impacts); 

(c) the promotion of public-private partnerships; (d) the promotion of vocational integration 

and youth entrepreneurship to revive agricultural activities and create a new class of 

professional agricultural entrepreneurs; and (e) improvement of the sector’s governance, etc. 

The preparation of PASTA will contribute to the identification and prioritization of key actions 

to be included in the project. These actions will contribute to the transformation of Gabon’s 

agriculture. It will be necessary to: 
 

 Review the ongoing reforms and initiatives or those planned under the Green 
Gabon Plan  

 Conduct studies on the value chains of sub-sectors among those identified and 
prioritized in the Green Gabon Operational Plan following justification of their 

selection 

 Identify catalytic projects/actions that could support the transformation of 
Gabon’s agriculture and that will constitute the body of PASTA 

 Formulate the PASTA project in accordance with three guiding principles: adopt 
an integrated upstream-downstream sector approach for growth-bearing sectors 

mutually agreed upon with the Government, apply a project approach, i.e. all the 

proposed actions will be formulated as projects that will contribute to the 

achievement of mutually pre-determined objectives to boost entrepreneurship 

and ensure pragmatic and effective public action. Indeed, the Government’s 

intervention that will be supported by PASTA will create an incentive and 

enabling environment for the development of the sub-sectors slated for 

promotion.  Its intervention will focus on the following areas: (i) organization of 

farmers; (ii) structuring of relationships between the different operators from 

production to placing on the market; (iii) financing of value chain actors; (iv) 

regional development; (v) agricultural research and development, training and 

guidance; (vi) availability of inputs and mechanization; (vii) enhancement of 

production (conservation, processing and marketing); (viii) rural development; 

and (ix) multiservice hubs. It will also aim to provide incentives to private 

investment and provide impetus to youth entrepreneurship in the selected sub-

sectors, where they will play a key role as the main actors for the development 

of productive agriculture: improvement of yields, participation in financing of 

equipment, provision of services, etc.  
 

2.1.2.2. The objective of the second component is to work directly towards the employment 

of young people in the agricultural sector and agribusiness.  This objective will be achieved in 

the first component (PASTA), through incentive rather than direct measures. The promotion of 

youth entrepreneurship in the agricultural sector and agribusiness (PEJA) will be achieved by 

an operational sub-project underpinning PASTA, aimed at fostering the integration of young 

people in the different segments of the value chains of the sub-sectors to be promoted.  PEJA’s 

operationalization will have to take into account the following two major Government concerns: 

(i) the need to begin the sustainable transformation of the rural environment by developing 

profitable and competitive activities that will attract economic operators, including young 

people; and (ii) the urgent need to help to reduce unemployment by spurring the interest of 

young people in profitable economic activities in the agricultural sector. In accordance with the 

strategic directions of the PSGE (2015-2025) and the Human Capital Strategy (2014-2018), the 

project will adopt a specific approach for young people in the agricultural sector to facilitate 

their integration into the different segments of the value chains. This framework should lead to 

the emergence of modern agricultural, agro-industrial and service enterprises fostered by 

improved access to financing and equipment, the development of productive, processing and 



 

6 

marketing infrastructure to be established under PASTA. Preparation of this component will 

provide an opportunity to review the different models already tried and tested as well as 

experience gained both at the national level and in other countries. It will also help to define 

the most efficient operating methods, taking into account the diversity of the targets and 

opportunities to increase absorption and enhance attractiveness. The projects that are ongoing 

or under preparation also deserve special attention in terms of capitalization and possible 

synergy. The “agripreneur” model developed by the International Institute of Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA) could also serve as a guide in the formulation of the project, while taking 

into account the specificities of Gabon and the existing structures. Ultimately, the results of the 

studies and reflections will contribute to the design and preparation of the project that could be 

financed from Bank resources, while specifying the implementation conditions. In this context, 
an inclusive approach will be adopted that will encourage the involvement of territorial 

communities, the technical services concerned by youth employment, major projects and 

programmes implemented such as GRAINE.  
 

2.1.2.3. PEJA is expected to foster youth employment and curb rural-urban migration by 

promoting the different links in the value chains of the pre-selected sub-sectors promoted in 

PASTA. In particular, it will be necessary to:  
 

*  Identify and analyse the labour market and opportunities relating to the growth-

bearing sub-sectors. This section of the study aims to capitalize on the analysis 

of all the sectors, sub-sectors and associated value chains conducted under 

PASTA to identify those areas that will provide more opportunities and 

increased contributory capacity for the transformation of the agricultural sector, 

job creation, GDP growth as well as the needs of major projects initiated such as 

the GRAINE project;  
 

*  Select the beneficiaries. It will be necessary to define the conditions to facilitate 

access by young people to the entrepreneurship promotion mechanisms to be 

established as well as the selection criteria and methods to be developed and 

applied.  
 

*  Build young people’s skills. This part of the study will comprise a diagnostic 

review of agricultural training programmes and strategies. It will assess the 

technical and physical capacity of the various existing training institutes and 

centres in relation to the skill building requirements of developers, and will 

propose possible solutions from an institutional, human resource, training 

content and budget standpoint, etc. 
 

*  Propose a mechanism for financing developers. It will be necessary to prepare a 

financing framework that will be able to support in different forms the initiatives 

of young people and women, taking into account the targeted profiles and 

activities. Financing mechanisms will be identified (including innovative ones) 

that will guarantee the lasting access by beneficiaries to financing by local 

financial institutions;  
 

* Support developers. This section of the study will consider the conditions for 

providing the best possible support to developers to enable them to establish and 

start up their activities under the best conditions. This stage is critical for the 

success of the activity’s start-up period and will allow for the necessary 

operational adjustments.  

  



 

7 

The conclusions of the different preliminary studies along with consideration of the experience 

acquired in the area can be used to support the project’s formulation. A quantified estimation 

of the different targets will be proposed at the same time as the preparation of the logical 

framework and definition of the key indicators. The proposed project components and activities 

will be described and the implementation conditions specified, with possible partners as well 

as the project’s expected benefits and risks and mitigation measures to be taken into account.  
 

2.1.2.4. Component 3 entails building the capacity of the state-owned institutions responsible 

for monitoring and implementing the project. These institutions will be identified beforehand, 

then provided with institutional support to enable them to monitor the activities being carried 

out under good conditions, and to develop certain strategic aspects while building capacity and 

adopting an inclusive approach. The necessary measures and procurements should be listed 

with their corresponding costs.  
 

2.1.2.5. Component 4: PASTA-PEJA project management. This component will concern the 

project management modalities. It will be necessary to: (i) propose an institutional and 

coordination mechanism for PASTA-PEJA activities; (ii) prepare an administrative, accounting 

and financial procedures manual and establish a PASTA-PEJA accounts management system; 

(iii) establish a communication and sensitization plan; and (iv) establish a baseline situation and 

a monitoring and evaluation system. The study terms of reference (TOR) are presented in annex.  

 

2.2 Description of Expected Outcomes: The operation will be implemented over 18 

months, eight of which will be dedicated to the conduct of the PASTA-PEJA study (excluding 

the time taken by the administration to approve the deliverables) that will entail two main phase. 

The first four-month phase will consist of comprehensive sector reviews and an overview of 

the implementation status of the agricultural sector development strategy. It will identify all the 

measures and projects/programmes that have not yet been implemented and could be 

incorporated in PASTA-PEJA. All the preparatory/intermediate analyses and studies to be 

carried out during this phase will help to determine the strategic directions of the support project 

to be presented at a national validation seminar. The second phase will be implemented over a 

4-month period and will consist of assessing the technical, financial, socio-economic and 

environmental feasibility of PASTA-PEJA. This phase will culminate in the presentation of the 

following provisional documents: (i) the PASTA- PEJA feasibility studies, (ii) the DD of the 

infrastructure to be established and; (iii) the project environmental and social impact assessment 

(ESIA), which will be examined at a second national seminar. The observations made at this 

seminar will be taken into consideration by the consultant in the final versions of the reports. 

At the end of this phase, it will also be necessary to prepare the project’s management, in 

particular by: (a) establishing the baseline situation and the monitoring/evaluation system; and 

(b) preparing the administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual as well as the 

PASTA-PEJA accounting system. 
 

3. ESTIMATED COSTS OF PREPARATORY ACTIVITIES  
 

3.1 Estimated Cost of Study: The study’s total cost, including provisions for physical 

and financial contingencies, is estimated at UA 1.11 million (CFAF 913.583 million), excluding 

taxes and customs duties. The total cost is broken down into foreign exchange costs of UA 

661,867 (CFAF 544.358 million) and UA 448,928 in local currency (CFAF 369.225 million). 

The main components of the study costs concern: costs incurred by the consultant who will be 

responsible for the study (fees, specific studies, travel expenses, organization of report 

restitution and validation workshops, etc.); procurement of the necessary equipment of the 

SCU, costs of external auditor and counterparts, study management and coordination costs, etc. 

A summary of the estimated project cost by component and by expenditure account is presented 

below, while the details are presented in the annexes. 
 

 

 



 

8 

Table 1: Summary of Estimated Costs by Component 

 
 

Table 2: Summary of Estimated Costs by Expenditure Categories 

  
 

3.2 Financing Plan 
 

3.2.1 This operation will be financed by a MIC-TAF grant of UA 991,095 equivalent to 

CFAF 815.135 million; i.e. 89.2% of the operation’s total cost. The estimated counterpart 

contribution is UA 119,700 (CFAF 98.448 million); i.e. about 10.8% of the total cost. This 

government contribution, not entailing any disbursement, will comprise the premises used by 

the project and assignment of the necessary personnel.  

  

%

Components L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total F.E.

Conduct of Study 273 010 587 790 860 800 224 540 483 433 707 973 68%

Cap acity  Building 12 570 15 530 28 100 10 338 12 773 23 111 55%

Study  M anagement 142 100 26 900 169 000 116 871 22 124 138 996 16%

Total S tudy Base Cost 427 680 630 220 1 057 900 351 749 518 330 870 079 60%

Phy sical Contingencies 8 554 12 604 21 158 7 035 10 367 17 402 60%

Financial Contingencies 12 695 19 042 31 737 10 441 15 661 26 102 60%

Total S tudy Cost 448 928 661 867 1 110 795 369 225 544 358 913 583 60%

UA CFAF 1000

%

Components L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total F.E.

I-Investments

Goods 12 570 15 530 28 100 10 338 12 773 23 111 55%

Procurement of Comp uters 2 100 4 900 7 000 1 727 4 030 5 757 70%

Office Equip ment 5 250 5 250 10 500 4 318 4 318 8 636 50%

M isc. IT Equip ment 3 420 4 180 7 600 2 813 3 438 6 251 55%

Other Sup p lies 1 800 1 200 3 000 1 480 987 2 467 40%

S ervices 277 510 598 290 875 800 228 241 492 069 720 310 68%

Technical Assistance Consulting Firm * 273 010 587 790 860 800 224 540 483 433 707 973 68%

Final Study  Audit 4 500 10 500 15 000 3 701 8 636 12 337 0%

Total Investment Cost 290 080 613 820 903 900 238 579 504 842 743 421 68%

II-Operation 137 600 16 400 154 000 113 170 13 488 126 659 11%

Coordination Unit Personnel 115 200 4 800 120 000 94 747 3 948 98 695 4%

Travel Exp enses 11 200 4 800 16 000 9 212 3 948 13 159 30%

Steering Committee 8 000 2 000 10 000 6 580 1 645 8 225 20%

M aintenance and Op eration 3 200 4 800 8 000 2 632 3 948 6 580 60%

Total Base Costs 427 680 630 220 1 057 900 351 749 518 330 870 079 60%

Phy sical Contingencies 8 554 12 604 21 158 7 035 10 367 17 402 60%

Financial Contingencies 12 695 19 042 31 737 10 441 15 661 26 102 60%

Total Cost of S tudies 448 928 661 867 1 110 795 369 225 544 358 913 583 60%

* In ad d it io n t o  t he s t ud y, t his  as s is t ance will co mp ris e, t he s t ab lis hment  o f: (i) t he p ro ject  b as eline s it uat io n, (ii) a mo nit o ring - evaluat io n s ys t em,  

p rep arat io n o f t he p ro ced ures  manual and  es t ab lis hment  o f t he acco unt ing  s ys t em

UA CFAF 1000



 

9 

 

Table 3: Operation’s Financing Plan 

 
 

3.2.2 The breakdown of financing by expenditure category and source of financing is as follows: 

 
Table 4: Breakdown of Financing by Expenditure Category 

 

 

4. METHODS FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF SERVICES AND GOODS  

 

4.1 Method for the Procurement of Consultancy Services: The procurement of 

consultancy services to be financed from the Bank’s resources will be made in compliance with 

the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations dated October 2015, using the 

Bank’s appropriate standards bidding documents. Technical assistance services for the 

preparation of the project feasibility study and related studies (establishment of the baseline 

situation and monitoring/evaluation system, preparation of the procedures manual and 

establishment of the accounting system) estimated at UA 860,800 will be acquired based on a 

shortlist and the Quality and Cost-based Selection Method (QCBS) as described in Section II 

of the Bank’s Rules and Procedures. Auditing services (UA 15,000) will be acquired based on 

a shortlist and the Least Cost Selection (LCS) method.  The requests for expressions of interest 

will be prepared by the Study Coordination Unit and published on: (i) UNDB online, (ii) the 

Bank’s website; and (iii) in at least one national newspaper. The consultant selection processes 

will be submitted to the Bank for prior review.  
 

4.2 Methods for the Procurement of Goods: The procurement of goods by shopping 

among suppliers will be made in compliance with national public procurement legislation using 

standard national bidding documents as well as with the provisions set out in the financing 

agreement. This concerns the procurement of goods amounting to UA 28,100. 

4.3 General Procurement Notice and Review Procedures. A General Procurement Notice 

(GPN), prepared by mutual agreement with the Donee, will be published on UNDB online and 

on the Bank’s website following approval of the proposed grant. The following documents are 

submitted for review and approval by the Bank prior to their publication: request for expressions 

%

S ource de financement M. Locale Devises Total M. Locale Devises Total Devises

BAD 329 228 661 867 991 095 270 777 544 358 815 135 60%

Gouvernement 119 700 0 119 700 98 448 0 98 448 0%

Total coût des études 448 928 661 867 1 110 795 369 225 544 358 913 583 60%

UC 1000 FCFA

%

LIS TE DES  BIENS  ET S ERVICES M. Locale Devises Total M. Locale Devises Total M. Locale Devises Total Devises

A-BIENS 12 570 15 530 28 100 0 0 0 12 570 15 530 28 100 55%

Acquisition ordinateurs 2 100 4 900 7 000 2 100 4 900 7 000 70%

Equip ements de bureaux 5 250 5 250 10 500 5 250 5 250 10 500 50%

Divers  matériel informatique 3 420 4 180 7 600 3 420 4 180 7 600 55%

Fournitures diverses 1 800 1 200 3 000 1 800 1 200 3 000 40%

B-S ERVICES 277 510 598 290 875 800 0 0 0 277 510 598 290 875 800 68%

Assistance technique bureau d'études 273 010 587 790 860 800 0 0 0 273 010 587 790 860 800 68%

Audit final de l'étude 4 500 10 500 15 000 0 0 0 4 500 10 500 15 000 0%

C-FONCTIONNEMENT 23 600 16 400 40 000 114 000 0 114 000 137 600 16 400 154 000 11%

Location bureaux 72 000 0 72 000 72 000 0 72 000 0%

Salaires P. Unité Coord et Exp . Hom 42 000 0 42 000 42 000 0 42 000 0%

Indem. Personnel Unité de coordination 1 200 4 800 6 000 0 0 0 1 200 4 800 6 000 80%

Indemnités de dép lacement 11 200 4 800 16 000 0 0 0 11 200 4 800 16 000 30%

Frais divers de fonctionnement 3 200 4 800 8 000 0 0 0 3 200 4 800 8 000 60%

Comité de p ilotage 8 000 2 000 10 000 0 0 0 8 000 2 000 10 000 20%

Non alloué 15 548 31 647 47 195 5 700 0 5 700 21 248 31 647 52 895 60%

TOTAL 329 228 661 867 991 095 119 700 0 119 700 448 928 661 867 1 110 795 60%

TOTAUX en UCGOUVERNEMENT en UCBAD en UC



 

10 

of interest; requests for proposals; shortlists; evaluation report on consultants’ technical 

proposals; and consultants’ draft contracts. The Procurement Plan, which will be submitted for 

the Bank’s prior approval, will specify for each procurement the applicable review method 

(prior or post). 
 

5. IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  
 

5.1 Scheduling of Planned Activities: This support operation will be approved in December 

2016 and will be implemented over eighteen (18) calendar months. The consultant’s intervention 

will be for an 8-month period. The schedule of activities is summarized as follows: 

 
Table 5 : Operation’s Activities Schedule 

Activity Responsible Entity Timeline 

- Grant approval 

- Establishment of the Coordination Unit 

- Signing of contract with the consulting firm  

- Study launching workshop 

- Validation workshop for the first phase of study 

- Validation workshop for the second phase  

- Submission of MIC final audit 

AfDB 

Government 

Government 

Government 

Government 

Government 

AfDB 

7 December 2016 

7 December 2016 

12 May 2017 

12 June 2017 

12 October 2017 

12 February 2018 

18 May 2018 

  

5.2 Draft Annual Work Programme and Procurement Schedule: The organization and 

management of this operation is presented in detail in the annexes combining the institutional 

arrangements, financial management and auditing requirements as well as the supervision and 

monitoring/evaluation of this operation. During the project’s appraisal, the Donee prepared a 

procurement plan (PP) which sets out the procurement methods. It will be submitted for review 

and approval by the Bank prior to the signing of the Letter of Agreement. 

 

5.3 Study Organization and Management: Planned over an 8-month period, the study 

will be conducted by a consulting firm to be recruited based on international shopping drawn 

from a shortlist using the QCBS method. The General Secretariat of the Ministry of Agriculture 

and Agricultural Entrepreneurship responsible for implementing the GRAINE programme 

(MAEAPG) will be the executing agency. In this regard, its capacity will be built up by the 

Study Coordination Unit (SCU) established under the MICT-TAF operation relating to the 

GRAINE Programme Support Project – Phase 2 (PAPG-2). This SCU will be set up at the 

General Secretariat and will be responsible for coordinating and managing the PASTA-PEJA 

study. As a reminder, the Ministry will appoint an official with the required qualifications and 

confirmed experience in agriculture and rural development to the position of Study Coordinator 

who will be assisted by a procurement specialist, an accountant and support staff (2 drivers and 

1 secretary). These will be recruited based on open competition, and performance contracts will 

be signed. In addition, the Gabonese Authorities will designate a team of seven (7) national 

counterparts (value chain development, agro-industry, rural engineering, development of 

agricultural entrepreneurship, governance and institutional aspects, development of rural 

institutions and gender), who will work closely with the international experts. A Steering 

Committee will also be established for the operation, to be chaired by MAEAPG’s secretary-

general, whose duties will entail monitoring the conduct of the study, analysing the consultant’s 

provisional reports and formulating recommendations and guidelines. To ensure the successful 

conduct of the study, plans have been made to build the SCU’s capacity by procuring IT and 

office automation equipment.  
  
6. FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS  
 

6.1 Financing/Disbursement Conditions and Audit: Disbursements will mainly be 

made by the direct payment method (for the payment of consultant’s service contracts to 

conduct the study and external audit). A special account will be opened exclusively for the 

operating costs of the MIC-TAF implementation unit and study coordination, at a Bank in 

Libreville deemed acceptable by the Bank. 



 

11 

 

6.2 Financial Management: The operation’s financial management framework will be 

compliant with MIC-TAF guidelines for small-scale operations funded by the Bank Group. The 

MIC-TAF Coordination Unit, which is the same as the one for the PAPG.2 project, comprises 

a coordinator, a procurement specialist, an accountant, a secretary and two drivers. The 

accountant will be recruited based on open competition and the evaluation report on this 

recruitment should be submitted to the Bank for its no-objection opinion. He/she should have 

at least 5 years accounting experience, two of which should be with development projects 

financed by donors, in particular AfDB or the World Bank, in addition to a university degree in 

accounting. 

  

6.2.1. Accounting software will be purchased by the consulting firm and transferred to the 

SCU  in order to maintain the accounts and produce the annual reports of this MIC-TAF 

operation (balance sheet, sources and uses tables for the period and cumulative periods, 

explanatory notes, special account reconciliations statement, and fixed assets inventory) and 

the six-monthly production of financial monitoring reports (FMR) to be submitted to the Bank 

latest 45 days after the end of the six month period. The accounts will be produced in 

compliance with the OHADA accounting principles. 
 

6.2.2. It is also planned that the consulting firm will prepare the administrative, financial and 

accounting procedures manual. This manual will describe the procedures applicable in the 

different management cycles and define the internal control mechanisms to be established. It 

will be used during the conduct of the study and for the future project. Therefore, the consultant 

will envisage updating these management tools during the implementation of the PAPG.2 

project, with a view to incorporating all the organizational specificities and implementation 

modalities of the finalized project. 

 

6.2.3. This MIC-TAF operation will be the subject of a single audit to be performed on 

completion of the project’s 18-month implementation period. The audit will be conducted by 

an independent firm of external auditors to be recruited based on open competition, in 

accordance with the Bank’s standard terms of reference. The related costs will be paid by the 

PAST-PEJA MIC-TAF fund. The audit report will be submitted to the Bank latest six months 

after the completion of the MIC-TAF activities. 

 

6.3 Suspension of disbursements: Disbursements of MIC-TAF resources will be 

governed by the Bank’s disbursement rules, in general, and those on the suspension of 

disbursements, in particular. 
 

6.4 Letter of Agreement: Following approval of the Request, the Bank will prepare a Letter 

of Agreement in accordance with the format in Annex 3 of the new MIC-TAF Guidelines 
(November 2011). The Letter of Agreement will be signed between the Bank and the Republic 

of Gabon, and will become effective following its signature. The conditions precedent to first 

disbursement will be to provide AfDB to its complete satisfaction:  

 

 

(i)  Evidence of the opening of a special account in a bank acceptable to AfDB for 

the purpose of receiving the proceeds of the grant; and  

 

(ii)  Evidence of the recruitment of a national coordinator for the study and the other 

members of the Study Coordination Unit (accountant and procurement expert), 

on the basis of open competition and with the Bank’s approval. 

 
 

 

7. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS 



 

12 

 

The project is proposed for Category 3 of the Bank’s environmental and social assessment 

procedures since it does not entail any activities that might generate negative environmental 

impacts.  
 

8. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 

8.1 Conclusions: The conduct of the aforementioned studies will contribute to the fine-tuning 

of PASTA-PEJA preparation and provide the project owner with all the required elements for 

the design and sizing of the project as well as an assessment of the investment’s feasibility. It 

will also allow for smooth preparation of project management. 

 

8.2 Recommendations: It is recommended that the Bank award the Republic of Gabon, 

in accordance with the above conditions, a grant not exceeding UA 991,095 from MIC Fund 

resources. This grant will mainly be used to finance consultancy services as described in this 

memorandum and the terms of reference (TOR) presented in annex. 

 



 

I 

 

MINISTRY OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  Libreville, 3 May 2016 

ECONOMY, INVESTMENT PROMOTION 

AND FORECASTING 

                          ……………………….. 

  Office of the Minister    the Minister 

          To 

         The President 

       of the African Development Bank 

  ………………………    ……………….. 

         Abidjan – Côte d’Ivoire 

Directorate-General of Forecasting 

No. 001153/mddepip/cdm/sg/dgpro  

 

Subject: Request for an ADB Grant to Finance Agricultural Sector Work 

 

Mr. President, 

 

In the Green Gabon Operational Plan of the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan (PSGE), Gabon 

promises to adopt an integrated approach for the development of agricultural sub-sectors and its 

value chains in order to achieve food self-sufficiency by 2025. This requires the development of 

205,000 hectares of land as well as the intensive and eco-friendly exploitation of plant, animal and 

fish farming sub-sectors. 

 

Moreover, in February 2015, under the implementation of the Agriculture-Livestock Sector Plan, 

the Government launched an ambitious agricultural development plan called the GRAINE 

Programme, the objectives of which are to guarantee food security and self-sufficiency, develop 

cash crops (coffee, cocoa, palm oil and rubber), contribute to the economic diversification and 

create agricultural jobs, especially for young people. 

 

To establish the different institutional links of the value chain and thus ensure the achievement of 

the results of this ambitious programme, I have the honour of requesting technical assistance from 

the African Development Bank (AfDB), to be financed from the resources of the Middle Income 

Countries Technical Assistance Fund (MIC-TAF), for the preparation of: (i) an Agricultural 

Transformation Strategy based on the Development of Value Chains (STADEC); and (ii) the 

formulation of a GRAINE Programme Support Project referred to above. 

 

Please accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my highest and brotherly consideration. 

 

[Signed] 

 

 

Régis Immongault  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 



 

II 

 

MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND REQUEST FORM 

1.  Title of Draft Studies:   PROGRAMME TO SUPPORT THE GREEN GABON 

OPERATIONAL PLAN FOR  : (I) THE FORMULATION OF AN AGRICULTURAL 

TRANSFORMATION STUDY BASED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS (STADEC); AND (ii) A GRAINE PROGRAMME 

SUPPORT PROJECT (PAPG)    

 

2.  Country:   Republic of Gabon 

 

3.  Executing Agency: 

  

 a)  Name: Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship Responsible 

  for Implementation of the GRAINE Programme   

 

 b)  Address: P.O. Box Libreville, Immeuble Ancienne Primature 
  Tel. (241) 01740043 

 

4.  Description of the activities: 

 

Gabon’s economy is based mostly on the exploitation of its raw materials, mainly oil.  In 2014, 

the contribution of oil to GDP had reached 39% and it accounted for 85% of exports and 49% of 

central government fiscal revenue.  Despite its potential of over 5 million hectares, the agriculture 

sector only contributes 4.7% to GDP.  Major investments are required to provide coordinated 

responses to the challenge of the agriculture sector’s structural transformation, with a view to 

increasing its contribution to the national economy and achieving food self-sufficiency by 2025.  

The proposed studies are focused on the two following components: (A) Conduct of feasibility 

studies; and (B) Management of the studies. 

 

          Conduct of Feasibility Studies: the activities to carried out are : 

 

- Formulation of the National Agricultural Transformation Strategy based on the 
Development of agricultural value chains (STADEC) 

 

 Carry out a comprehensive diagnostic review of the different agricultural, animal 
and fishery subsectors; 

 

 Assess the constraints and opportunities for the development of agricultural 
value chains; 

 

 Carry out an inventory and propose an appropriate action plan for the 
agricultural training and research system; 

 

 Carry out an inventory and propose an efficient action plan for the production, 
certification and distribution of seeds and other agricultural inputs;  

 

 Carry out an inventory of the system for the development of cultivable land; 
 

 Carry out an inventory of mechanization among farmers; 
 

 Analyse the collection system and marketing channels for agricultural products; 
 

 Carry out an inventory of agricultural product processing; 



 

III 

 

 

 

 Carry out an inventory of the information system on agricultural product 
markets; 

 

 Carry out an inventory of the national health safety system in the agriculture 
sector; 

 

 Carry out an inventory of the epidemiological surveillance system for animal 
diseases; 

 

 Analyse both policy and institutional frameworks, financing mechanisms and 
actor involvement; 

 

 Formulate the national agricultural transformations strategy based on the 
development of agricultural value chains, taking into account the above-

mentioned inventories; and 

 

 Prepare a quantified short-, medium- and long-term action plan. 
 

Another of the consultant’s duties will be to conduct a technical, economic, financial and 

organizational feasibility study as well as an economic and social impact assessment of a 

project to be retained by mutual agreement with the government. 

 

- Prepare and formulate the GRAINE Programme Support Project 
 

The objective of the GRAINE Programme is to accelerate economic diversification in order to 

release the multi-pronged drivers of inclusive growth.  In the short-term, it aims to increase the 

share of agriculture in national wealth with a view to guaranteeing food security, control youth 

unemployment and create about 20,000 jobs.  As part of this vast State-run programme, over 

200,000 hectares will be farmed and about 30,000 volunteer families grouped together in 

cooperatives distributed in several hundred villages integrated into basic socio-economic 

infrastructure (tracks, markets, collection centres, slaughtering areas, processing units, rural 

DWS, health centres, schools, etc.).  In keeping with the PSGE and the Social Pact, this 

programme also addresses several socio-economic challenges, in particular: (i) the strengthening 

of food security through the local farming of staple products (bananas, cassava, cocoyam, oil, 

sugar cane, etc.); (ii) the diversification and enriching of Gabon’s agricultural base; (iii) the 

promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship; (iv) poverty reduction through the empowerment of 

the most economically vulnerable segments of the population; (v) job creation; (vi) economic 

development of rural areas; (vii) reduction in the volume and cost of food imports; (viii) curbing 

of rural-urban migration; and (ix) the creation of a strong agricultural community. 

 

This is the background against which it is planned to formulate a project in PPP form between 

the Government (Ministry of Agriculture) and SOTRADER.  Therefore, the consultant’s main 

duty will be to conduct a technical, economic, financial and organizational feasibility study as 

well as an economic and social impact assessment, in addition to preparing the DD for the 

infrastructure retained and their corresponding BD.  Based on this study, the consultant will be 

required to propose a project operational plan as well as the corresponding financing plan (central 

government, SOTRADER).  The aforementioned project will comprise the following main 

components : (A) Development of agricultural and rural infrastructure (tracks, markets, 

warehouses, drying areas, slaughtering areas, rehabilitation of institutes and schools providing 

training in agricultural trades, development of land, schools, DWS, electricity, health centres, 

etc.; (B) development of value chains (agricultural multi-service hubs, facilitation of access to 



 

IV 

 

improved inputs, support to mastery of technical itineraries, enhancement of agricultural 

products, organization of producers, agricultural and fishery product processing units, etc.); (C) 

Capacity building, (seeds, training and research, agricultural guidance, agricultural trades, 

health control and epidemiological surveillance of animal diseases, development of agricultural 

entrepreneurship and IGA). 

 

B.  Management of the Studies  

 

 Coordination of activities 

 Establishment of administrative, accounting and financial management 
procedures manuals 

 Establishment of a communication and sensitization plan 

 Establishment of an internal and external monitoring and evaluation plan, and 

 Monitoring of studies and production of reports. 
 

5.  Rationale for the activities 

 

Gabon faces a socio-economic paradox of belonging to the group of Middle-Income Countries 

(MIC) because of its income per capita while, at the same time, being classified among Least 

Developed Countries (LDC) because of its social indicators, with a poverty rate of 32.7% in 

2014 and an unemployment rate of 27% of the labour force. Gabon’s average Human 

Development Index (HDI) of about 0.684 ranks it 112th out of 187 countries in the Human 

Development Report (UNDP, 2014). Hence, Gabon’s economy has all the characteristics of a 

rent economy that creates few jobs and is focused on exports of unprocessed primary 

commodities despite strong potential for diversification, given the country’s significant natural 

resource capital. 

 

With a contribution to GDP of 4.7% and an annual growth rate of 3.3% between 2005 and 2010, 

Gabon’s agriculture occupies quite a marginal position in the country’s economy.  The rural 

population, in a minority, was estimated at over 225,000 in 2014, i.e. 14% of the country’s 

population.  Agricultural land is estimated at 5.2 million hectares.  Agricultural land is an 

abundant resource, almost all of which is easily accessible, especially since the low population 

density of 6.1 inh./km2 reinforces the impression of relatively unimpeded access.  However, the 

allocation of land to mining and forestry concessions leaves little or no secure land for 

agricultural activities.  The highest estimates give a figure of 500,000 hectares of land cultivated 

by an ageing smallholder population.  Overall, agricultural output is low and Gabon imported 

foodstuffs valued at over CFAF 300 billion. 

 

In 2010, in order to resolve the socio-economic paradox facing the country, the national 

authorities launched the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan 2025 (PSGE 2025). Focused on three 

pillars (Green Gabon, Industrial Gabon and Services Gabon), PSGE is a roadmap that will allow 

the country to emerge from its dependency on the oil sector and capitalize fully on its comparative 

advantages to address the challenges by: (i) accelerating economic growth through the 

diversification of sources; (ii) reducing poverty and social inequalities; and (iii) ensuring 

sustainable natural resource management.  It is necessary to encourage the shift from a resource-

based economy towards a diversified one, in order to strengthen the competitiveness of the 

industrial and service sectors while preserving the country’s immense natural wealth. 

 

The strategic objectives of the “Green Gabon” Pillar are as follows: (i) sustainable management 

of Gabon’s forests and the country’s positioning as world leader in certified tropical wood 

(Forestry and Wood Sector Programme); (ii) the realization of agricultural potential and 

achievement of food security (Agriculture and Livestock Sector Programme); and (iii) the 

promotion of sustainable exploitations and development of fishery resources (Fisheries and 



 

V 

 

Aquaculture Sector Programme).  Therefore, PSGE aims to guarantee food security by covering 

the food requirements of the country’s population and ensuring the sustainable availability of 

high quality and affordable products. 

 

In December 2104, the President of the Republic presented a new initiative to Gabon’s partners: 

the GRAINE Programme (Gabonese Initiative for Achieving Agricultural Outcomes with 

Engaged Citizenry).  This is a programme to support the policies of establishing and developing 

agricultural cooperatives nationwide to ensure the emergence of a new generation of competent, 

productive and cohesive farmers.  It is in keeping with the PSGE and the Social Pact.  

Implemented since January 2015, the GRAINE Programme is focused on four main strategic 

thrusts : (i) assist individuals in forming cooperatives; (ii) develop plantations, provide operating 

equipment and premises for each cooperative; and (iv) provide supervision of the management of 

agricultural activities generated by the cooperative.  The GRAINE Programme is being 

implemented by Société Gabonaise de Transformation Agricole et Dévéloppement Rurale 

(SOTRADER) stemming from a Public-Private Partnership between the Republic of Gabon and 

OLAM. 

 

To assist the Government of Gabon in addressing the challenge of food security by achieving 

almost complete food self-sufficiency and also in becoming an exporter of industrial crop 

products on the one hand, and in building the institutional capacity of the support structures of 

the Ministry responsible for Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship and the Ministry 

responsible for Fisheries and Livestock to  (i) transform the agriculture sector by developing value 

chains, and (ii) support supervise and monitor the activities implemented under the GRAINE 

Programme throughout the national territory, on the other hand, the Government of Gabon has 

requested  assistance from the Bank.   

      

 

6.  Estimated Costs of Proposed Studies: 

 
 a)  Foreign Exchange                       :    UA 1,439,000 
 

 b)  Local Currency                           :    UA 770,000  
 

 c)  Total amount                               :     UA 2 200 000 
 

7.  Financing Plan 

 
 a)  ADB / MIC - TAF                        :      UA 2 000 000         

 

 b)  Government                                  :       UA 200 000 

 

 c)  Total                                              :       UA   2 200 000     
 

8.  Proposed Procurement Method (if known):  

 

 a)  Services:  Competitive Bidding - REOI - Shortlist 
 

 b)   Goods & works:  Goods and Works: National shopping among suppliers. 

 

 c)  Others, including Training of 
  Local Staff: Direct contracting.                                 

 
9.  Implementation Plan 

 



 

VI 

 

The study will commence latest one month after notification of the contract to the consultant.  

The schedule for the provision of services is as follows:  

 

Table 3 : Schedule for Operation’s Activities  

Activity  Responsible Entity  Timeline 

Review Process (Peers, 

Country Team) 

AfDB September 2016 

Grant Approval AfDB October 2016 

Establishment of 

Coordination Unit 

Gvt. November 2016 

Procurement of Consultancy 

Services 

Gvt. January 2017 

Installation of Strategic and 

Operational Tools 

Gvt. February 2017 

Submission of Study Reports Gvt. November 2017 

Completion of Study Projects Gvt. December 2017 

   

 

 

 
  



 

VII 

 

Annex III 

 

MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND 

LETTER OF AGREEMENT 

 

Honourable Minister of Rural Development, Economy, Investment Promotion and Forecasting, 

Republic of Gabon 

Libreville, Gabon 

 
Dear Minister: 

 

Subject: Grant of UA 991,075 to the Government of Gabon to finance the preparation studies for 

a project to support agricultural transformation based on the development of agricultural value 

chains and youth entrepreneurship in the agricultural sector and agribusiness.   

 

Letter of Agreement  

 
I am writing on behalf of the African Development Bank to indicate the Bank’s decision to provide 

to the Republic of Gabon a grant not exceeding UA 991,075. The purpose of the grant is to finance 

the preparation studies for a project to support the agricultural transformation strategy and the 

promotion of youth entrepreneurship in the agricultural sector and agribusiness. 

 
The grant is being provided for the purposes and on the terms and conditions set forth in the 

Attachments hereto, and the Recipient hereby represents, by confirming its agreement hereunder, 

that it is authorized to contract, withdraw, and utilize the grant for the said purposes and on the 

said terms and conditions. 

 
Please confirm your agreement with the foregoing and the conditions and terms attached hereto, 

on behalf of the Government of Gabon, by signing, dating, and returning to us the enclosed copy 

of this letter. 

 

This agreement will become effective on the date of countersignature by the Bank. 
 
Sincerely, 

_______________ 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 
By 

 

Vice President, Operations ------------------------------------------------ 
 
OR 
 
President --------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

Date ------------------------- 

AGREED 

REPUBLIC OF GABON 

 
By: -------------------------------------------------- 
The Minister of Sustainable Development, Economy, Investment Promotion and Forecasting 

Date: 

 



 

VIII 

 

Annex IV 

TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE STUDY ON THE PREPARATION OF THE STUDY 

TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION STRATEGY AND THE 

PROMOTION OF YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE AGRICULTURAL 

SECTOR (PASTA-PEJA) 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 
 

1.1.  Located on the Gulf of Guinea, Gabon straddles the Equator and covers an area of 267,667 

km2. The country is bordered to the North by Cameroon, to the North-West by Equatorial Guinea 

and to the South-East by Congo-Brazzaville. It has a coastline of 800 km along the Atlantic Ocean. 

Its relief is linked to the equatorial nature of its climate, its hydrography and vegetation. It 

comprises three distinct geomorphological areas: the coastal plains, mountain ranges and plateaus 

in the interior. Annual rainfall varies between 1,500 and 3,000 mm. The network of waterways 

covers almost the entire national territory. Dense, rich equatorial forest covers 85% of Gabon’s 

territory. After oil, wood is the country’s second most important economic resource. Gabon is 

divided into 9 administrative provinces, 47 départements, 152 cantons, 52 municipalities, 26 sub-

prefectures and 3 304 villages and groups of villages. 

 

1.2. Gabon is under-populated, with the lowest population density in Africa. In 2013, the 

population was estimated at 1 802 728 inhabitants1, i.e. a density of 5.6 inhabitants per km². The 

annual population growth rate is estimated at 2.7%. It has the following two major characteristics: 

a high proportion of young people (36% of the population is under 15) and almost 82% of the 

population lives in urban areas, mostly in the three main urban centres of Libreville, Port-Gentil 

and Franceville. The rural areas have been abandoned in favour of the large towns and cities. The 

rural population has halved in 50 years and currently stands at only 273,000. This high rate of 

urbanization has mainly concerned people of working age, with a subsequent drop in the size of 

the rural labour force. With income per capita of USD 7,3702, Gabon is classified as a Middle-

Income Country. However, its social indicators are comparable to those of countries with low 

Human Development Indices (HDI). Furthermore, according to the Poverty Assessment and 

Monitoring Survey (EGEP 20053), one third of Gabon’s population was reported to be living 

below the poverty threshold. There are wide disparities between rural and urban areas in terms of 

development, in particular access to basic infrastructure, which is reflected in human development 

indicators in rural areas below those recorded in urban areas. Thus, the rural poverty rate is 45% 

compared to 30% in urban areas, and the illiteracy rate is 18% in rural areas compared to 9% in 

urban areas. Gabon’s ranking remains well below that of other countries in its category in terms 

of income per capita. The employment situation is quite precarious. The unemployment rate is 

worrisome and is estimated at over 20%, with unemployed youth representing 60% of the 

unemployed population.  

 

1.3. Gabon’s economy is heavily dependent on oil, which represents 50% of GDP, 60% of tax 

revenue and 80% of exports of goods. This dependency makes it even more fragile, especially 

since prices fluctuate, reserves are far from being inexhaustible and production is declining. It is 

also characterized by weak diversification and heavy dependency on the outside world, with a high 

level of public spending. Gabon’s agricultural sector (plant and animal production, fisheries, 

aquaculture and forestry) plays a marginal role in the country’s socio-economic life. Over the past 

five years, its contribution to GDP has declined and now stands at about 3% compared to 16% in 

1970. The downward trend in the sector’s value-added is mainly the result of the oil sector’s 

                                                 
1 Results of the General Population and Housing Census (GPHC) de 2013 
2 Bank’s 2011-2015 RBCSP; July 2011 

3  The 2005 EGEP is the most recent source of reliable data on poverty in Gabon. This survey has not yet been updated. The 2010 MDG 

Progress Report is, however, available and reports a worrisome poverty trend that significantly reduced the likelihood of reaching the 
targeted poverty rate by 2015. 



 

IX 

 

dominance in the economy and the government’s strategy that was particularly dependent on agro-

industries and cash crops. This strategy was not successful in boosting agricultural production 

mainly because of rural-urban migration to the towns in which oil activities were concentrated. 

Therefore, agriculture (including stockbreeding and fisheries) has experienced a sharp drop of 

almost 80% in the quantity of food produced annually because of the combined effects of rural-

urban migration and an ageing agricultural population.  This has created a deficit and chronic food 

insecurity that is threatening a high proportion of Gabon’s population.  This deficit is covered by 

imports, about 20% of which come from neighbouring countries. As a result, Gabon is now highly 

dependent on food imports at almost 60%.  Gabon imports over 275,000 tonnes of food products 

and 80% of its imports consist of wheat, rice and poultry meat. The food import bill is currently 

estimated at CFAF 350 billion per year. 

 

1.4. The plantain, banana and cassava sub-sectors are the main plant sub-sectors in Gabon in 

terms of areas and productions, in addition to rubber in terms of the value of its output. The most 

important animal sub-sector is poultry. Two types of agriculture co-exist in Gabon: food crop 

agriculture, which pre-dominates, and cash crop farming for agribusiness and export. Food crop 

agriculture is carried out through shifting cultivation and subsistence farming, mainly managed by 

elderly people or women in the form of private village and peri-urban farms. It is inefficient and 

production is for on-farm consumption. The main crops and activities are plantain, bananas, yams, 

cassava, market gardening and small ruminant breeding (sheep and goats). Cash crop farming is 

of a commercial nature mainly intended for agribusiness and exporting. The main plant crops are 

rubber, sugar cane, oil palm, coffee and cocoa, while livestock productions is confined to cattle 

breeding. 

 

II. STUDY CONTEXT 

 

2.1. The agricultural sector has strong potential such as: (i) a wealth of natural resources and 

the availability of arable land; (ii) favourable agro-ecological conditions; (iii) a favourable 

equatorial climate; (iv) strong demand for food, market garden and livestock products (existence 

of significant import substitution potential since 60% of food products in towns and cities are 

currently imported; (v) a relatively high literacy rate; (vii) the recent emergence of associations 

and individual initiatives in rural areas to tackle the economic crisis. However, development of the 

agricultural sector has been impeded by many constraints that have led to a shift from family-based 

agriculture to subsistence farming systems. The main constraints are: (i) low population density 

with wide regional disparities: the rural areas of concentration are the Woleu-Ntem, Ngounie and 

Nyanga provinces; (ii) an ageing, unskilled and scarce rural labour force; (iii) traditional non-

intensive production systems; (iv) an unfavourable economic environment (remoteness of 

production areas which results in high transportation costs between those areas and areas of high 

consumption as well as a lack of decentralized trading facilities); (v) weak organization of 

producers; (vi) a poorly organized agricultural research system which is barely operational, and 

weak institutional capacity of advisory and support services; and (vii) lack of coordination among 

the different actors operating in rural areas. 

 

2.2. Recognizing its heavy dependency on the oil sector and food imports, Gabon in 2010 

launched its Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan 2025 (PSGE 2025). Focused on three pillars (Green 

Gabon, Industrial Gabon and Services Gabon), the PSGE is a roadmap that will guide the 

transformation from a rent-based economy to a high value-added and diversified one geared 

towards strengthening the competitiveness of industrial and service sectors, while preserving the 

country’s vast natural wealth. Green Gabon’s economic potential will be fully developed with a 

view to ensuring food security, sustainable resource development and reducing poverty. In this 

regard, an agricultural development strategy was prepared, which aims to transform the 

agricultural sector (in the broad sense) into one that will drive Gabon’s development, with the 

following strategic visions: (i) a sector that provides access to sufficient quantities of high quality 

food through more affordable prices and ensures high quality products for all of Gabon’s 



 

X 

 

population; (ii) a competitive, job-creating, export-focused sector by increasing agricultural areas 

and developing cash crops; (iii) a sector that will help to develop and balance the distribution of 

people, activities and natural resources throughout the country, thus transforming the agricultural 

sector into a driver of rural development. 

 

2.3. In this regard, an integrated approach to protect and ensure the sustainable development 

of Gabon’s ecosystems was designed that applies to forest, aquatic and agro-pastoral ecosystems, 

and is sub-divided into seven associated development sub-sectors: agriculture and livestock, 

fisheries, aquaculture, the wood sector, Non-Wood Forest Products (NWP) and the bush meat 

(game) sub-sector. The Green Gabon Operational Plan (2015) sets out the approach and projects 

planned to promote and provide a framework for the sustainable development of Gabon’s 

ecosystems and their natural resources. Therefore, a number of projects have been identified that 

will contribute to their protection and development. These projects are organized around three tiers 

of actions: the core elements (protection, knowledge and regulation), the drivers of 

competitiveness (vocational training, research and business framework) and actions to add value 

(conservation, processing, marketing and certification, etc.). The drivers of agricultural 

transformation include academic and vocational training.  This transformation requires the 

professionalization of existing actors in their areas of expertise as well as the contribution of new 

actors, new profiles and new skills. Furthermore, agricultural transformation will create new needs 

and innovating trades linked to the development of value chains.  

 

2.4. In light of these new directions and in order to address these requirements, the 

Government of Gabon has submitted a request to the Bank concerning the conduct of a study on 

the Project to Support the Agricultural Development and Transformation Strategy and the 

Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship in the Agricultural sector and Agriculture, based on the 

development of agricultural sub-sector value chains, which is the subject of these terms of 

reference. 

 

III. THE STUDY 

 

3.1 Guiding Principles 

 

The preparation study on the Project to Support the Agricultural Transformation Strategy and the 

Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship in Agriculture and Agribusiness (PASTA-PEJA) will be 

guided by a number of principles which, if applied, will contribute to sustainable development, 

promote an agriculture with strong potential to diversify the economy, create wealth and jobs in 

the different agricultural areas of Gabon, and meet the food requirements of a steadily rising 

population.  These objectives, which contribute most directly to this ultimate goal, are focused on: 

 

 Capitalization on the achievements and lessons learned from implementing 

previous  agricultural projects and programmes, but also the search for successful 

examples and new technologies developed and mastered in the country, which 

should be scaled up to produce a significant impact in terms of the sector’s 

development 

 The reference frameworks for PASTA-PEJA will be the Agricultural Sector 
Development Strategy (2014), the Green Gabon Plan (2015), PNIASAN, in 

addition to other agricultural sector and sub-sector studies, and 

 The exit and sustainability strategy: the project’s interventions will be made in line 
with predetermined roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders, in particular 

manufacturers, local communities, users and decentralized government services in 

terms of maintenance and sustainability of investments as well as the supply of 

services to communities. 



 

XI 

 

3.2 Study Objectives 

3.2.1. The study’s main objective is to prepare a project to support the implementation of the 

agricultural sector transformation strategy by developing the value chains of growth-bearing 

agricultural sub-sectors and promoting youth employment in the agriculture and agribusiness 

sectors. The main expected outcomes are to: (i) contribute to Gabon’s food security by achieving 

almost complete self-sufficiency in food products by 2025; (ii) make Gabon a top industrial crop 

product exporting country; and (iii) improve the population’s living conditions by promoting 

profitable and job-creating agriculture for young people.  

3.2.2. More specifically, the consultant will be required to:  

 Identify, among the programmes/projects/actions set out in the Agricultural sector 

Development Plan and the Green Gabon Operational Plan, those to be implemented 

in close cooperation with the ministries and institutions responsible for those 

projects 

 Prepare an Agricultural Transformation Strategy Support Project with its 

geographic scope, logical framework, components/activities, institutional set-up, 

cost, financing plan and support measures. This project will have two 

complementary components: (i) development of the value chains of the growth-

bearing sectors – PASTA; and (ii) promotion of youth entrepreneurship in the 

agriculture and agribusiness sectors - PEJA 

 Formulate a programme to identify actions to provide support to the ministries and 

institutions responsible for implementing PASTA-PEJA  

 Prepare detailed designs (DD) for social and economic infrastructure as well as 

support infrastructure for the sectors selected under PASTA-PEJA, the economic 

study and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (EIES) of the support 

project; establish the baseline situation, set up the monitoring/evaluation system, 

prepare the administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual and 

establish the PASTA-PEJA accounting system 

 Prepare the project baseline situation as well as the administrative, accounting and 

financial procedures manual, and establish an accounts management system as well 

as a PASTA-PEJA communication and sensitization plan, etc. 

The study’s goal is to provide the project owner with all the required elements with which to assess 

the feasibility and appropriateness of financing the project.  

3.3. Project Schedule and Duration 

The study will be conducted eight (8) months and will comprise two main phases:  

 The first phase of four (4) months, which will entail the installation of the consulting 
firm, procurement of the necessary equipment for the Study Coordination Unit 

(SCU), preparation and sharing of its intervention strategy with the Steering 

Committee (SC) and the Bank. Thereafter, comprehensive sector reviews and an 

overview of the implementation status of the agricultural sector development 

strategy will be carried out. This phase will identify all the measures and 

projects/programmes not yet implemented and which could be incorporated in 

PASTA-PEJA. It will be based on criteria to be prepared with the objective of 

developing growth-bearing agricultural subsectors and promoting agricultural 

agribusiness entrepreneurship among young people.  Through a participatory 



 

XII 

 

process, this phase will address all the concerns of the different stakeholders and 

specific problems relating to gender, poverty, the environmental as well as the 

socio-economic situation. All the preparatory/intermediate analyses and studies to 

be carried out during this phase will help to determine the strategic directions of the 

support project to be presented at a national validation seminar, which will 

consolidate the participatory process and mobilize all stakeholders in the 

implementation of PASTA-PEJA. 

 The second phase will be implemented over a 4-month period and will consist of 
assessing the technical, financial, socio-economic and environmental feasibility of 

PASTA-PEJA. This phase will culminate in the presentation of the following 

provisional documents: (i) the PASTA- PEJA feasibility studies, (ii) the DD of the 

infrastructure to be established; and (iii) the project environmental and social 

impact assessment (ESIA), which will be examined at a second national seminar. 

The observations made at this seminar will be taken into consideration by the 

consultant in the final version of the report. At the end of this phase, it will also be 

necessary to prepare the project’s management, in particular by: (i) establishing the 

baseline situation and the monitoring/evaluation system; and (ii) preparing the 

administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual as well as the PASTA-

PEJA accounting system. 

IV. Detailed Description of the Study Content 

4.1 The PASTA-PEJA study will be structured around four components. The first component 

proposes support to the Agricultural Transformation Strategy (PASTA), by drawing on a 

comprehensive inventory of the analyses and studies already carried out. The aim of this 

component is to design a sub-project that will contribute to the transformation of Gabon’s 

agriculture by promoting growth-bearing sub-sectors that will diversify its economy (both in the 

case of essential basic products and agro-industrial products), by specifically focusing on the 

promotion of value chains and operationalization of the multiservice hub concept developed by 

the Government for wealth creation. The operation’s objectives are in line with the Bank’s High-

5 priorities, which aim to feed Africa by 2025 and improve the quality of life of the people of 

Africa. They are closely aligned on the post-Dakar strategic directions, namely to: (i) obtain new 

private sector investments in agriculture; (ii) develop solid value chains for key basic products; 

(iii) improve farmers’ access to agricultural inputs; (iv) develop youth employment in agriculture; 

and (vi) transform the education and training system into a development tool that will provide 

training in trades that meet the economy’s needs. Therefore, the formulation of the support project 

will incorporate key elements linked particularly to: (a) capacity building for public, private and 

community institutions in the sector; (b) the development of facilitating infrastructure, both 

material (tracks, markets, warehouses, drinking water supply and sanitation, training structures 

and agricultural support services, etc.) and immaterial (in particular, ICT, which may have positive 

impacts); (c) the promotion of public-private partnerships; (d) the promotion of vocational 

integration and youth entrepreneurship to revive agricultural activities and create a new class of 

professional agricultural entrepreneurs; and (d) improvement of sector governance, etc. The 

preparation of PASTA will contribute to the identification and prioritization of key actions to be 

included in the project, which will help to transform Gabon’s agriculture. It will be necessary to: 

 Review the ongoing reforms and initiatives or those planned under the Green Gabon 
Plan  

 Conduct studies on the value chains of sub-sectors among those identified and 
prioritized in the Green Gabon Operational Plan following justification of their 

selection 



 

XIII 

 

 Identify catalytic projects/actions that could support the transformation of Gabon’s 
agriculture and that will constitute the substance of PASTA. 

 Formulate the PASTA project in accordance with three guiding principles: adopt 

an integrated upstream-downstream sector approach for growth-bearing sectors 

mutually agreed upon with the Government, apply a project-based approach, i.e. all 

the proposed actions will be formulated as projects that will contribute to the 

achievement of mutually pre-determined objectives to boost entrepreneurship and 

ensure pragmatic and effective public action. The Government’s intervention that 

will be supported by PASTA will create an incentive and enabling environment for 

the development of the sub-sectors slated for promotion.  Its intervention will focus 

on the following areas: (i) organization of farmers; (ii) structuring of relationships 

between the different operators, from production to placing on the market; (iii) 

financing of value chain actors; (iv) regional development; (v) agricultural research 

and development, training and guidance; (vi) availability of inputs and 

mechanization; (vii) enhancement of production (conservation, processing and 

marketing); (viii) rural development; and (ix) multiservice hubs. It will also aim to 

provide incentives to private investment and offer impetus to youth 

entrepreneurship in the selected sub-sectors, where they will play a key role as the 

main actors for the development of productive agriculture: improvement of yields, 

participation in financing of equipment, provision of services, etc. 

4.2. The second component will be specifically dedicated to agricultural entrepreneurship 

(PEJA) though an operational sub-project aimed at fostering the integration of young people in the 

agricultural sector in the broad sense (18-40 age group). The promotion of youth entrepreneurship 

in the agricultural sector and agribusiness (PEJA) will be achieved by an operational sub-project 

underpinning PASTA and aimed at fostering the integration of young people in the different 

segments of the value chains of the sub-sectors promoted.   Its purpose is to promote the sector’s 

modernization and transformation through the different links of the value chains, by fostering 

employment and curbing rural-urban migration. In particular, it will be necessary to: (i) select 

young rural and urban dwellers with or without degrees but highly motivated to benefit from the 

programmes; (ii) build their skills (technical, managerial and marketing, etc.), depending on their 

profiles and vocation, through targeted training course, simulations and incubator modules; (iii) 

help them to set up shop (preparation of business plans, facilitation of access to funding, individual 

support, etc.); and (iv) monitor implementation. Preparation of this study will also help to establish 

a cohesive intervention framework that reflects best practice and is able to smoothly guide future 

actions in the area of agricultural entrepreneurship involving young people. 

4.3. The study’s third component will involve designing institutional support for ministries 

and related institutions to enable them to monitor the activities being carried out under good 

conditions and to develop certain strategic aspects while building capacity and adopting an 

inclusive approach.  

4.4.  The final component will concern the project management modalities: it will be necessary 

to: (i) propose an institutional and coordination mechanism for PASTA-PEJA activities; (ii) 

prepare an administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual and establish a PASTA-

PEJA accounts management system; (iii) establish a communication and sensitization plan; and 

(iv) establish a baseline situation and a monitoring/evaluation system.  

4.5.  Component 1: Study on PASTA Sub-Project 

4.5.1.  Approach for PASTA formulation: To assess all the actions to be implemented, a 

comprehensive study will be conducted taking into account the different challenges. The 

consultant will use all the existing strategic and analytical documents, in particular the PSGE, the 

Green Gabon Operational Plan 2025, the National Employment Policy, the Social Pact, the 



 

XIV 

 

National Industrialization Strategy, TFP reports on the agricultural sector, the report on the 

agricultural development strategy study, the PNIASAN, the legal texts governing the agricultural 

sector, status reports of the different ministries responsible for implementing the Green Gabon 

Plan, and any other document relating to the subject and deemed useful by the consultant. The 

main objectives of this review will be to: 

 Examine the ongoing reforms or those planned under the Green Gabon Project,  

 Conduct studies on the value chains of subsectors among those identified and 
prioritized in the Green Gabon Operational Plan following justification of their 

selection.  

 Identify catalytic projects/actions that might support the transformation of Gabon’s 

agriculture and which would constitute the substance of PASTA. 

 Formulate the PASTA project in accordance with three guiding principles: adopt 
an integrated upstream-downstream sector approach for growth-bearing sectors 

mutually agreed upon with the Government, apply a project-based approach, i.e. all 

the proposed actions will be formulated as projects that will contribute to the 

achievement of mutually pre-determined objectives to boost entrepreneurship and 

ensure pragmatic and effective public action. Government’s intervention supported 

by PASTA will create an incentive and enabling environment for the development 

of the sub-sectors slated for promotion.  Its intervention will focus on the following 

areas: (i) organization of farmers; (ii) structuring of relationships between the 

different operators from production to placing on the market; (iii) financing of value 

chain actors; (iv) regional development; (v) agricultural research and development, 

training and guidance; (vi) availability of inputs and mechanization; (vii) 

enhancement of production (conservation, processing and marketing); (viii) rural 

development, and (ix) multiservice hubs. It will also aim to provide incentives to 

private investment and offer impetus to youth entrepreneurship in the selected sub-

sectors, where they will play a key role as the main actors for the development of 

productive agriculture: improvement of yields, participation in equipment 

financing, provision of services, etc. 

4.5.2.  Phase 1: Diagnosis and Guidelines 

4.5.2.1. Analysis of the institutional framework: Several sector policy, strategy and reform 

documents have been prepared and implemented over the past two to three years. The agriculture 

and agri-business sector is particularly targeted by the reforms, which implies major institutional 

procedural changes. The consultant shall review the strategies formulated in recent years and the 

reforms announced by the Government. It shall review the status and degree of implementation of 

these reforms, particularly concerning the improvement of sector governance (legal framework, 

restructuring of ministries and agencies linked to the project, regional development, allocation of 

land, etc.), capacity building and basic infrastructure. It will identify the major functions that are 

not yet adequately covered and factors impeding the development of value chains of the 

agricultural and agri-business sub-sectors. Special attention will be paid to institutional support 

programmes being prepared in these areas with the TFPs. 

4.5.2.2.  Identification and analysis of sub-sectors to be covered under PASTA and updating 

of their studies by adopting the value chain approach. The value chain concept is an economic, 

institutional system focused on the execution of actions. Application of the value chain concept is 

of particular interest in identifying business opportunities at the macroeconomic level that explain 

the organic relationship between developing value chains and improving youth employability in 

the agriculture and agribusiness sector. For each sub-sector selected, the value chain studies and 

analyses will mainly comprise: 



 

XV 

 

i.  Identification of the value chains to be promoted: it will be necessary to demarcate 

the value chain, select the products, and analyse the context, constraints and 

opportunities.  A number of criteria should be taken into account through 

opportunity analyses. A growth and competitiveness matrix 

(supply/demand/market trends) /poverty reduction (number of 

producers/processors/ traders) / factors of success (availability of technologies and 

synergy with other programmes) will be produced for each target product obtained 

from a value chain, then prioritization and selection will be carried out in 

consultation with the stakeholders. Thereafter, the sub-sector will be selected 

following a review of existing studies and working sessions, aided by comparative 

tables (market opportunity and likely outcome in terms of poverty reduction). 

 

ii.  Preparation of the mapping of the key actors in the value chain and their 

characteristics (strengths and weaknesses), starting with suppliers of inputs, 

producers, transporters, traders, processors, final distributors and other service 

providers at different levels of the chain. A description of the value chain with links 

in terms of flows between all the key actors is expected as the starting point for the 

analysis.  

iii.  Collection and analysis of data on costs, prices and size of flows at all levels of the 

chain. This stage will identify the different types of costs, the value added structure 

along the chain, supply of inputs and final distribution / marketing of products 

processed based on predetermined criteria (export and/or import parity), value chain 

performance, competitive advantages/disadvantages of the sub-sector under 

review.  

iv.  Description of the constraints and opportunities encountered by the key actors in 

each value chain. This should include a detailed description of the main problems, 

constraints and opportunities encountered at each link of the chain, including 

political and institutional issues affecting the performance of the value chain and 

trade barriers (tariff and non-tariff), etc. 

v.  An estimation of the demand for each product in the sub-sector on the national, 

regional and international market through consultation with actors and the statistical 

review.  

vi.  Consultations with sub-sector actors as well as with all the stakeholders concerned.  

vii.  The formulation of specific recommendations on what must be done to promote the 

performance of each value chain in order to improve the volume, quality and value 

of trade.  

viii.  The proposal of a plan to develop the sub-sector and build the capacity of the value 

chain actors, with an indication of the areas of concentration of production, demand 

and areas targeted for the development of agribusiness. 

4.5.2.3. PASTA main thrusts: Based on the previous analyses (sector analysis of the institutional 

framework and justified identification of the sub-sectors to be supported), the consultant, in close 

consultation with the ministries and institutions involved, will define PASTA’s outline and main 

thrusts. The findings of the diagnosis and the main thrusts of the project will be the subject of a 

validation and sharing workshop with the stakeholders and the steering committee. 

 

 



 

XVI 

 

4.5.3. Phase 2: Project Formulation  

4.5.3.1. Following this diagnosis, and based on the recommendations of the validation workshop 

and additional analyses carried out, PATA will be formulated to focus on key actions that are 

necessary to activate the triggers. The project will target priority actions in terms of reforms and 

flagship operations. The main focal areas for PASTA’s formulation will be value chains, private 

sector promotion and agricultural entrepreneurship. This project will be fully consistent with the 

Green Gabon Operational Plan, while developing specific actions with an effective contribution 

to the development of the value chains of promising sub-sectors identified. This phase of the study 

will propose and prioritize different types of measures (regulatory, institutional, operational, 

technical, financial, etc.) capable of achieving the transformation. It will include key elements 

linked in particular to capacity building of public, private and community institutions in the sector, 

and to infrastructure development.  

4.5.3.2. The Consultant will also review the activity coordination mechanisms aimed at 

accelerating the transformation process, and at closer alignment of the activities and investments 

of the different actors in this direction. A synergy and complementarity framework will be 

prepared to ensure effective implementation based on the different projects and programmes that 

are ongoing or being planned from national funds and with TFP support. In this approach, it will 

also be necessary to ensure that the transformation process meets the many needs of Gabon’s 

population by giving the expected priority to inclusion, sustainability and appropriate nutrition. 

Furthermore, the programme’s formulation will reflect lessons learned from the PSGE. The 

priority actions will then have to be characterized and quantified, including detailed operation 

sheets, which facilitate the selection of those that could, if required, be retained in the context of 

PASTA’s implementation.  

4.5.3.3. Lastly, the consultant will formulate the Agricultural Transformation Strategy Support 

Project (PASTA) and prepare: (i) its technical, economic, institutional and environmental 

feasibility study; (ii) the DD of infrastructure to be created; and (iii) the project Environmental and 

Social Impact Assessment (EIES). The operations will be organized in three (3) parts: (A) 

PASTA’s presentation and rationale; (B) Project Description; and (C) Project feasibility. 

A. PASTA Presentation and Rationale 

A description will be given of the PASTA project, its qualitative and quantitative objectives, its 

targeted sub-sectors, its areas of intervention and its beneficiaries, its components/activities, the 

implementation procedures, its cost and financing plan and its performance indicators. A PASTA 

logical framework will be prepared (results chains, performance indicators, and means of 

verification, risk and mitigation measures.  

B. Project Description 

The integrated subsector approach assumes the project’s intervention at all levels of the links in 

the value chain of a targeted subsector. By making use of the studies on the value chains of the 

targeted subsectors, it will be necessary to identify, describe and quantify the project’s intervention 

at the level of the following components:  

 Regional development: identify, describe and give the scope of project 
interventions in relation to the contribution to regional development of the 

subsectors retained. 

 Research and development, training and agricultural guidance: support the different 
actors of the targeted value chains by providing efficient and accessible services at 

the following levels: research and development, training of entrepreneurs and 

specialized labour and agricultural extension and guidance. The aim of this part is 



 

XVII 

 

to build the capacity of the technical services of Ministries responsible for 

Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock as well as agricultural vocational training. It 

will be necessary to propose comprehensive solutions in terms of availability and 

operationalisation of workspaces and equipment of Ministerial Department services 

to meet PASTA needs.  

 Enhancement of production: Define the project’s contribution to production value-
added through conservation, processing, marketing, certification, branding, etc., 

including the establishment of collection, processing, storage and marketing 

facilities retained under the PASTA programme.  

 Rural Development: it will be necessary to define, justify (number of beneficiaries) 
and characterize basic public infrastructure to be established in the areas of 

concentrations targeted by the PASTA project: (i) roads and rural feeder roaders to 

be improved; (ii) infrastructure and facilities for the generation of electricity and 

production of water; and (iii) health centres and schools, etc. 

 Development of multi-service hubs: to be established to facilitate the countrywide 
development of agricultural activities. These are service centres for farmers. The 

proposed services are organized based on distinct components: agricultural 

guidance; inputs and multiplication of the material; collection, conservation, 

processing and marketing of agricultural products, administrative support to 

farmers and mechanization workshops. The consultant will be required to identify 

and design the hubs that will be necessary for the development of the targeted 

subsectors. 

 Organization of value chain link actors: (i) organization of farmers (horizontal 
integration); (ii) structuring of the relationships among the different operators from 

production to placing on the market (vertical integration).  

 Supporting incentive measures: proposed to accelerate investments in the sector 
(fiscal, administrative, regulatory) and remove the main constraints identified: (i) 

measures to implement a law that will foster the development of the agricultural 

and agribusiness sectors to be developed; (ii) funding of value chain actors (through 

banks and the MFI); and (iii) administrative procedures (tax regime…) and easing 

of the business environment to strengthen the competiveness of sub-sectors. 

For each component, it will be necessary to define, identify and design all PASTA interventions 

and the implementation modalities for the subsectors retained in order to develop and enhance 

project interventions that are consistent with the Green Gabon Plan. 

4.6.  Component 2: Study on Sub-Project to Promote Youth Entrepreneurship in 

 Agriculture and Agribusiness (PEJA) 

4.6.1. The project to promote youth entrepreneurship in agriculture and agribusiness will take 

into account the following two major Government concerns: (i) the need to begin the sustainable 

transformation of the rural environment by developing profitable and competitive activities that 

will attract economic operators, including young people, and (ii) the urgent need to help to reduce 

unemployment by interesting these young people in profitable economic activities in the 

agricultural sector. In accordance with the strategic directions of the PSGE (2015-2025) and the 

Human Capital Strategy (2014-2018), the project will adopt a specific approach for young people 

in the agricultural sector in order to facilitate their integration into the different segments of the 

value chains. This framework should lead to the emergence of modern agricultural, agro-industrial 

and service enterprises fostered by improved access to financing and equipment (mechanization 

and processing), development of productive, processing and marketing infrastructure to be rolled 

out under PASTA. 



 

XVIII 

 

4.6.2. Approach for the formulation of PEJA: The project preparation activities will concern 

several services in the areas of data collection and certain targeted analytical interviews to more 

accurately identify the problems relating to the topic of “agricultural entrepreneurship/youth 

employment”. Also taken into consideration in this reflection will be the diversity of the potential 

target public: rural and urban, graduate or non-graduate, in-or-out-of-school, agriculture or other 

sectors, individuals or groups, women and men, etc. Particularly, it will be necessary to review the 

most appropriate operational mechanisms for the different categories of actors by taking into 

account and trying to develop all the existing structures, including coaching and training structures. 

Preparation of this component will provide an opportunity to review the different models already 

tried and tested as well as experience gained at the national level and in other countries, and to 

define the most efficient operating methods, taking into account the diversity of the targets and 

opportunities to increase absorption and enhance attractiveness. This will also facilitate the 

establishment of a cohesive intervention framework that reflects best practice and is able to more 

smoothly guide future actions of partners in the area in terms of transformation of the sector and 

value chains. The results of the studies and reflection will ultimately facilitate the project design 

and preparation, which can be financed from resources planned in the ongoing CSP, while 

specifying the implementation conditions. In this context, an inclusive approach will be adopted 
that will encourage the participation of local communities and the technical services concerned by 

youth employment.  

4.6.3.  Standard Model: in this analytical and formulation exercise, projects that are ongoing 

or under preparation will also deserve special attention in terms of possible capitalization and 

synergy. The “agripreneur” model developed by the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 

(IITA) could also serve as a guide in the formulation of the project, while taking into account the 

specificities of Gabon and the existing structures. The initial phase of this project consists in 

providing support to the development of local economic initiatives for young people by improving 

the supply of non-financial services provided by local service providers or incubator structures. In 

particular, this phase prioritizes: (i) facilitation of the emergence of new ideas on business 

ventures; (ii) training of young people in business incubation centres, in the fields of agribusiness, 

production, marketing, processing and management; and (iii) support for the creation of new 

companies as well as for the preparation of business plans. The second phase aims to put in place 

a financial mechanism to facilitate the establishment of SMEs and the provision of financial 

support to them in order to limit the obstacles that hamper the development of such businesses. 

This appropriate financial mechanism involves associating local financing institutions to support 

young graduates to set up business.  

4.6.4.  Phase 1: It will be necessary to conduct all the preparatory studies required for PEJA’s 

formulations. This phase is sub-divided into five sections: 

4.6.4.1.  Section 1: Identification and analysis of the labour market and opportunities in 

growth-bearing sub-sectors. This section of the study aims to capitalize on the analysis of all the 

factors (agriculture, stockbreeding, fisheries, environment, forestry etc.), subsectors and related 

value chains, carried out under PASTA, to identify areas that provide more opportunities and 

greater contributory capacity to the agricultural sector’s transformation, jobs and GDP. After 

outlining the youth employment situation, in general, and the prospects provided by the 

agricultural sector’s transformations, in particular, the study will address the following points: (i) 

identification of potential, markets (local, national, regional and external) and other employment 

generating niches; (ii) analysis of the organizations and profitability of the different subsectors and 

value chain links, and their development prospects; (iii) promotion of access to technologies and 

innovations aimed at improving productivity in the subsectors with a special focus on the possible 

use of ICT in the agricultural value chains; (iv) identifications of opportunities and promising 

trades in the agricultural subsectors, consistent with the required level of modernization; (v) 

identification of income generating activities that could be professionalized and in time provide 

sustainable activities, etc. The consultant may be required to map the employment opportunities, 

while taking into account local and regional specificities and potential. 



 

XIX 

 

4.6.4.2. The review of job opportunities for young people (women and men) will concern the 

different agricultural subsectors and all the value chains identified and supported by the PASTA 

study, as well as the requirements of the major projects initiated such as the GRAINE project. The 

following are examples of the different potential niches and trades that should be taken into 

account and considered: agribusiness, processing, marketing and sale of products; provision of 

services, linking of actors, agricultural mechanization; sale of products, supply of inputs, supply 

of equipment; development of agricultural areas, establishment of market garden, tree-growing, 

poultry, fish farms; small-scale stock breeding, innovative stockbreeding, beef and dairy cattle 

breeding, milk processing, etc. The analysis of opportunities will take into account the existing 

situations and the processes already triggered at the individual and collective level that could be 

further professionalized. The consultant will make use of all existing documentation: strategy 

papers, subsector studies, thematic studies, project documents, etc. It will also meet with the 

different categories of young people concerned and all the structures connected with the 

agricultural sector, employment, SME/SMI promotion, etc.   In his/her analysis, the consultant will 

disaggregate data by gender to the extent possible by specifically identifying opportunities 

available to women. 

4.6.4.3. Section 2: Modalities and criteria for the selection of young people. It will be 

necessary to define the conditions of access by young people to the entrepreneurship promotion 

mechanisms to be established as well as the selection criteria and methods to be developed and 

applied. This issue is fundamental and constitutes a critical stage for ensuring that candidates have 

the required capacity and commitment to engage fully in entrepreneurship and the creation of self-

employment. Care must also be taken not to recruit people who are opportunists, attracted by 

possible near-term benefits but who lack the real spirit and will sought. The consultant will define 

all the criteria to be taken into consideration, including those linked to profiles, skills, 

qualifications and experience. It will also be required to take gender parity into account. 

Furthermore, the selection modalities should take into consideration the possibility of providing 

rural dwellers with the same opportunities of access to the programme. Therefore, the criteria could 

be differentiated by target categories. Therefore, the consultant will define all the necessary 

measures to provide a non-exclusive method of selection. Special attention will be paid to rural 

youths who represent a major segment of potential applicants. The profile “graduate of an 

agricultural training establishment” will also be closely considered with a view to enhancing the 

sector’s professionalization from an environmental standpoint and directly linked to the necessary 

its modernization. 

4.6.4.4. Section 3: Mechanisms and modalities for building young people’s skills. This section 

of the study will comprise a diagnostic review of agricultural training programmes and strategies. 

It also aims to assess the technical and physical capacity of the various existing training institutes 

and centres, to meet the developers’ skill building requirements. It will focus on: (i) an analysis of 

training supply to meet the demand of potential developers; (ii) assessment of the necessary 

infrastructure capacity to properly oversee the developers; (iii) analysis of existing capacity 

building and youth integration mechanisms; (iv) definition of a skills building approach for 

potential developers; (v) the feasibility of establishing agricultural business incubators and related 

conditions, (vi) the possibility of simulations in existing structures (enterprises, companies, 

groups, etc.). It is also necessary to ensure that existing training facilities that could be mobilized 

will still be able to provide their usual services. The study will propose the most appropriate 

training and incubation mechanisms to meet the diversified needs identified. Particular attention 

will be paid to the preparation of business plans and the related market studies as well as marketing 

corporate management and the use of new technologies. The reflection will also include the role 

that could be played by the existing agricultural extension services and building their capacity. 

Details will be provided on possible operating methods (location, actors, duration, costs, etc.). 

4.6.4.5. Section 4: Mechanisms for Financing Developers. It will be necessary to prepare 

financing that can support youth and women’s initiatives in various forms, taking into account the 

targeted profiles and activities. The consultant will be required to identify the financing 



 

XX 

 

mechanisms (including innovative ones) that will guarantee sustainable access by the beneficiaries 

to financing by local financial institutions. The study will explore the following aspects: (i) 

identification of financial institutions that provide or could provide support to developers in the 

value chains; (ii) analysis of existing supply of financial services and products, analysis of credit 

granting modalities, a comparative analysis of financing mechanisms; (iii) identification of 

existing funds and financial institutions that could support these mechanisms; (iv) identification 

of developers’ strategy and obstacles to access to financing; (v) proposal of one or more adapted 

and innovative financing mechanisms, according to category of actors; (vi) characterization and 

comparative advantages of possible operating methods; (vii) definition of eligibility criteria and 

access to financing for project sponsors, in accordance with the targeted categories, etc. The 

consultant will meet with the different local financial institutions and together with them identify 

possible measures to support potential partners to ensure the sustainability of the proposed 

financing mechanism. It will draw on the existing analyses and will explore opportunities for 

sponsoring by certain private firms. 

4.6.4.6. Section 5: Installation and support to promoters. This section of the study will 

examine the conditions that will provide optimal support to promoters to enable them to establish 

and start-up their activities under optimal conditions. This stage is critical to provide initial security 

for the activity and facilitate the necessary adjustments. The consultant will analyse the post-

incubation support mechanisms and will propose a cohesive approach that will guarantee the 

operation’s sustainability. It will also consider some possible forms of start-up support in terms of 

access to land, supply of inputs, assistance in the form of equipment, establishment of 

infrastructure, organizational structuring, etc. Furthermore, it will define the conditions for 

monitoring and overseeing developers in the initial stages of their activities to be able to guide 

them and, if necessary, readjust certain approaches. It will explore the possibility of mobilizing 

and boosting the existing advisory-support and extension mechanisms. The possible use of 

experienced personnel and/or leaders well established locally will also be considered. 

4.6.5. Phase 2. Formulation of PEJA: The conclusions of the different preliminary studies 

along with consideration of the different experiences in the area, including work carried out by 

IITA, will be used to support the project’s formulation. Therefore, a project preparation report will 

be prepared based on the analysis of all possible options and by proposing the most appropriate 

scenarios and alternatives that will be backed up by arguments. A quantified estimation of the 

different targets will be proposed at the same time as the preparation of the logical framework and 

definition of the key indicators. At this stage, it will be necessary to specify the number of 

businesses to be created, the potential number of expected jobs, anticipated potential revenue, the 

target distribution by zones/sectors/gender, etc.  The proposed project components and activities 

will be described and the implementation conditions specified.  As already pointed out, the project 

design should capitalize on experience from within the country and take into account lessons 

learned from other operators in the sector and ongoing initiatives for the promotion of youth and 

women’s employment.  To make optimal use of the resources provided, synergies and 

complementarities will be sought with ongoing projects and initiatives.  The consultant will set 

out the project’s expected benefits (social, economic, etc.) and identify the risks and mitigation 

measures to take into account.  

4.7. Component 3: Building the capacity of State-owned institutions responsible for 

project monitoring and implementation 

It will be necessary to provide institutional support to the ministries and related institutions to 

enable them to adequately monitor the activities being carried and to develop certain strategic 

aspects while building capacity and adopting an inclusive approach. The necessary measures and 

procurements shall be listed with their corresponding costs.  

 



 

XXI 

 

4.8. Component 4: PASTA-PEJA Project Management 

 Project coordination mechanism: the consultant will propose an adequate 
institutional mechanism, including project coordination and steering mechanisms. 

These proposals should take into account PASTA-PEJA’s multidisciplinary 

character and the need to involve all the ministries and stakeholders, while 

guaranteeing the mechanism’s operational effectiveness. 

 Administrative accounting and financial management: the consultant will 

define the most appropriate procurement and management methods in accordance 

with the Bank’s Rules and Procedures. Thus, to prepare the procedures manual that 

will be used for both the study and project to be prepared, the consultant will work 

together with the Unit in charge of MIC-TAF to define in the Manual the role and 

responsibilities of each of the officials responsible for the components and activities 

of the project to be prepared, and determine the procedures to be applied in the 

different situations encountered. The Manual must also pinpoint the responsibilities 

and procedures relating to the project in the operation of its management bodies. 

The consultant’s main duties will be to formalize and describe: (i) the project actors 

and their roles and responsibilities; (ii) procurement procedures; (iii) financing, 

operational and monitoring mechanisms; and (iv) the project administrative, 

accounting and financial procedures as well as the design of the internal control 

system. These procedures should facilitate: (i) the optimal management of external 

funds provided to Gabon as well as the counterpart funds in compliance with the 

procedures and guidelines of the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the 

national public administration rules relating to the special account, disbursement, 

procurement of goods and services and auditing; (ii) the reliable data entry, 

processing and storage of the project's administrative, operational and accounting 

information; and (iii) establish an administrative and accounts management system 

in compliance with the Bank’s procedures. As regards the installation of the 

computerized financial management system, accounting software will be purchased 

and installed, and should facilitate the accounting treatment of all the Bank’s project 

operations irrespective of the origin of the funding (Government, AfDB, etc.). The 

software package should generally be able to maintain the necessary entries and 

accounts to record the operations, resources and expenditure in accordance with 

appropriate accounting practices. It should at least comprise the following modules: 

system of parameters, general accounting, cost accounting, budget management, 

contract management, fixed asset management, monitoring of agreements, 

publishing of financial statements, including disbursement and utility statements, 

preparation of Funds Withdrawal Requests (FWR), etc. This software package will 

comprise a disbursement system based on interim financial reports. The consulting 

firm selected will implement a training and assistance programme for staff using 

the software during the first few months of implementation. In its offer, the firm 

shall include a proposal for the purchase of a financial management software 

package that will ensure the appropriate and timely recording, analysis and 

reporting of the project’s financial implementation focused on the consolidated 

revenue and expenditure by source of financing. In its offer, the consulting firm 

shall also indicate the number and technical characteristics of the PCs to be 

procured by the project for the installation of the software.  The project accounts 

will be kept in accordance with international accounting standards. The firm must 

make provision for updating these management tools during the implementations 

of the PASTA-PEJA project in order to incorporate all the organizational 

specificities and implementation modalities of the finalized project. 

 



 

XXII 

 

 Establishment of a communication and sensitization plan: the consultant will 
define the communication mechanism to be established to ensure inclusive 

participation and widespread dissemination of messages internally and externally, 

that will help to enhance the image of a modern agriculture with high revenue 

potential. 

 Establishment of the baseline situation and monitoring/evaluation system: the 
consultant will present the details of the monitoring/evaluation system to be 

established and possibly linked to existing ones. A report will be drafted on the 

PASTA-PEJA project baseline situation, then the consultant will design and 

establish the computerized monitoring and evaluation system. In this regard, it will 

specifically define: (i) all the relevant indicators in relation to the project logical 

framework; (ii) the information collection, transmission, processing, analysis and 

dissemination system; and (iii) the types of databases. This will be done in close 

collaboration with the study coordination team. This service will facilitate: (a) the 

use of the database established for the baseline situation; (b) definition of the 

results-based logical framework accompanied by impact and outcome indicators; 

(c) the preparation of a monitoring and evaluation system technical manual; and (d) 

the design and establishment of a computerized, impact-focused monitoring and 

evaluation mechanism compatible with the accounting and financial database. The 

entire mechanism must be linked to the existing system installed at MAEAPG in 

the context of monitoring the PSGE, Green Gabon Plan. 

4.9. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

The Consultant will calculate the project cost, broken down by component and category, by 

establishing four different scenarios including the realistic one based on the allocation proposed 

in the Country Strategy Paper (CSP). It will specify the contributions expected from the different 

parties, including the government and beneficiaries. Detailed cost tables must be provided, 

including the cost by activity, to facilitate the project’s implementation. The tables are as follows: 

(i) Estimated costs by activity/component and total PASTA-PEJA cost; (ii) PASTA-PEJA 

investment and operating costs; (iii) Breakdown of total cost by source of financing; (iv) Project 

cost by expenditure category; and (v) Expenditure category by component. 

4.10. Project Implementation Arrangements and Key Performance Indicators 

The consultant will answer the following questions: (i) Which institutions will be responsible for 

the PASTA-PEJA project’s implementation? (ii) What coordination arrangements will be made? 

(iii) What capacity constraints exist if any, and how will they be lifted?  In this regard, the 

consultant will propose an organization chart of the project management unit and personnel 

required (profiles, number, etc.), by specifying the relationships between the stakeholders and their 

responsibilities. More specifically, the consultant will: 

 Analyse the overall PASTA-PEJA institutional framework, especially its 
institutional anchoring 

 Analyse the overall cohesiveness of PASTA-PEJA, especially as regards its 
strategic and operational context 

 Review the project management structure and its relationship with the other 
structures, and  

 Prepare performance contracts for the management unit personnel. 

 



 

XXIII 

 

4.11. PASTA-PEJA Feasibility 

4.11.1. Project Economic and Financial Analysis 

From an economic standpoint, the consultant, in consultation with the project owner, will establish 

a baseline situation (no-project scenario).  In relation to this situation the flows and benefits 

expressible in monetary terms, the consultant will estimate the “with project” situation, including 

the possible negative and positive externalities in the different configurations envisaged. In 

particular, the consultant will perform the following activities: 

 Analysis of the economic and financial feasibility of PASTA-PEJA 

 Calculation of the PASTA-PEJA financial and economic rates of return 

 Analysis of sensitivity of PASTA-PEJA project to cost and investment 
implementation period, the volume of activity (low / medium/high scenarios 

defined in the market study), operating costs, etc. 

 Analysis of the probable breakdown of the cost and benefits expressed in monetary 
terms between the different categories of shareholder 

 Establishment of economic and financial justification of PASTA-PEJA 

 Analysis of recurrent costs, and 

 Consideration of issues relating to allowances and benefits of national personnel, 
the technical assistance to be deployed, etc. 

4.11.2. Preparation of DD and BD for social, economic and agricultural sector support 

infrastructure relating to the project support components.  BD and DD will be prepared for each 

item of infrastructure retained. This will include all the components required to set up the 

infrastructure. This mainly concerns the following aspects: (i) fine-tuning of data and technical 

principles selected; sizing of the infrastructure in question; management modalities; and (ii) the 

technical data and principle retained which will include: a general description of the infrastructure, 

basic data, design principles; detailed estimated bill of quantities; etc. The bidding documents 

(BD) will be prepared based on models approved by AfDB. The BD must present the services that 

are the subject of the contract, determine bidding procedures and stipulation the terms of the 

contract. In addition to the procurement  notice, the dossier will comprise: (a) the special conditions 

of contract; (b) the technical specifications; (c) bid and guarantee forms; (d) the price schedule and 

itemized estimate; and (e) plans and diagrams. 

4.11.3  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the project, including the 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP): 

 Analyse the project environmental requirements in relation to national regulations 
and the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) 

 Analyse the project’s environmental impacts  

 Prepare an environmental and social impact assessment of project activities, 
including a waste management plan 

 Propose adequate mitigation measures that will be factored into project activities 
and cost 

 Analyse aspects relating to the different types of pollution 



 

XXIV 

 

 Analyse national gender mainstreaming policies 

 Examine the role of women and young people, identify constraints that impede their 
participation in different agricultural and agribusiness activities and propose 

specific actions in their areas of interest that will improve their status and 

integration 

 Analyse the project’s impact on women and other vulnerable groups, and propose 
measures coupled with significant financial coverage 

 Collect gender-disaggregated data 

 Collect data on social transformations, especially changes in women’s status 

 Propose mitigation, capacity building and ESMP monitoring measures 

 Estimate the costs of implementing the ESMP, and 

 Prepare an ESIA summary in compliance with the Bank’s format.  

The provisional version of PASTA-PEJA will be discussed and validated with the Steering 

Committee, and subsequently with the partners involved in the programme at a national workshop. 

V. CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 

5.1 Organization and Management of the Operation 

5.1.1 The study will be conducted by a multi-disciplinary consulting firm to be recruited 

through international shopping based on a shortlist using the QCBS method. The General 

Secretariat of the Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship responsible for 

implementing the GRAINE programme (MAEAPG) will be the executing agency. In this regard, 

its capacity will be built up by the PAPG-2 Project Coordination Unit set up at the General 

Secretariat, which will also be responsible for the PASTA-PEJA project. The Ministry will appoint 

an official with the required qualifications and confirmed experience in agriculture and rural 

development to the position of Study Coordinator. He/she will be responsible for coordinating 

study activities (including capacity building and the organization of national seminars). In that 

capacity, he/she will facilitate interventions by international experts on the ground.  He/she will 

also liaise between the consulting firm and the Bank. The coordinator will be assisted by a 

procurement specialist, an accountant and support staff (2 drivers and 1 secretary). These will be 

recruited based on open competition, and performance contracts signed. In addition, the Gabonese 

authorities will designate a team of national counterparts (value chain development, agribusiness, 

agricultural entrepreneurship, gender/communication, governance and institutional aspects, a 

specialist in the development of rural institutions and a rural engineer), who will work closely with 

the international experts.  

5.1.2 A Steering Committee will be established for the operations, chaired by the MAEAPG 

Secretary-General, and comprising:  

 A representative of the Ministry of Sustainable Development, Economy, 
Investment Promotion and Forecasting 

 A representative of the Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship 
responsible for implementing the GRAINE programme 

 A representative of the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock 



 

XXV 

 

 A representative of the Ministry of Infrastructure, Public Works and Regional 
Development 

 A representative of the Ministry of Vocational Training and Youth Integration 

 A representative of the Ministry of Budget and Public Accounts 

 A representative of the PSGE Coordination Bureau 

 A representative of the National Investment Promotion Agency 

 A GRAINE programme representative 

 A representative of the Gabon Chamber of Commerce 

 A representative of the cooperatives  

 A representative of civil society, and 

 A representative of agricultural professional organizations. 

 

The Steering Committee will be responsible for monitoring the conduct of the study, analysing the 

consultant’s interim reports and making recommendations for guidance. It will meet at least thrice 

during the study’s implementation. 

5.1.3. To conduct the preparation study successfully, equipment will be procured under the 

project. These will be batches of IT (computers, printers, inverters and various software), a 

photocopier and miscellaneous equipment. The coordination unit established under PAPG-2 will 

be responsible for PASTA+PEJA’s coordination and management. 

5.2 Expertise Required and Team Composition 

5.2.1 The expertise required for the conduct of the study will cover the following areas: 

 The development of tropical agricultural sub-sectors 

 Rural development 

 Rural aspects and agricultural sector governance 

 Youth and women’s agricultural entrepreneurship 

 The private sector and business environment 

 The agribusiness sector, and 

 Infrastructure engineering.  

5.2.2 Based on the above-mentioned areas of expertise, the consultant will provide a team 

comprising the following experts: 

 An agricultural economist/mission leader 

 An agronomist 



 

XXVI 

 

 An expert in value chains and market analysis 

 An expert in agricultural vocational training  

 A legal expert 

 An agribusiness expert 

 A rural engineering expert 

 A civil works and architectural expert 

 A socio-economist 

 A gender expert 

 A financial and economic analyst 

 An expert in environmental and social safeguards  

 A private sector and business expert 

 A senior expert in setting up PPP 

 An expert in the development of rural organizations, and 

 A financial expert. 

5.2.3 The international experts will be assisted by national counterparts with the required 

qualifications in the study fields. In addition, the consultant will mobilize the necessary support 

staff to ensure the smooth conduct of the study. 

VI. SCHEDULE AND REPORTING 

6.1 Schedule and Duration: The study will start-up latest one month after notification of the 

contract to the consultant. The schedule for services is as follows: 

Implementation of the First Phase     

 Start-up of activities;       M 

 Submission of inception report     M + 0.5 

 Submission of report on diagnostic review and  

PASTA’s main orientations Interim reports on PEJA  

preparatory studies;        M + 3.5 

 Holding of a national seminar for validation 

and submission of the final versions of the first phase reports M + 4  

Implementation of the Second Phase 

 Submission of the PASTA-PEJA interim reports 

 and DD for infrastructure       M + 7 

 Holding of national validation workshop     M + 7.5 



 

XXVII 

 

 Submission of PASTA-PEJA final reports     M + 8 

6.2.  Reports and Documents 

Based on the planned works schedule, the consultant shall submit the following reports in French. 

It shall submit to the project owner the computer files of the final reports, including digital 

photographs and useable versions of models of economic calculations and financial simulations 

carried out under the study. 

 Inception Report: to be submitted 0.5 months after the mobilization of the 
consultant’s team in Gabon, this report will mainly comprise a detailed description 

of the strategy to pursue for the smooth conduct of the study, as well as an 

implementation matrix. Ten (10) copies of the report will be submitted to the 

Government and two (2) to the Bank. 

 The PASTA diagnostic report and strategic directions, and the PEJA First 
Phase Report: interim report to be submitted three and a half (3.5) months after the 

start-up of the study, and the final version to be submitted three months later.  

Fifteen (15) copies of both versions of the report will be submitted, with thirteen 

(13) to the Government and two (2) to the Bank. 

 The reports on the PASTA-PEJA study and DD/BD studies. These will be 
submitted seven (7) months after the start of the interim study and after 8 months 

for the final reports following the second national validation seminar. PASTA-

PEJA will present in detail the objectives of the operation, components, detailed 

description of activities, estimated costs (in foreign exchange and local currency), 

the financial and economic analysis, etc. Fifteen (15) copies of the report will be 

submitted, with thirteen (13) to the Government and two (2) to the Bank. 

 The report on the project’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA). This report will be submitted at the same time as the feasibility reports, i.e. 

eight (8) months after the start-up of the study, and will present in detail the impact 

of the project’s two components on the environment as well as the appropriate 

mitigation measures. Fifteen (15) copies of the report will be submitted, with 

thirteen (13) to the Government and two (2) to the Bank. 

 The Administrative, Accounting and Financial Procedures Manual will be 
submitted in the 4th month in fifteen (15) copies, with thirteen (13) to the 

Government and two (2) to the Bank, in addition to the establishment of the 

PASTA-PEJA accounts management system.  

 The report on the establishment of the baseline situation will be submitted in 
the sixth month in fifteen (15) copies, with thirteen (13) to the Government and two 

(2) to the Bank, in addition to the establishment of the monitoring/evaluation 

system. 

VII. FEES AND TERMS OF PAYMENT 

The fees and terms of payment will be presented in the Request for Proposals and specified in the 

contract to be negotiated and signed between the Consultant and the Government of Gabon. The 

consultant’s proposal will cover all the necessary elements for the conduct and the prices will be 

non-revisable. The contract that will be submitted to the Bank for approval will specify the 

responsibilities of both parties as well as the terms of payment. Payment requests will be submitted 

to the Bank, after verification by the Government. The following indicative payment instalments 

are proposed: 



 

XXVIII 

 

 Upon signature of the contract     20 % 

 Upon approval of the diagnostic report    40 % 

 Upon approval of the final PASTA-PEJA preparation report 40 % 

VIII. GOVERNMENT’S OBLIGATION 

8.1.  Implementation: To facilitate preparation of PASTA-PEJA, coordinate the Consultant’s 

activities in relation to other possible studies and take the necessary decisions for the continuation 

of the study, a steering committee will be established by MAEAPG. In addition to the coordinator, 

it will comprise national counterparts as well as representatives of the technical administrations 

and institutions directly concerned by the study as proposed in Paragraph 5.1.2. 

8.2.  Liaison and Assistance: Under the authority and responsibility of the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Agricultural Entrepreneurship, responsible for implementing the GRAINE 

project, the Steering Committee will be the liaison body between the Consultant’s team and all the 

public and private structures and services concerned by the study. It will facilitate contacts and 

field visits, and ensure that the consultants have access to all the available documentation and 

information required to conduct the study. It will ensure that the study is conducted in compliance 

with the pre-determined schedule and will take all necessary measures to correct any possible 

weaknesses. 

8.3.  Documentation: The Steering Committee will provide the consultant throughout the 

study period with all the data, reports and studies conducted in connection with the mission. An 

indicative list of available studies and documents will be submitted by the SC at the start-up of 

services, a copy of which is presented as annex. All expenditure on the purchase of documents and 

maps not available at MAEAPG will be paid for by the consultant.  

IX. CONSULTANT’S OBLIGATIONS AND PROFILES 

9.1 Obligations 

9.1.1 The consultant shall be fully responsible for the conduct of the PASTA-PEJA preparation 

study and ensure the timely provision of essential specialists, support structures and logistics in 

terms of quantity and quality to ensure the smooth conduct of the mission. 

9.1.2 The consultant shall provide services for the preparation study and fulfil its obligations 

diligently, efficiently and economically in compliance with generally accepted methods and practices. 

It will exercise sound management and use appropriate cutting-edge techniques, reliable and efficient 

equipment, machinery, materials and procedures. 

9.1.3 The consultant shall schedule and specify the tasks to be implemented in agreement with 

the SC, to which it will confirm the expected participation.  The consultant shall undertake to: 

- Verify the consistency of the data and information collected in the performance of its 
duties. It shall complement them as required by the necessary investigations to allow 

it to perform its task; 

- Take out all the required insurance policies covering its activities, staff and 
independent experts, without third party lability; and 

- Maintain the confidentiality of the information obtained as well as of the results of its 
tasks performed during the conduct of the study. 

 



 

XXIX 

 

9.1.4 The consultant shall provide evidence that it has the necessary equipment to fulfil its mission. 

9.2 Consultant’s Profiles 

9.2.1. The consulting firm shall have already implemented projects in Africa financed by 

international donors (AFD, World Bank, AfDB, EDF, EIB, etc.). An additional asset will be the 

firm’s experience in the CEAMC sub-region, and more specifically in Gabon. The firm shall: (i) 

have confirmed agricultural engineering and agro-food experience; (ii) at least over 10 years 

confirmed experience with at least two (2) similar missions with proof of previous services deemed 

satisfactory by the beneficiary; (iii) provide evidence of sound knowledge of agricultural and/or 

agribusiness issues in Gabon or in similar countries; and (iv) have a team of multidisciplinary 

experts capable of working under pressure and in a specific, multicultural environment. 

9.2.2. The firm shall provide evidence of sound experience in the organization of rural 

institutions, especially agricultural cooperatives, community development, youth entrepreneurship 

in rural areas as well as in-depth knowledge of PPP development in agribusiness. The following 

table gives an indication of the estimated inputs for the conduct of this study. 

 

Key Personnel Unit Estimated Time 

A senior agricultural economist/mission leader Person/months 8 

An agronomist Person/months 2 

An agricultural vocational training expert Person/months 2 

A value chain development expert Person/months 3 

An agribusiness expert Person/months 2.5 

A legal expert Person/months 2 

A socio-economist Person/months 2 

A gender expert Person/months 2 

An expert on environmental and social safeguards  Person/months 2.5 

A rural engineering expert Person/months 2 

A civil engineering and architecture expert Person/months 2 

A financial analyst Person/months 2 

A microfinance expert Person/months 2 

An expert in the development and organization of the rural 

environment 
Person/months 2 

A private sector, business environment expert  Person/months 2 

A PPP expert Person/months 2 

ESTIMATED TOTAL Person/months 40 

Agricultural Economist/Mission Leader 

 Post-graduate degree (DEA, DESS, Master’s, Engineering, Doctorate) in 

economics, agricultural economics, planning or project management 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience, including five (05) years’ relevant practical 

experience in the preparation of agricultural or rural public policies 

 Sound knowledge of the challenges of agricultural and rural development, issues 

relating to youth unemployment in Sub-Saharan Africa and employability in the 

agricultural and agribusiness subsectors 

 Capacity to manage, coordinate and supervise multidisciplinary teams 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written) 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 

Internet), and 

 Fluency in French. 



 

XXX 

 

Qualified Agronomist 

 DEA (post-graduate diploma) or Master’s degree in agricultural sciences 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience, including five (05) years’ relevant practical 

experience in the analysis of agricultural subsectors and value chains 

 Practical experience in the development of innovative approaches in integrated 

rural development 

 Sound knowledge of current agricultural development policies and strategies in 

Gabon 

 Sound knowledge of agricultural sub-sectors in Gabon 

 Sound knowledge of Gabon’s different agro-ecological areas 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 

Internet) 

 Fluency in French 

 Good writing and communication skills, and 

 Ability to work in a team in a multicultural environment. 

Value Chain and Market Analysis Expert 

 DEA (post-graduate diploma) or Master’s degree in agricultural  economics, 

marketing, management, MBA, processing)  

 At least ten (10) years’ experience including five (05) years’ relevant practical 

experience in conducting studies on sub-sectors and agribusiness sub-sector value 

chains and market analyses 

 Sound knowledge of current agricultural development policies and strategies in 

Gabon 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 

Internet) 

 Fluency in French 

 Good writing and communication skills, and 

 Ability to work in a team in a multicultural environment. 

Agricultural Training Expert 

 Doctorate or Master’s degree in education and training sciences 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience, including five (05) years’ relevant practical 

experience in the preparation of policies and programmes on human resource 

capacity building and the integration of young people into professional life 

 Confirmed experience in agricultural development and agricultural training centres 

or schools 

 Sound knowledge of agricultural development and poverty issues in Sub-Saharan 

Africa 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 

Internet). 

 Fluency in French 



 

XXXI 

 

 Good writing and communication skills, and 

 Ability to work in a team in a multicultural environment. 

Agri-Business Consultant  

 Post-graduate degree (Doctorate, DEA, DESS, Master’s, Engineering) in 

agricultural sciences and food technologies; 

 At least ten years’ experience in post-harvest processing; 

 Confirmed experience in the processing and enhancement of agricultural products 

in humid tropical regions 

 International work experience (a sound knowledge of Sub-Saharan Africa would be 

appreciated) ; 

 Proficiency in computer tools (Word, PowerPoint, Excel), and 

 Fluency in French. 

Civil Engineering and Architecture Consultant 

 Holder of a civil engineering degree or degree in architecture awarded by the 

Government (D.P.L.G) ; 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience in the field of architecture or civil engineering; 

 Proficiency in CADD software (computer-aided design and drafting software); 

 Relevant experience in the development and construction of agricultural 

infrastructure; 

 Work experience in Central Africa would be appreciated; 

 Proficiency in computer tools (Word, PowerPoint, Excel)  

 Fluency in French. 

Rural Engineering Consultant 

 Holder of a rural engineering degree; 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience of irrigation schemes; 

 Work experience in Central Africa would be appreciated; 

 Proficiency in computer tools (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) 

 Fluency in French. 

A  Legal Expert  

 Holder of a DEA or Master’s in Law 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience with at least five (5) years of business-related 

land and legal issues  

 Work experience in Central Africa would be appreciated; 

 Proficiency in computer tools (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) 

 Fluency in French. 

Environmental Expert 

 Holder of a DEA or Master’s in Environmental Sciences  



 

XXXII 

 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience in the environment sector with confirmed 

experience in the conduct of strategic environmental studies, environmental and 

social impact studies/assessments in the field of agribusiness, diagnostic studies, 

auditing and environmental and social management plans applied to the 

agribusiness sector part of which should be in similar countries to Gabon. 

Social Economics Expert  

 Holder of a Post-Graduate Degree (DEA, DESS, Master’s, Engineering, Doctorate) 

in Economics, Social Economics, Planning and Project Management; 

 At least ten (10) years’ experience including five (05) years’ relevant practical 

experience in rural development, the promotion and establishment of rural 

institutions in particular cooperatives and associations 

 Sound knowledge of agricultural development challenges and poverty issues in 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written) 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 

Internet), and 

 Fluency in French. 

Financial Analyst  

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in economics, 
preferably in financial management or an equivalent degree  

 At least 10 years’ experience in market studies advisory services and in marketing 
strategy  

 Provided similar types of services on at least two occasions  

 Certification in the use of COMFAR III and UNIDO software would be an 
advantage. 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written) 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 
Internet), and 

 Fluency in French. 

Gender Expert 

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in social sciences, 
or equivalent degree,  

 At least 10 years’ experience in the formulation and implementation of strategies 
and programmes for the advancement of women and young people  

 Confirmed ability in the application of the gender approach in Sub-Saharan 
African rural and urban areas. Specific knowledge of Gabon would be an 

advantage 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written), and 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, 
Internet). 

 



 

XXXIII 

 

Expert in Rural Development and Organizations 

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in social sciences, 
or equivalent degree  

 At least 10 years’ confirmed experience in the promotion of rural institutions 
(cooperatives, associations, etc.), local development and support to the 

development of rural communities 

 Confirmed ability to handle land tenure and regional development issues in Sub-
Saharan Africa; specific knowledge of Gabon would be an advantage 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written), and 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, and 
Internet). 

A Private Sector and Business Environment Expert 

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in economics, 
preferably in financial management or an equivalent degree  

 At least 10 years’ experience  in SME promotion and financial inclusion 

 Sound knowledge of private sector development challenges in Sub-Saharan 
Africa; specific knowledge of Gabon will be an advantage 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written), and 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook and 
Internet). 

PPP Specialist 

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in  Law or 
equivalent degree 

 At least 10 years’ experience of the legal and institutional issues necessary to set 
up PPP models linked to the management of agri-hubs and EEC 

 Ability to establish the legal and institutional framework necessary for this type of 
institution using a public-private partnership-based system of management 

 Sound knowledge of private sector development challenges in Sub-Saharan 
Africa; specific knowledge of Gabon will be an advantage 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written), and 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook and 
Internet). 

Micro-Finance Expert 

 Post-graduate diploma or degree (Bac+5 [Master’s equivalent]) in economics, 
agricultural economics or equivalent degree 

 At least 10 years’ experience in the micro-finance sector in the management of 
micro-finance institutions 

 Confirmed knowledge of the setting up and financing of micro-projects and small-
scale enterprise initiatives in the agriculture and agribusiness sector; experience in 

Sub-Saharan Africa and, more specifically, in Gabon will be an advantage 



 

XXXIV 

 

 Capacity for analysis, synthesis and communication (oral and written), and 

 Proficiency in basic computer software (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook and 
Internet) 

 Fluency in French. 

   



Annex V 

XXXV 

XXXV 

 

Year Gabon Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2016 268 30 067 94 638 36 907
Total Population (millions) 2016 1,8 1 214,4 3 010,9 1 407,8
Urban Population (% of Total) 2016 88,8 40,1 41,6 80,6
Population Density  (per Km²) 2016 6,8 41,3 67,7 25,6
GNI per Capita (US $) 2014 9 450 2 045 4 226 38 317
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2016 49,2 65,6 63,9 60,3
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2016 40,3 55,6 49,9 52,1
Gender -Related Dev elopment Index  Value 2007-2013 0,748 0,801 0,506 0,792
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 187 countries) 2014 110 ... ... ...
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2008-2013 8,0 42,7 14,9 ...

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2016 2,2 2,5 1,9 0,4
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2016 2,5 3,6 2,9 0,8
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2016 37,0 40,9 28,0 17,2
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2016 5,1 3,5 6,6 16,6
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2016 72,6 79,9 52,9 51,2
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2016 102,4 100,2 103,0 97,6
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2016 24,3 24,0 25,7 22,8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2016 65,4 61,5 66,2 79,4
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2016 66,2 63,0 68,0 82,4
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2016 29,2 34,4 27,0 11,6
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2016 8,2 9,1 7,9 9,1
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 36,1 52,2 35,2 5,8
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 50,8 75,5 47,3 6,8
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2016 3,8 4,5 3,5 1,8
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 291,0 495,0 238,0 10,0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2016 35,1 31,0 ... ...

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 29,2 47,9 123,8 292,3
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 501,7 135,4 220,0 859,8
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2015 87,1 53,2 68,5 ...
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 93,2 71,6 89,3 99,5
Healthy  life ex pectancy  at birth (y ears) 2013 57,2 54,0 57 68,0
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 41,9 39,4 61,2 99,4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2014 3,9 3,8 ... ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2014 444,0 245,9 160,0 21,0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2014 91,0 84,1 90,0 ...
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2014 61,0 76,0 83,5 93,7
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2014 6,5 18,1 16,2 1,1
Daily  Calorie Supply  per Capita 2011 2 781 2 621 2 335 3 503
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2013 2,4 2,6 3,0 7,7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2015 142,0 100,5 104,7 102,4
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2015 139,9 97,1 102,9 102,2
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2015 53,3 50,9 57,8 105,3
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2015 44,7 48,5 55,7 105,3
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2015 52,9 47,6 50,6 82,2
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2015 83,2 66,8 70,5 98,6
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2015 85,3 74,3 77,3 98,9
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2015 81,1 59,4 64,0 98,4
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2014 3,8 5,0 4,2 4,8

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2013 1,3 8,6 11,9 9,4
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2013 20,0 43,2 43,4 30,0
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2013 87,7 23,3 28,0 34,5
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2012 3,4 1,1 3,0 11,6

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Gabon

August 2016

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

G ab on A fr i ca

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

GNI Per Capita US $

G ab on A fr i ca

0,0

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

3,0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Population Growth Rate (%)

G abo n A fr ic a

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

G ab on A fr i ca



Annex VI 
 

XXXVI 

 

REPUBLIC OF GABON 

Preparation Study for the Project to Support the Agricultural Transformation Strategy and 

the Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 

 

DETAILED STUDY COSTS 

 

 
 

 

Total L.C. F.E Total ADB GVT Total ADB GVT

Component A: Conduct of S tudy

1-Organization of S tudy

Study  launching Unit 1 10 000 10 000 7 000 3 000 10 000 10 000 8 225 8 225 0

Validation of 1st Phase of Study  Unit 1 10 000 10 000 7 000 3 000 10 000 10 000 8 225 8 225 0

Validation of 2nd Phase of Study Unit 1 10 000 10 000 7 000 3 000 10 000 10 000 8 225 8 225 0

S /Total 1 30 000 21 000 9 000 30 000 30 000 0 24 674 24 674 0

2-Technical Assistance/Consulting Firm

2-1-International Expertise 

Key Personnel

Agricultural Economist -M ission Leader PM 8,0 11 000 88 000 13 200 74 800 88 000 88 000 72 376 72 376 0

Agronomist PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Agricultural Vocational Training Exp ert PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Agribusiness Engineer PM 2,5 8 500 21 250 3 188 18 063 21 250 21 250 17 477 17 477 0

Social Economist (lcoal develop ment) PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Sp ecialist in Value Chain Dev. and M arket Analy sis PM 3,0 8 500 25 500 3 825 21 675 25 500 25 500 20 973 20 973 0

Financial Analy st PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Civil Engineer/Architect PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Rural Engineer PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

M icrofinance Sp ecialist PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Gender Exp ert PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Private Sector and Business Exp ert PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Sp ecialist in setting up  PPP PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Rural Organizaton Develop ment Exp ert PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

Environmentalist PM 2,5 8 500 21 250 3 188 18 063 21 250 21 250 17 477 17 477 0

Business Lay er/Legal Exp ert PM 2,0 8 500 17 000 2 550 14 450 17 000 17 000 13 982 13 982 0

S upport Personnel

Field Coordination PM 2,0 6 500 13 000 1 950 11 050 13 000 13 000 10 692 10 692 0

Communication Sp ecialist PM 2,0 5 000 10 000 1 500 8 500 10 000 10 000 8 225 8 225 0

Grap hics Designer PM 2,0 4 000 8 000 1 200 6 800 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Secretary PM 8,0 500 4 000 600 3 400 4 000 4 000 3 290 3 290 0

2-2-National Expertise (counterparts)

Value Chain Develop ment Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Agribusiness Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Rural Engineering Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Agricultural Entrep reneurship  Develop ment Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Institutional and Governance Asp ects Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Rural Institution Develop ment Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

Gender/Communication Counterp art PM 8,0 1 000 8 000 3 600 4 400 8 000 8 000 6 580 6 580 0

2-3-S pecific ExpertiseBaseline Situation and M onitoring-Evaluation 

Sy stem Lump sum 1,0 70 000 70 000 28 000 42 000 70 000 70 000 57 572 57 572 0

Procedures M anual and Accounting Sy stem Unit 1 50 000 50 000 20 000 30 000 50 000 50 000 41 123 41 123 0

2-4-Reimbursable Costs

Air Tickets for International Exp erts Unit 20 1 400 28 000 5 600 22 400 28 000 28 000 23 029 23 029 0

Per Diem for International Exp erts. p ers/day 500 200 100 000 30 000 70 000 100 000 100 000 82 246 82 246 0

Per Diem for National Exp erts p ers/day 420 140 58 800 26 460 32 340 58 800 58 800 48 361 48 361 0

Local Transp ort Lump sum 1 30 000 30 000 24 000 6 000 30 000 30 000 24 674 24 674 0

M isc. Costs (vaccination+others) Lump sum 1 4 000 4 000 400 3 600 4 000 4 000 3 290 3 290 0

Communication costs (internet, telep hone, etc.) Lump sum 1 5 000 5 000 3 500 1 500 5 000 5 000 4 112 4 112 0

Rental of Offices Lump sum/month6 4 000 24 000 21 600 2 400 24 000 24 000 19 739 19 739 0

Rep ort Rep roduction and Data Acquisition Lump sum 1 10 000 10 000 8 000 2 000 10 000 10 000 8 225 8 225 0

S /Total 2 830 800 252 010 578 790 830 800 830 800 0 683 299 683 299 0

DETAILED COSTS OF PASTA-PEJA PROJECT SUPPORT STUDIES

Cost in CFAF 1000
Unit 

Price 

(UA)UnitHeadings
Qty.

UA COS TUA Cost



Annex VI 
 

XXXVII 

 

 
 

 

Component B: Capacity Building 

3-IT and Office Equipment

Comp uters Unit 7 1 000 7 000 2 100 4 900 7 000 7 000 5 757 5 757 0

Office Furniture Lot 7 1 500 10 500 5 250 5 250 10 500 10 500 8 636 8 636 0

Scanner Unit 1 600 600 270 330 600 600 493 493 0

Printer Unit 1 700 700 315 385 700 700 576 576 0

M ulitmedia Projector Unit 1 1 300 1 300 585 715 1 300 1 300 1 069 1 069 0

Photocop ier for medium p rint runs Unit 1 5 000 5 000 2 250 2 750 5 000 5 000 4 112 4 112 0

Other Sup p lies (software, etc.) Lump sum 1 3 000 3 000 1 800 1 200 3 000 3 000 2 467 2 467 0

S /Total 3 28 100 12 570 15 530 28 100 28 100 0 23 111 23 111 0

Component C: S tudy Management and Coordination

4-1-S ervices

Final Study  Audit Lump sum 1 15 000 15 000 4 500 10 500 15 000 15 000 0 12 337 12 337 0

S /Total 4-1 15 000 4 500 10 500 15 000 15 000 0 12 337 12 337 0

4-2-Fonctionnement

Rental of Offices Lump sum/mois 18 4 000 72 000 72 000 0 72 000 0 72 000 59 217 0 59 217

Salaries

         Coordinator p ers/month 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

        Procurement Exp erts and Accountant p ers/month 36 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         Secretary p ers/month 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

       Drivers p ers/month 24 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         External M onitoring Officer p ers/month 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         External Counterp arts p ers/month 56 750 42 000 42 000 0 42 000 0 42 000 34 543 0 34 543

Allowances for Unit Personnel (*)

         Coordinator p ers/month 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         Procurement Exp erts and Accountant p ers/month 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         Secretary p ers/month 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

         Drivers p ers/month 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

        External M onitoring Officer p ers/month 12 500 6 000 1 200 4 800 6 000 6 000 0 4 935 4 935 0

Exp enses for travel to field locations Lump sum 8 2 000 16 000 11 200 4 800 16 000 16 000 0 13 159 13 159 0

Other Op erating Costs Lump sum/mois 8 1 000 8 000 3 200 4 800 8 000 8 000 0 6 580 6 580 0

S /Total 4-2 144 000 129 600 14 400 144 000 30 000 114 000 118 434 24 674 93 760

4-3-S tudy Coordination

Steering Committee M eeting Exp enses meeting 2 5 000 10 000 8 000 2 000 10 000 10 000 0 8 225 8 225 0

S /Total 4-3 10 000 8 000 2 000 10 000 10 000 0 8 225 8 225 0

Base Cost 1 057 900 427 680 630 220 1 057 900 943 900 114 000 870 079 776 319 93 760

Phy sical Contingencies 21 158 8 554 12 604 21 158 18 878 2 280 17 402 15 526 1 875

Financial Contingencies 31 737 12 695 19 042 31 737 28 317 3 420 26 102 23 290 2 813

Total Cost of S tudy 1 110 795 448 928 661 867 1 110 795 991 095 119 700 913 583 815 135 98 448

*P IU: T his concerns t he coordinat or, account ant , procurement  expert , secret ary and 2 drivers. Allowances for t he members of t he Coordinat ion Unit  are already t aken int o account  under t he P AP G.2 st udy



Annex VII 
 

XXXVIII 

 

Political Map of Gabon 

 

 



















































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK


 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

GHANA 

 

 
SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (SAPIP) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHAI/PGCL DEPARTMENTS 

December 2017 

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

 P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

P
u

b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

  

 



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

Currency Equivalents, Fiscal Year, Weights and Measures, Acronyms and  

Abbreviations, Loan/Grant Information, Programme Summary, 

Result-Based Logical Framework, Project Timeframe i – vii 

 
I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE .......................................................................... 1 

1.1.  Programme linkages with country strategy and objectives ....................................... 1 
1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement ............................................................................. 2 

1.3. Donors’ coordination ................................................................................................. 3 
 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 4 
2.1 Project Objectives ...................................................................................................... 4 
2.2 Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored .................................... 6 

2.3 Project type ................................................................................................................ 6 

2.4  Programme cost and financing arrangements ............................................................ 6 
2.5 Programme’s target area and population ................................................................... 8 

2.6 Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation ..... 9 
2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the programme design ........................ 9 
2.8 Key performance indicators .................................................................................... 10 

 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY ................................................................................................ 11 
3.1. Financial and economic performance ........................................................................ 11 

3.2. Environmental and social impacts ........................................................................... 11 
 

IV IMPLEMENTATION ....................................................................................................... 15 
4.1. Implementation arrangements ................................................................................. 15 
4.2 Monitoring ............................................................................................................... 17 

4.3. Governance .............................................................................................................. 18 

4.4. Sustainability ........................................................................................................... 18 
4.5 Risk management .................................................................................................... 18 
4.6 Knowledge Building ................................................................................................ 19 

 

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY .............................................................. 19 
5.1.  Legal instrument ...................................................................................................... 19 
5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank Group intervention ............................................. 19 
5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies ............................................................................... 20 

 

VI – RECOMMENDATION ................................................................................................. 20 

 
Annex I : Country Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators 

Annex II : Organizational Structure for Project Implementation 

Annex III : Bank Portfolio in the Country 

Annex IV : Map of Project Areas 

Annex V : Procurement Arrangement 



 

i 

Currency Equivalents 
 

September 2017 
 

                    1 UA  = GHS 6.16 

                    1 USD  = GHS 4.36 

                    1 UA  = USD 1.40 

 

 

Fiscal Year 
1st January – 31st December 

 

 

Weights and Measures 

 
                  1 metric tonne  = 2,204 pounds (lbs) 

                  1 kilogramme (kg)  = 2.200 lbs 

                  1 metre (m)   = 3.28 feet (ft) 

                  1 millimetre (mm)  = 0.03937 inch (") 

                  1 kilometre (km)  = 0.62 mile 

                  1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 

 



 

ii 

Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 
ADF African Development Fund 

AFD L'Agence française de développement 

AGRA Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa 

CGIAR  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 

CRI Crop Research Institute 
CSP Country Strategy Paper 

DA District Assembly 

DFID Department for International Development 
DVCC Divisional Value Chain Committee 

EA Executing Agency 

EIA Environmental Impact Assessment 

EIRR Economic Internal Rate of Return 

EPA Environmental Protection Authority 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 

GHS Ghana Cedi 

GPRS-I Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy-Phase I 

GPRS-II Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy-Phase II 

GSGDA Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 

IITA International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 

JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
METASIP Medium Term Agriculture Sector Investment Plan 

MLGRD Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 

MoFA Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

NEPAD New Partnership for Africa’s Development 

NPV Net Present Value 

NRGP Northern Rural Growth Programme 

NSEZ Northern Savannah Ecological Zone 

PCMU Programme Co-ordination and Management Unit 

PFJ Planting for Food and Jobs 

PSC Programme Steering Committee 

SAZAPIP Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

SME Small and Medium Enterprise 

SNV  Stichting Nederlandse Vrijwilligers (Netherlands Development Organisation) 

SSE Small Scale Enterprise 

TASI Transformation of African Savannah Initiative 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

UA Unit of Account 

WFP World Food Program 



 

iii 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

(SAZAPIP) aims at transforming agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job 

and wealth creation in the Northern Savannah Zone of Ghana. The project will increase farmers’ 

food and nutrition security and incomes through increased agricultural productivity and 

diversification; and enhance the creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase 

incomes of actors along selected value chains on a sustainable basis. The project has four 

Components: (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value Chains & Agribusiness 

Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Coordination, Management, 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project will be implemented over a five-year period (2018 – 

2023) at a total cost of UA 40.38 million. 

 
Needs Assessment: The Savannah Zone holds major agricultural promise that when harnessed 

will transform the lives of the zone's inhabitants quite significantly, yet the zone constitutes the 

poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double the national 

average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological conditions, 

low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in infrastructure and 

services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for Ghana’s balance 

of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition security, job 

creation and poverty reduction. 

 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed SAZAPIP will contribute 

towards the High 5 goals of the Bank Group. The project fits with the two key pillars of the 

draft Bank Group Country Strategy Paper (CSP) (2017-2021) for Ghana namely: (i) Agriculture 

Enhancing Inclusive Growth and Economic Development; and (ii) Support to Industrialization 

through Private Sector Development. The Bank Group has a comparative advantage in 

supporting the agriculture value chains development activities that will transform the 

impoverished rural areas of the northern part of the country into zones of economic prosperity 

drawing on lessons from experiences gained from previous projects financed by the Bank in 

Ghana. The project will also leverage on the complementary Ghana Incentive Based Risk 

Sharing for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established by the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture as well as the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded Rural 

Enterprises Project (REP).  
 

Knowledge Management: Knowledge will be captured through the establishment of a 

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system by the project.  The M&E system will coordinate all 

results and measurement activities, ensure the quality control and provide the necessary 

capacity building. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-based 

framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect advancement towards the 

translation of outputs into development outcomes. Data for analysis will be captured from the 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and 

field exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge will be generated by the pilot 

demonstration plots to form the basis for private sector investment in the agribusiness in the 

ecological zone as part of TASI. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution 

by showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short 

documentaries on Bank website, etc.). 

 



 

iv 

Loan information 

Client’s information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

RECIPIENT :  Republic of Ghana 

EXECUTING AGENCY :              Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

Financing plan 

Source 

 

Amount (million) 

 
Instrument 

UA USD 
African Development Fund (ADF) 27.86 39.01 Loan 

Government of Ghana (GoG)   6.50 9.10 Counterpart  

Beneficiaries    6.01 8.42 Beneficiary 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 40.38 56.53 - 

 

ADF’s key financing information (to be determined at loan negotiations) 

 
Loan currency UA 

Interest type*  

Interest rate spread*  

Tenure  

Grace period  

Commitment fee  

Other fees  

       *if applicable 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Identification Mission May, 2017 

Preparation Mission August 2017 

Concept Note Approval September, 2017 

Appraisal Mission September, 2017 

Programme approval 15 December, 2017 

Effectiveness 15 January, 2018 

Completion 31 December 2022 

Last Disbursement 31 March, 2023 

 

  



 

v 

Ghana: Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Result-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) 

Country and project name: Ghana : Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Purpose of the project:  To transform agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation. 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2023) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Jobs and wealth are generated along the value 

chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is enhanced 

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.1   Increased domestic food supply for key commodities (rice, maize, 

soybean and vegetables,)  

2.2. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting   

1. n.a  

2. n.a  

3. 33% 

1. 20,000 (50% women; 20% youth) 

2. 600,000 mt. 

3. 40% reduction in the number of stunted 

children under five 

MoFA reports, Project Reports 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 1. Additional household incomes  USD500 p.a. 

 

USD3,000 p.a. Project Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

  

2. Increased minimum diet diversity  2. % of children 6-23 mths consumed more than 4 food groups 33.3% 50% UNICEF/MOH data Risk 1: Slow economic 

growth and deterioration 

of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to 

fall in cocoa and other 

commodity prices.  

 
Mitigation 1:  The Bank 

will intensify the 

dialogue with the 

government to adopt 

supportive macro-

economic policies to 

rationalize fiscal 

expenditure. 
 

3. Productivity and diversification Improved 

 

3.1 Quantity (mt) of crops produced:                   1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Maize 

                                                                              3. Soybean 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

283,109 mt 

85,000 mt 

80,000 mt 

30,000  

350,000 mt 

150,000 mt 

140,000 mt 

  60,000 mt 

Projects Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

3.2 Crop yield (t/ha)                                             1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Soybean 
                                                                              3. Maize 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

2 

1.65 
2.5 

n.a 

6 

3.0 
6 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 
Household surveys 

 

4. Increased private sector investment in 

priority value chains 

4.1 Domestic and foreign investment (USD) in: 1. Rice 

                                                                             2. Maize 

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

USD120 million 

USD40 million 

USD60 million 

tbd 

MoFA reports, Ghana Investment 

Promotion Centre reports 

 OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1:  Crop Productivity Improvement 

1. Improved seeds production 1.1 Quantity of breeder seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

16 

71 

n.a 

n.a 

250 

1,500  

tbd 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

 

 

Risk 2:  The proposed 

project area is prone to 

climate change impacts 

 

Mitigation 2:  ESMPs 
will incorporate 

integrated pest 
management plans and 

climate risk mitigation 

and adaptation measures. 
  

1.2 Volume of foundation seeds produced (mt): 1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

Rice – 96 
Maize – 120 

Soybean - 140  

Vegetables n.a 

Rice – 5,400 
Maize – 4,000 

Soybean - 4,000 

Vegetables 150 

1.3 Volume of certified seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  

                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

578  

80,000 

213 

n.a 

28,100 

350,000 

4,250 

 tbd 

2. Mechanization along the value chains 
(segments of value chains mechanized) 

2.1 Mechanized land preparation (ha) 120 10,000   

2.2 Mechanized crop husbandry practices  (ha) 200 10,000  

2.3 Mechanized harvesting (ha) 150 10,000  

3. Crop nutrition enhanced 3.1 Area of land with soils tested for fertility; 0 10,000   



 

vi 

 

 

 

3.2 % of farmers using recommended fertilizer blends. 0 70%  

4. Nutrition Promotion activities implemented 4.1 % of households reached on Nutrition activities 0 80%   

5. Introduction and deployment of new yield 
enhancing technologies  

6. Demonstration of climate smart agriculture 
principles 

5.1 Establishment of 3, 20-ha demonstration plots  

5.2 Training of extension agents in new approaches to crop production 

5.3 Training in conservation agriculture, zero tillage  

2.5 mt/ha of maize and 

1 mt/ha of soybean 

 
0 

6 mt/ha of maize; 3 mt/ha soybean 

3, 20-ha demonstration trials established 

200 extension agents trained 
6 

MoFA reports, 

Program reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports 

 

Component 2:   Commodity Value Chains Development 

7. Rice processing zone development 6. No of processing zones developed - 1 Projects reports, MoFA reports, 
Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 
Monitoring reports 

Supervision records 

 

 

8. Enhanced capacity of commodity value 
chain actors 

9. Private sector investment  

7.1 No. of value chain development platforms created/strengthened. 2 10  

7.2  No of value chain actors trained 0 20,000 

 

7.3 Percentage of outgrower contracts executed effectively 

8.1 No. of private sector investments attracted to the ecological zone  

8.2 Innovation Platforms established 

0 

0 

0 

80% 

3 

1 

 Component 3:   Infrastructure Development 

 

10. Rehabilitate and expand existing seed 
processing and storage facilities. 

9.1 No of seed processing and storage centres rehabilitated 

9.2 No. of seed processing and storage centres constructed for research 

institutions 

0 

 

0 

4 

 

2 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 
Program reports 

Supervision records 

  

 11. Rehabilitation of road infrastructure  10.1 Length of feeder roads rehabilitated (km) 0 100 

 

12. Area of agriculture water management 
schemes rehabilitated / constructed 

11. Area of land under irrigation (ha)   

improved field water management systems 

2,000 10,000 

 13. Rehabilitation of warehouses 12. No of warehouses rehabilitated 0 12   

 14. E-agriculture. 13.1 National E-agriculture system strengthened 
13.2 No of farmers registered and placed on platform 

0 

20,000 

1 

500,000 

  

 Component 4:    Program Management/ Monitoring & Evaluation  

 15. Work plan and operations are implemented 14.1 Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 
14.2  Development & implementation of the site-specific ESMPs 

0 

0 

100% 

100% 

Program agreements, funding documents 

Supervision mission Financial 

management reports M&E reports 

 

 16. Program activities monitored and 
information produced regularly 

15.1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 0 20 

 

15.2 No. of audit reports produced annually 

15.3 No. of monitoring visits conducted by MOFA/MOF headoffice 

15.4 No. of NPSC meetings held 

0 

0 

0 

5 

10 

1 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS     SOURCES OF 

FINANCE 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Crop Productivity Improvement 

Improved seeds production; Build capacity for rice and maize seed inspection and certification; Develop an efficient system of production, storage and distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed; mechanization along the 

production chains; Soil fertility management; and nutrition promotion.  Introduction and demonstration of modern technologies to increase maize and soybean production and dissemination to these technologies to commercial, 

smallholder, and youth farmers 

 

Total Project Cost  

(UA million) :   40.38 

ADF Loan     :   27.86 
 

Other sources 

GoG               :    6.50  

Beneficiaries  :    6.01 

Component 1 :  28.64 

Component 2 :    2.97 

Component 3 :    7.33 

Component 4 :    1.43 

Component 2: Value Chains Development 

Maize and rice processing zone development; Support existing aggregation/marketing centres equipped with drying floors, and storage facilities; training entrepreneurship and business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; Number of Value Chain Development Platforms created / strengthened; Percentage of contracts executed effectively. 

Component 3: Infrastructure Development 
Rehabilitation of transport infrastructure (feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure; Rehabilitation of warehouses; and E-agriculture; 

Rehabilitate and expand existing storage facilities for seed. 

Component 4: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; development and implementation of site specific ESMPs; development of a results based framework for M&E; and procurement, 

disbursement and audit functions. 



 

vii 

 

Programme Timeframe 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                      

Board approval                      

Signature of Loan and Grant Agreement                      

Appointing remaining PCMU team members                      

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement                      

Programme launch                      

Finalization and validation of procedures manuals                       

Conducting baseline studies                      

Preparing, signing agreement/protocols with implementing partners                      

Prepare, approve Bid docs and contract awards for Goods, Works & Services                      

Contracts execution for Goods, Works and Services                      

Quarterly reports submission                      

Annual reports submission                      

Programme Work plans and Budgets                        

Steering committee meetings                      

Bank’s supervision missions                      

Audit                      

Mid-term review                      

Programme Completion Reporting                       

Impact assessment and technical audit                      

 

 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT FOR THE PROPOSED 

ADF LOAN OF UA 27.86 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA FOR THE 

FINANCING OF THE SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT  

 

Management submits the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan of UA 27.86 

million to finance the Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project in Ghana. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1.  Programme linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP) is 

designed within the context of the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II” 

(GSGDA II). The underlying theme of the GSGDA II is socio-economic transformation, which 

involves a change in the structure and composition of the national output in ways that enhance 

broad-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. It stimulates the innovative process of 

production through skills and technological upgrading; enhancing the competitiveness of 

industry and trade; lifting workers from low-productive agriculture to higher productive 

activities; and putting the economy on a growth path that creates jobs, opens up decent work 

opportunities for all, alleviates poverty and reduces income and social inequalities.  

1.1.2 It is guided by country’s Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy 

(FASDEP) which has the following as its pillars: (i) Food Security and Emergency 

Preparedness; (ii) Increased Growth in Incomes and Reduced Income Variability; (iii) Increased 

Competitiveness and Enhanced Integration into Domestic and International Markets;  (iv) 

Sustainable Management of Land and Environment; (v) Science and Technology Applied in 

Food and Agriculture Development; and (vi) Improved Institutional Coordination. The 

FASDEP anchors on sub-sector policies including the Crop Development Policy; Cocoa 

Strategy; Livestock Development Policy; Fisheries Policy and Policies for Services Delivery 

(Extension. Irrigation, Plant Protection, Agricultural Mechanization). 

1.1.3 The Government has targeted enhancing agricultural productivity and production 

through its Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) Campaign. The major interventions under the 

PFJ are organized around the following five pillars: (i) Seed: The program will catalyse market-

led production of adequate quantities of quality seeds by private enterprises; (ii) Fertilizer: 

Private companies engaged in fertilizer production/blending and importation will be facilitated 

in meeting the fertilizer demands of the beneficiary farmers; (iii) Extension Services: In 

partnerships with the local governments and private inputs and service providers, the extension 

services will provide reliable and programmed technical assistance to beneficiaries; (iv) 

Marketing: It is envisaged that the facilitation of increased uptake of inputs will lead to 

increase in production of the targeted crops by the provision of storage warehouses; and (v) E-

Agriculture: The PFJ Campaign will profile the beneficiaries by e-registering them and 

developing a state-of-art information and communication technology (ICT) platform. 

1.1.4 While the PFJ Campaign is a nationwide program, the SAZAPIP will focus on three of 

the six agri-business clusters of the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone (NSEZ). The NSEZ 

constitutes the poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double 

the national average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological 

conditions, low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in 

infrastructure and services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for 



 

2 

Ghana’s balance of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition 

security, job creation and poverty reduction.  

 

1.1.5 The Project is anchored in the PFJ Campaign of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

as well as the One District One Factory (1D1F) initiative of the Government of Ghana. The PFJ 

Campaign seeks to enhance agricultural production while the 1D1F looks at agro-industrial 

development aspects of the project. The Project will target four (i, ii, iv and v) of the above 

mentioned pillars and thereby contribute to the High-5 priorities that are crucial for accelerating 

Africa’s economic transformation: Feed Africa; Industrialize Africa; and Improve the quality 

of life for the people of Africa. It will particularly contribute to the Feed Africa priority which 

focuses on transformation, scaling up agriculture as a business through value addition, led by 

the private sector and enabled by the Government. It will concentrate on one of the eight 

identified Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) under TAAT - Transforming African Savannahs into 

breadbaskets and promote four of the 18 identified priority commodity value chains – rice, 

maize, soybean and vegetables. In line with the Feed Africa Strategy’s focus on priority value 

chains, the project will contribute towards the Transformation of the African Savannah 

Initiative (TASI) by serving as a precursor pilot project for proven technologies and knowledge. 

Details of TASI are in Section C6 of the Technical Annexes.  

 

1.1.6 The Bank has a comparative advantage in supporting the agriculture value chains 

development activities that will transform the impoverished rural areas of the northern part of 

the country into zones of economic prosperity with attendant benefits of employment and social 

development. This Project will achieve this by creating strategic, competitive agribusinesses 

around rice, maize, soybean and vegetable value chains that are widely produced in the northern 

parts of the country. The Project will consolidate the gains made through various previous Bank 

interventions such as the Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP), Fufulso-Sawla and 

Techiman - Kintampo Roads Project; optimise on the usage of infrastructure that were 

constructed in those interventions; and leverage on private sector investment to the 

establishment of a rice processing zone around Tamale and commercial farming in the Northern 

Savanna – the RMG projects in Yagaba and Babato.  

 

1.1.7 SAZAPIP is aligned to 2012-2017 Ghana Country Strategy Paper (CSP) which has been 

extended to December 2018. The strategy has two pillars namely: (i) Support for infrastructure 

development; and (ii) Support for improved governance and accountability. During the CSP 

extension period, the Bank will focus on developing and supporting priority skills for industry, 

improving access to sanitation and providing diverse opportunities for rural employment and 

income generation for a more equitable growth. Over the CSP extension period, the Bank will 

meet this objective through the implementation of the Development of Skills for Industry 

Project, and the Greater Accra Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project. 

Other projects that are envisaged to support this objective include: the Savannah Zone 

Agriculture Productivity Improvement Project and the Establishment of Ghana Incentive-Based 

Risk Sharing for Agriculture Lending.  

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The project has a great potential in contributing to the twin objectives of the Bank’s 10-

Year Strategy (TYS). It contributes to inclusive growth across geographical locations, age and 

gender in that the major interventions of the project are concentrated in commodity value chain 

intervention in the NSEZ where poverty is highest in the country and youth and women agri-

preneurs are targeted by the project. 



 

3 

1.2.2 The project will enhance agriculture transformation through increased productivity of 

rice, maize, soybean and vegetables; and investment in both hard infrastructure (seed processing 

and storage, irrigation, produce warehouses and feeder roads); as well as soft infrastructure 

(farmer e-registration and e-agriculture). The project will also leverage on the complementary 

innovative agricultural financing mechanisms (the Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established with the assistance of the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture in the savannah zone of Ghana. Furthermore, the project will provide 

entrepreneurship and business management training to value chain actors in order for them to 

be eligible to assess resources in the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded 

Rural Enterprises Project (REP).  

1.3. Donors’ coordination 

1.3.1 The key development partners that are active in the sector are: L'Agence française de 

développement (AFD); Department for International Development (DFID); Global Affairs 

Canada; European Union; German Dev. Co-op (KfW Development Bank and GiZ); 

Netherlands Embassy; Australian High Commission; JICA; USAID and World Bank; UN 

Agencies (IFAD, FAO and WFP). Others are IFPRI, AGRA and international NGOs such as 

SNV and Catholic Relief Services. Donor activities cuts across ranges mostly targets various 

commodity value chains development, productivity enhancement, agricultural production and 

processing infrastructure development, mechanization, irrigation, sustainable land 

management, climate change adaptation and mitigation, nutrition, food safety, MSE and 

agribusiness development, access to finance, access to land and ICT for agriculture.  

 

1.3.2 Donor coordination mechanisms for the Agriculture Sector in Ghana are effective. 

Coordination under the Agriculture Sector Working Group (ASWG) began in 2002 and 

provides a platform for sharing information on ongoing and planned future activities with the 

aim of harmonizing interventions. The group holds annual joint sector reviews where donors, 

Government, implementation partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private 

sector review the performance of the sector to inform planning and decision making. The 

ASWG is an open group of donors; quasi donors; implementers including NGOs, CSOs, private 

sector, etc.; and Government Ministries.  

 

1.3.3 Key on-going/pipeline interventions by donors include a EUR160 million support for 

productive investment for sustainable agriculture development capacity building of 

decentralized institutions and community development in the part of the SADA Zone. The 

Government of Canada is also supporting the sector with a CAD125 million facility for 

Modernizing Agriculture in Ghana (MAG). IFAD has provided USD71.60 million as loan for 

sustainable rural poverty reduction in rural areas and a grant of USD10.0 million to mitigate 

the effects of climate change. The Bank has successfully co-financed projects in the sector with 

other donors. Notable among these is the just ended Northern Rural Growth Program and the 

on-going Rural Enterprises Program which were/are both co-financed with IFAD. A matrix of 

interventions by donors is presented in Annex A1 of the Technical Annexes. The coordination 

of aid through the ASWG is enhancing aid effectiveness through harmonization and alignment 

of development partner support.  

 

 



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives 

2.1.1 Project development goal: The development objective of the project is to transform 

agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

2.1.2 Specific project objectives: To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and 

incomes through increased agricultural productivity and diversification; and enhance the 

creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase incomes of actors along selected value 

chains on a sustainable basis. 

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The project will have four Components. (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value 

Chains & Agribusiness Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project 

Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The summary of activities are 

indicated in Table 2.1 below. 

 

Component 1 – Crop Productivity Improvement: This component will seek to increase the crop 

productivity through the use of improved and more nutritious seed varieties. The project will 

assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt productivity– improving 

technologies such as soil fertility interventions, mechanization, and extension services. 

Nutrition promotion activities will be implemented in order to promote dietary diversity, and 

in particular to increase consumption of vegetables in the project area. Infrastructure of the 

decrepit national seed production centers will be renovated, equipped with modern machinery 

and supported to ensure national self-sufficiency in breeder, foundation and certified seeds 

production for strategic commodities. Essential expected outcomes under this component will 

be disseminating technologies selected under the Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) for the target commodities. These technologies will be complemented 

by other proven technologies within the TASI framework. Demonstration of high gross margin 

crop production technology and conservation agriculture will also be carried out at four selected 

locations. Private and public sector extension agents, commercial farmers, and young farmers 

will also be trained in the new maize and soybean production technologies. 

 

Component 2: Value Chain and Agribusiness Development: The objective of this component 

is to set up sustainable agribusinesses along the commodity value chains by entrepreneurship 

training to value chain actors. It will further strengthen the local governance structures such as 

the District Value Chain Committees (DVCCs), which is an innovative concept that links 

farmers to value chain’s actors to more ably participate in the ownership and management of 

facilities that will be set up. It will orchestrate linkages to other flagship programmes of the 

Bank particularly the on-going ENABLE Youth Program in the Rural Enterprises Program and 

the up-coming Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) through Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL and facilitation of the establishment of an Innovation Platform.  

This component will ultimately contribute to the achievement of the Government flagship 

program of 1D1F as it will promote private sector investments in the Project operational area. 

 

Component 3:  The infrastructure development component will provide for both hard and soft 

infrastructure. The hard infrastructure will include: (i) Development of Transport Infrastructure 

(feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); (ii) Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; (iii) 

Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as corporate rural 



 

5 

enterprises; and (iv) Rehabilitation of warehouses. The soft infrastructure will leverage on on-

going e-agriculture activities in the sector to consolidate the various registration of farmers into 

an agriculture sector database for input supply system. 

 

Component 4: The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for the day to 

day management of the project. It will also be responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E), gender equality and women’s empowerment and implementation of the Project 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 
Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 1: Crop 

Productivity 

Improvement 

28.6  (70.9) This component will seek to increase crop productivity through:  

- Development of an efficient system of production, storage and 
distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed  

- Use of improved and more nutritious rice, maize, soybean and 
vegetable seed varieties. 

- Rehabilitate and expand existing seed processing and storage facilities  
- Building capacity for seed inspection and certification; 
- Assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt 

productivity improvement technologies including soil fertility 

interventions, mechanization, and improved extension using DVCC 

as Innovation Platforms.  

- Disseminating technologies selected under the auspices of TAAT, 
some of which will add nutrition value to the crops 

- Introduction and dissemination of complementary high gross margin 
technologies under the TASI Pilot 

- Training of private and public sector extension agents, commercial 
farmers, and youth farmers.  Technical manuals in English and local 

languages describing the new methods will be produced  

- Promotion of community based nutrition promotion activities 
including appropriate Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices, and 

hygiene sensitization through capacity strengthening of the 

Community Health Worker System in the Upper East region 

- Linkage of small holder farmers to the school meal programme,  
nutrition and hygiene education and support in schools through the 

Regional School Health Education Programme and the School Meal 

Programme in the Northern region 

Component 2: 

Value Chain and 

Agribusiness 

Development  

3 (7.4%) The objective of this component is to set up sustainable agribusinesses 

along the rice value chains. This component will: 

- Strengthen the local governance structures (DVCCs) to more ably 
participate in the ownership and management of facilities will be set 

up. 

- register farmers within the project area on the e-registration platform 
and develop database for input supply system 

- Support the establishment of an Innovation Platform, which will work 
to address policy, infrastructure, fiscal and land tenure bottlenecks in 

order to facilitate the flow of private capital into game changing 

agribusiness investments in the region.  

- Provide incentives to crowd in private investments in project area to 
harness the business opportunities enabled through the public 

investments in the area through this and other projects including 

innovative financing (e.g. GIRSAL), infrastructure development 

(roads, power, irrigation etc.), land tenure reforms and others.   



 

6 

Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 3:  

Infrastructure 

Development 

Component 

7.3 (18.2%) The infrastructure development component will consider:  

- Rehabilitation of feeder roads and farm-tracks) 
- Rehabilitation of irrigation canals;  
- Improvement of water harvesting and distribution for lowland rice  
- Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as 

corporate rural enterprises; and 

- Rehabilitation of warehouses.  

Component 4: 

Project 

Management, 

Monitoring & 

Evaluation  

1.4 (3.5%) The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for:  

- the day to day management of the project.  
- M&E,  
- Gender equality and women’s empowerment,  
- Implementation of the Project ESMP 

2.2 Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

2.2.1 Table 2.2 presents design options considered and reasons for their rejection. 

Table 2.2: Project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

2.3 Project type 

This is an investment project financed with an ADF loan. 

2.4  Programme cost and financing arrangements 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at UA40.38 million, net of taxes, and based on 

2017 prices, comprising of UA27.56 million (68%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

UA12.81 million (30%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively.  

 

2.4.2 The project cost of UA40.21 million will be part financed by an ADF loan of UA27.86 

million (69% of project costs) covering all major activities including rehabilitation and 

construction of infrastructure. The Government of Ghana will contribute UA6.5 million (16.1% 

of project costs) through the provision of office space and allied facilities, payment of salaries 

of Government staff attached to the project, and provision of tractors and subsidies on fertilizers 

and seeds. The farmer beneficiaries’ contribution of UA6.0 million (14.9% of project cost) will 

be towards the payment for inputs delivered in the Government subsidy scheme. The summary 

of estimated costs by component and category of expenditure are presented in Tables 2.3 and 

2.4 below. 

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Instrument: Project 

vs. sector budget 

support 

Under sector budget support, resources are disbursed in 

tranches based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector 

fiduciary environment 

was not conclusive and 

had high level of 

uncertainty 

Intervening in other 

value chains including 

livestock. 

Livestock is one of the key value chains that was identified 

in five of the six agribusiness zones. The per-capita 

consumption meat has almost doubled in past 15 years. 

The growth in meat production however lags far behind 

the growth in consumption of meat hence large volumes of 

imported meat.. Livestock development integrates well 

with crops development especially with crops such as 

soybean and maize which are used for livestock feed in 

semi-intensive and intensive production systems 

Budgetary allocation for 

the project cannot 

accommodate the livestock 

intervention. Furthermore, 

livestock is yet to be 

considered a priority 

commodity under the 

Planting for Food and Jobs. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD/UA) 
 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % 

Foreign 

Cost 

% 

Total 

Costs 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost Total Cost 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total 

Cost 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 10,763.83 28,900.31 39,664.14 7,688.45 20,643.08 28,331.53 73 70 

2. Value Chain & Agribusiness 

Development 2,272.49 1,737.47 4,009.96 1,623.21 1,241.05 2,864.26 43 7 

3. Infrastructure Development 3,218.59 6,013.66 9,232.25 2,298.99 4,295.47 6,594.46 65 16 

4. Project Management, M&E 1,247.76 726.74 1,974.50 891.26 519.10 1,410.36 37 4 

Total Baseline Costs 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

Price Contingencies 172.61 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total Project Costs 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68  

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (USD/UA)  
 

CATEGORY 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

%Foreign 

Exchange 

% 

Total  

Costs Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

  I. Investment Costs         

  A. WORKS         

   Construction & Rehabilitation 2,607.87 7,461.53 10,069.40 1,862.77 5,329.66 7,192.43 74 18 

  B. GOODS         

   1. VEHICLES         

    Vehicles 463.75 768.75 1,232.50 331.25 549.11 880.36 62 2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS         

    Equipment 1,130.85 2,199.45 3,330.30 807.75 1,571.04 2,378.79 66 6 

    Furniture 15.85 22.05 37.90 11.32 15.75 27.07 58 - 

    Materials 8,589.92 24,299.25 32,889.17 6,135.66 17,356.61 23,492.27 74 60 

   Subtotal 9,736.62 26,520.75 36,257.37 6,954.73 18,943.39 25,898.12 73 66 

  Subtotal 10,200.37 27,289.50 37,489.87 7,285.98 19,492.50 26,778.48 73 68 

  C. SERVICES         

   
Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 97.38 14.00 111.38 69.55 10.00 79.55 13 - 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,032.15 1,770.85 3,803.00 1,451.54 1,264.89 2,716.43 47 7 

   Contractual Services 1,736.75 454.95 2,191.70 1,240.54 324.96 1,565.50 21 4 

   Audit 91.00 49.00 140.00 65.00 35.00 100.00 35 - 

  Subtotal 3,957.28 2,288.80 6,246.08 2,826.63 1,634.85 4,461.48 37 11 

 Total Investment Costs 16,765.52 37,039.83 53,805.35 11,975.37 26,457.02 38,432.39 69 95 

 II. Recurrent Costs         

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE         

   Vehicles 17.25 40.25 57.50 12.32 28.75 41.07 70 - 

   Infrastructures 162.50 87.50 250.00 116.07 62.50 178.57 35 - 

  Subtotal 179.75 127.75 307.50 128.39 91.25 219.64 42 1 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 557.40 210.60 768.00 398.14 150.43 548.57 27 1 

 Total Recurrent Costs 737.15 338.35 1,075.50 526.53 241.68 768.21 31 2 

Total BASELINE COSTS 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

  Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

  Price Contingencies 172.60 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total PROJECT COSTS 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68 103 

 

 

 



 

8 

2.4.3 The summary of project costs schedule component, source of finance by category of 

expenditure and sources of finance are presented in Tables 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 below. Detailed 

project cost tables are presented in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 
 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA ‘000) 
 
 

Components 
Totals including contingencies 

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 25,419.94 2,960.79 87.22 93.20 77.44 28,638.59 

2. Commodity Value Chain & 

Agribusiness Development 400.00 876.27 883.20 414.29 400.00 2,973.76 

3. Infrastructure Development - 2,718.95 3,124.01 1,399.57 91.08 7,333.61 

4. Project Management, M&E 405.79 290.09 250.80 265.08 218.29 1,430.05 

Total PROJECT COSTS 26,225.73 6,846.10 4,345.23 2,172.14 786.81 40,376.01 

 

Table 2.6 Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (UA ‘000) 

 

Expenditure Category 

ADF 

Loan Government Beneficiaries Total %  

 I. Investment Costs      

  A. WORKS      

   Construction & Rehabilitation 8,086.38 - - 8,086.38 20.0 

  B. GOODS      

   1. VEHICLES      

    Vehicles 438.62 456.98 - 895.60 2.2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS      

    Equipment 2,425.60 - - 2,425.60 6.0 

    Furniture 27.27 - - 27.27 0.1 

    Materials 12,010.60 5,828.93 5,828.93 23,668.46 58.6 

   Subtotal 14,463.47 5,828.93 5,828.93 26,121.33 64.7 

  Subtotal 14,902.10 6,285.90 5,828.93 27,016.93 66.9 

  C. SERVICES      

   

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 79.55 - - 79.55 0.2 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,729.90 - - 2,729.90 6.8 

   Contractual Services 1,583.11 - - 1,583.11 3.9 

   Audit 100.00 - - 100.00 0.2 

  Subtotal 4,492.56 - - 4,492.56 11.1 

 Total Investment Costs 27,481.04 6,285.91 5,828.93 39,595.87 98.1 

 II. Recurrent Costs      

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE      

   Vehicles 41.07 - - 41.07 0.1 

   Infrastructures - - 182.14 182.14 0.5 

  Subtotal 41.07 - 182.14 223.21 0.6 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 342.64 214.29 - 556.93 1.4 

 Total Recurrent Costs 383.71 214.29 182.14 780.14 1.9 

Total PROJECT COSTS 27,864.75 6,500.19 6,011.07 40,376.01 100.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

9 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (UA ‘000) 
 

Sources of finance Foreign Cost Local Cost Total Cost % Total Cost 

 ADF Loan 18,418.01 9,446.74 27,864.75 69.0 

 Government 4,714.42 1,785.77 6,500.19 16.1 

 Beneficiaries 4,435.45 1,575.62 6,011.07 14.9 

Total 27,567.88 12,808.13 40,376.01 100.0 

 

2.4.4 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The ADF loan of UA 27.86 million will 

finance 100% of Works; 55% of Goods and Materials; 100% of Services; and 68% of recurrent 

costs. The loan will finance 67% of foreign costs and 72% of local costs. The Government of 

Ghana does not have the capacity to finance all local costs of the project as a result of the current 

economic hardship and fiscal deficit facing the country. Consequently, local costs have been 

factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.   

2.5 Programme’s target area and population 

The Project will be implemented in three agribusiness zones (1, 2 & 5) defined by SADA 

covering the following towns: Savelugu-Nanton (Nasia/Nabogu); Builsa South 

(Fumbisi/Gbedembilisi); Tolon (Golinga); Kumbungu (Bontanga); West Gonja (Nabori, 

Busumu); and West Mamprusi (Walewale). Additionally, four seed centres at Winneba, Ho, 

Kumasi and Tamale would be rehabilitated. The direct beneficiaries are about 50,000 

economically active smallholders living in the selected agro-processing zones; and the 

processing firms that serve as a direct market for the farmers. The indirect beneficiaries include 

the entire population (consumers) that will benefit from the availability of food and business 

associations who provide services to the producers and processors. This number is expected to 

increase significantly when other economically active value chain entrepreneurs get involved 

in the Project. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop production, 

processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. About 50% of beneficiaries (women) 

will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits. 

2.6 Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation 

The preparation mission had a general consultation and technical working sessions with 

Government personnel and key stakeholder groups in agriculture including development 

partners. The outcome of the discussions was the development of a logical framework for the 

Project and the preparation report that is forming the basis for the appraisal report. Stakeholders 

will also be consulted during the preparation of the ESMF and site specific ESMPs and their 

inputs will be taken into consideration during planning, design and implementation. A 

stakeholder engagement plan will be developed for the implementation phase of the project. 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the programme design 

2.7.1 As at 30 December 2016, the overall performance of the Bank’s portfolio in Ghana was 

rated satisfactory, with an overall rating of 3.0 on a scale of 1 to 4, with 4 being highly 
satisfactory. The portfolio was rated 2.9 for implementation progress, and 3.4 for development 

outcome. The portfolio has six (6) project at risk, of which three projects (i) Rural Enterprise 

Programme III; (ii) Development of Skills for Industry (DSIP), and (iii) the Electricity 
Distribution Systems Reinforcement are experiencing slow implementation. The Greater Accra 

Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project experienced signature delays, 
which have now been surmounted with the signing of the loan in September 2017. The Ghana 



 

10 

Country Office (COGH) improved in most of the key performance indicators during the period 
2013 to 2017. Average time lapse between approval and first disbursement has reduced to an 

all-time low of 5.4 months compared to 18 months in 2015. The pace of implementation of the 
lending program and portfolio was adversely impacted by Government’s imposition of a 

moratorium on new loans, between 2013 and 2015, as part of its debt management strategy. 

This moratorium contributed to the drop in the disbursement ratio from 28% in 2015 to 18% in 
2016. Disbursement is now on the upward path, at 22.4% as at August 2017. Further details are 

provided in Annex B1.2 of the Technical annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in the country has enhanced project 

design for implementation efficiency and sustainability. For example the CSPE (2002-2015) 

indicated that the sustainability of agriculture sector projects was limited by project design 

flaws, particularly the lack of clear management plans for the maintenance of key assets such 

as pack houses and markets. This flaw has been addressed in this project by the new approaches 

which considers intervening to fill the gaps in the operations of actors along the value chains of 

interest as against the concentration of the activities supported by the program around just the 

farmers. The project designs also builds on lessons learnt form the NRGP in the areas of 

Appropriate exit strategy for project implementing support agencies; Readiness of project for 

implementation at design; and Matching grants. Specifically, based on the experiences of this 

project and others, APIP is designed to support existing government institutions such as the 

CSIR-SARI, SRI to strengthen their delivery of services that are under their mandate such as 

breeder and foundation seed production; and soil nutrient analysis as against using NGOs or 

private sector. It is also designed to leverage on private sector investment on the ground, such 

as existing AMSECs and AVNASH and catalyse their activities (e.g. mechanization and 

primary processing), without creating dependency of the project funds. APIP has already 

identified the major infrastructure for which feasibilities had already been done including 

rehabilitation works on the existing Golinga and Botanga Irrigation Schemes; improvement of 

water management infrastructure for selected flood recession schemes, rehabilitation of 12 

warehouses have all be identified. APIP is not introducing any one fit all matching grant 

program. It will leverage on the government’s own input and mechanization support program 

in which case mechanized service provides are able to acquire machinery / equipment from the 

government with a concessionary repayment arrangement including a grant element.  In the 

cases of non-existing technologies, particularly for mechanization such as using laser levellers, 

mouldboard plough, rice transplanters etc. the project will provide for full grants to the 

mechanization service providers to acquire the technology and promote them 

2.8 Key performance indicators 

The overall impact of the SAZAPIP include improved food and nutrition security, job creation 

and wealth creation for commodity value chain actors. Through improved agricultural 

production, productivity and market linkages, about 20,000 jobs will be created, of which 

women and youths account for about 60%, along the value chains. It is envisaged that there will 

be income increase by 25% along the value chains and employment of women and youth in the 

agriculture sector. The crowding in of private sector investment in terms of investment volume 

as a result of the demonstration of improved technologies and production systems will be a key 

indicator of success.  

 

 



 

11 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Financial and economic performance 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of prevailing market prices. The key assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) 

50,000 farmers being actively engaged in farming at full capacity of the project; (ii) additional 

25% increase in income will be earned under the project, (iii) farmers will adopt the improved 

seed varieties (iii) a 20-year time period was used to measure the incremental benefits from the 

project; (iv) the opportunity cost of capital (OCC) used for discounting future benefits was 

estimated to be 12%. For the economic analysis, (v) hired labour value was adjusted by a 

conversion factor of 0.75; (vi) the rehabilitation of the seed system will ensure national quality 

seed supply. These analyses were carried-out with financial and economic costs generated using 

Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in Annex VII and further elaborated 

in Annex B6 in Volume II of the appraisal report. The project is expected generate the following 

benefits: (i) increase in food production; (ii) increased private sector investment; (iii) improved 

seed production and storage; (iv) improve average household income; (v) provide employment 

for 50,000 farmers and entrepreneurs; and (vi) enhanced crop nutrition. 

 

 Table 3.1: key economic and financial figures 
 

FIRR : 23%    NPV (base case) is USD   2,333,835.26   

EIRR : 28%    NPV (base case)  is USD  2,683,910.55      

   NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

 

3.1.2 Financial analysis 

 

Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated Net Present Value (NPV) of 

USD2,333,835.26 and financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 23%, as captured in the 

technical annexes (B6). Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially feasible. 

The FIRR of 23% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

3.1.4 Economic analysis 

 

The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the financial analysis, on the 

basis of shadow prices of tradable goods, producer (farm gate) prices and total cost of project. 

In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, such as, reduction in post-harvest losses; 

provision of mechanic service centre for agro equipment, reliable soil information system for 

fertilizer blends, efficient input distribution system through the farmer database system and 

lower cost of transportation of goods and services. However, these additional benefits were 

difficult to adequately value in monetary terms due to the limited scope of this report. In these 

conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD2,683,910.55 and the economic 

internal rate of return (EIRR) of 28% as captured in the technical annexes. 

3.2. Environmental and social impacts 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture, has made efforts to ensure sustainable land and 

environmental management within the sector through implementation of several policies and 

programmes and these include: Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy (FASDEP II) 



 

12 

and an Agricultural Sustainable Land Management Strategy and Action Plan was developed to 

operationalize the policy objective. MoFA works in collaboration EPA at all levels to ensure 

that environmental sustainability policy and programmes are implemented. The proposed 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project is classified as a Category 2 

because the project activities are expected to have impacts that can be avoided and minimised 

and will mostly be site-specific environmental and social impacts. The Project also falls under 

Schedule 2 of the Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999 LI 1652 of the Ghana 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The project is expected to finance construction and 

rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, processing, marketing and storage facilities as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. The project’s precise 

location, scope and scale of the project interventions will not be known before project 

implementation; hence, an overarching environmental and social management framework 

(ESMF) needs to be developed to provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social risks/issues of the project. This will guide the preparation of environmental and social 

impact assessment (ESIA) and development of site specific ESMP during project 

implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and agricultural production and value-chain development activities and 

include:  (i) loss of vegetation cover and habitat fragmentation due to site clearing (ii) land 

degradation, soil erosion, and pollution (iii) degradation of water resources through siltation 

and pollution (iv) disruption of water flows and hydrologic cycle which may impact activities 

of other water users, (v) noise, vibration and emissions from construction works and operation 

of machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (vi) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers that may have impacts on human health and 

biodiversity (vii) solid and liquid wastes generated from processing and marketing facilities 

(viii) increase in bush fires through the slush and burn traditional agricultural systems; (ix) 

climate risk impacts of GHG emissions and cumulative impacts of flooding if infrastructure is 

not well designed (x) increase in public health concerns (vector borne diseases, HIV/AIDs and 

other STDs) due to creation of vector habitats such as stagnant waters and influx of workers in 

project site areas and increased land conflicts due to commercialization, most lands are 

customary. The project is not expected to have land acquisition because the infrastructure 

development will be done on existing irrigation schemes and feeder roads with existing right of 

way. During operation phase, agriculture activities of value chain actors may lead to (i) 

increased use of agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, which may contribute to 

soil and water (surface and groundwater) contamination, and increase health-risks of people 

exposed to pesticides, (ii) maintenance of irrigation infrastructure can generate dredged 

materials and waste and effluents from processing and marketing facilities can result in soil and 

water contamination when not properly disposed of. These impacts are mostly site specific and 

can be readily managed with the application of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific 

ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) restricting clearance of vegetation to construction and farming areas 

and revegetation by planting of trees; (ii) rehabilitation and filling of the exposed or excavated 

soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing compaction of soils, (ii) 

ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing sustainable water management 

and flood mitigation systems, and (iv) reduction of GHG emissions by ensuring well serviced 

machinery is used and proper processing facilities waste management; (v) capacity building of 

value chain actors to promote good agriculture and sustainable environment and land 

management practices (vi) use of improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy; (vii) 

using lessons learned from similar projects. In addition, the project will ensure that institutional 



 

13 

and technical capacity that currently exist within MoFA is strengthened by having an 

Environmental Safeguard specialist in the Program Management Unit and training of 

Environmental Desk Officers at the local level to ensure effective site specific ESMP 

development, implementation and monitoring/reporting.  

 

3.2.1.3 Ghana SAZAPIP will generate significant positive impacts including (i) improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors including vulnerable groups, and support 

the local economy of the northern regions of Ghana; (ii) improved access to irrigation that will 

foster water management and reduce the vulnerability of farmers to precarious weather 

conditions and ensure all year round agriculture activities; (iii) improved agronomic practices 

and technologies for selected crops and improved varieties that are adapted to different climatic 

conditions; and (iv) improved agricultural production, productivity and market linkages that 

will foster job creation along the value chains. 

  

3.2.2  Climate change 

 

3.2.2.1 Ghanaian agriculture and food systems are climate dependent and recognized as one of 

the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. Indications are that the Northern Region of 

Ghana is currently experiencing seasonal variability of climate and rainfall. Consultations with 

MoFA and EPA indicated that the region is susceptible to flooding and drought that are 

unpredictable. The current increase in rain intensity is aggravating flooding events causing 

riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure damages, crop failure, fisheries 

destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant implications on livelihoods of 

agricultural communities who are mostly dependent of rain fed agriculture. Recommendations 

were made to incorporate climate risk mitigation and management strategies in the project 

design. 

 

3.2.2.2 The project will mainstream climate risk mitigation and adaptation activities in the 

project design and implementation that will focus on reducing the dependency on rainfall for 

agricultural activities as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other natural or anthropogenic 

hazards that accompany floods, drought and other land use changes.  The program will explore 

climate change adaptation technologies for agriculture consistent with priorities established in 

Ghana’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA), Climate Change Policy, and the 

MoFA’s National Climate Smart Agriculture and Food Security Action Plan (2016-2020). This 

will ensure that the project facilitates and promotes greater resilience and adaptation to climate 

change by promoting climate smart agriculture through use of improved agriculture 

technologies and conservation agriculture.  

 

3.2.3 Social Impact and Nutrition 

 

According to the most recent data in the 2014 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 

the prevalence of stunting is significantly higher in the Northern Region, with 33% stunting in 

children under five as compared to the national prevalence of 19%. Also the prevalence of 

anaemia in children under five is very high (82.1%). The Project will contribute to increased 

dietary diversity among households, and especially among women and children, in the Northern 

and Upper East regions. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good 

nutrition and hygiene practices, and enhanced management of acute malnutrition, through 

strengthening of the Community Health Workers system; (ii) equipment of health facilities with 

materials for anthropometric measurements where there is an identified need (based on 



 

14 

assessment by Ghana Health Services); (iii) linkage of small holder farmers to the Ghana School 

Feeding Programme and (iv) nutrition and hygiene education in schools, complemented by fruit 

tree planting and school gardens. To link the School Feeding Programme to the smallholder 

farmers benefiting from the project, agriculture extension officers will be involved, who will 

also be engaged in the school gardens and fruit tree planting. In order to accommodate all these 

activities, a total of UA3 million will be earmarked for the support to the Community Health 

Workers system, the provision of equipment to health centres, and the nutrition and hygiene 

education in schools, complemented by fruit tree planting and school gardens. Part of the budget 

will also be used to support the cost of a representative Food Security and Nutrition Survey to 

support the M&E component of the Project and evaluate impact in terms of household dietary 

diversity at district levels.  

 

3.2.4 Gender Aspects 

 

3.2.4.1 In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the national Agricultural labour force, contribute 

46% to the total GDP and also produce 70% of subsistence crops (MOFA, 2002). In the SADA 

zone, where the project will be implemented, women play a major role in farming and food 

processing. Women are engaged in planting, weeding, harvesting, processing and marketing of 

agricultural produce in the region. Women are involved in the agricultural processing and 

contribute at more than 70% of agriculture transformation. The gender analysis of the 

agriculture sector in the area revealed the gender gaps along the value chain, with women in a 

disadvantaged side. Most of the gender gaps are outlined in  access to land and farming 

equipment’s, access to extension services delivery, access to certified seeds supply, fertilizer 

and crop protection materials, access to agricultural technologies, agriculture processing, access 

to credit and financial services. The Project will contribute to implement the Gender and 

agriculture Strategy by empowering women in the agriculture production. 

 

3.2.4.2 To address the identified gender gaps, the project will implement specific activities and 

put in place measures to uplift the conditions of women in the agriculture value chain, as 

follows: i) Engage with the traditional authorities and family heads to ensure land security for 

women in the project; ii) Ensure that equipment is easy to use and woman-friendly; iii) Ensure 

that women have equal access to improved inputs; iv) Train women and men on safe storage 

options for their produce and utilization of fertilizers; (v) ensure that women have equal access 

to marketing networks; and vi) Organize training for women in the areas of improved 

production, business management, financial literacy, packaging, leadership and decision 

making; good nutrition especially to pregnant women and under five-year children; and (vi) 

organise sensitizations on women’s rights and access to land. The total budget allocated to 

gender equality promotion and nutrition is around UA I million.  

 

3.2.5 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the 

Project activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agricultural 

systems but if any loss occurs it will be compensated based on AfDB requirements.  

 

 

 

 

 



 

15 

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is the Executing Agency of the 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP). A National Project 

Steering Committee (NPSC) will be constituted chaired by the Hon. Minister of MOFA or his 

representative, to provide strategic direction and oversight guidance to the project. To ensure 

effective project coordination and monitoring, the day-to-day project administration will be 

managed by a Project Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU) within MOFA, under the 

direct supervision of the Chief Director. The PCMU will be headed by a Project Coordinator 

who will report to the Chief Director, and also to the Northern Regional Director of Agriculture. 

The Ministry had used a similar arrangement to successfully implement Bank financed projects 

such as the Northern Rural Growth Program (NRGP), Export Marketing and Quality Awareness 

Project (EMQAP), and Afram Plains District Agricultural Development Project (APDADP). 

The Ministry is thus familiar with the Bunk’s financial management rules, procurement 

requirements and disbursements procedures. MOFA is already connected to the government 

integrated financial information management system (GIFMIS), although the system is yet to 

be fully deployed for all projects. Thus, the PCMU of the proposed project will adopt the Sun 

Accounting software of the just completed NRGP for financial accounting and reporting, and 

migrate to the GIFMIS when the system is fully deployed to projects.  
  
4.1.2 The PCMU staff will be competitively recruited by MOFA and located in the office 

premises of the Regional Department of Agriculture at Tamale. The staff requirement will 

include: the Project Coordinator, a Financial Controller, an Accounts Officer, Agronomist, a 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists, an Agribusiness specialist, an Agricultural Engineer and 

a Procurement Specialist. The services of other experts such as Irrigation specialist, Gender and 

Nutrition specialist and Environmental specialist will be drawn from regional government 

institutions. For implementation of nutrition related activities, the PCMU will collaborate with 

other Government stakeholders including the Ghana Health Services, the Ghana School 

Feeding Program and the Ghana Education Regional Offices. SADA will play an active role in 

work activity planning, implementation monitoring and also attracting investors to collaborate 

with the Project. Relevant government agencies such as Projects Coordination Unit, Crop 

Services Directorate, Agricultural Engineering Services Directorate (AESD), Ghana Irrigation 

Development Authority (GIDA), Plant Protection and Regulatory Services Directorate 

(PPRSD), Ghana Grains and Legumes Development Board (GLDB), Environmental Protection 

Authority and Ministry of Trade Industry (MoTI) will be supported to conduct macro-

monitoring of the project’s activities.  
 

4.1.3 A National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will be established to provide 

strategic policy direction and oversight guidance for the project implementation. Its core 

activities shall include implementation of program strategy, oversee planning, review progress 

and impact, review/ approval of annual work plans and budgets as well as ensuring effective 

linkages with related programs. The NPSC membership would include: (i) one representative 

each from the relevant ministries (MOFA, MOTI MOF, MLGRD, MORH); (ii) one 

representative from selected public-sector agencies and institutions (BoG, DFR, EPA, SADA); 

(iii) three representatives from the Farmer Based Organizations; (v) three representatives from 

large-scale private sector traders/processors; and (vi) four representative from private investors 

and management firms of commodity chains facilities. NPSC meetings would be chaired by the 

Hon. Minister of MOFA or his designated representative, with the Project Coordinator as 

secretary. The NPSC would meet at least twice a year. Costs related to the meetings of the 

NPSC will be financed from ADF loan. 



 

16 

 

Procurement arrangements 
 

4.1.4 “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition 

of consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), 

dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following: 

 

4.1.5 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Procurement through Open competitive Bidding 

National (OCBN) procedures will be carried out using BPS comprising its Laws and 

Regulations (Ghana Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663), as amended Act, 2016 (Act 914) 

using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) agreed during project negotiations” 

for various group of transactions to be entailed under the project, detailed in annex B 5.1 and 

the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  

 

4.1.6 Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the 

relevant Bank Standard Solicitation Documents (SDDs), will be used for Open Competitive 

Bidding International (OCBI) contracts for both goods and works and Acquisition of 

Consulting Services as indicated in the Technical Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2.  

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement 

risks at the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing 

Agency (EA), were undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on 

the procurement regimes (BPS and Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups 

of similar transactions under the project. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para 5.3.2. The project 

activities derived from these components has informed the procurement risk and capacity 

assessment as well as the market analysis based on which the procurement strategy of the 

project has been developed. In addition some of the identified activities will require that MoUs 

are adopted to engage the services of some of the project partners including research institutions 

and the details of these arrangements are clearly defined in the technical annexes, B5. 

 

 Financial management and disbursement arrangements  

 

4.1.8 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) through its Project Coordination and 

Management Unit model will be directly responsible for the financial management 

arrangements of the project. The Project financial management will be headed by the FMS, 

who shall be a seasoned chartered accountant with hands-on experience on AfDB FM rules and 

procedures, assisted by an experienced Accounts Officer and Accounts Assistant/ Clerk. MOFA 

has not identified qualified accountants from within its ranks that can fill the top project FM 

positions, and would thus be expected to competitively fill the FMS and Accounts Officer 

positions. Both persons will be required to be proficient in the use of Sun Accounting Software 

and the practical application of IPSAS Cash Basis of Accounting. The Accounts Assistant 

position shall however be deployed from existing MOFA staff for staff capacity building and 

knowledge transfer purposes. In harmony with Government of Ghana (GoG) accounting 

standards and practices within MOFA, the project shall adopt the IPSAS Cash Basis for 

financial reporting.  

4.1.9 In terms of information flow, the FMS will report to the PC and to the Finance Director 

of MOFA (to ensure project results are correctly included in the overall consolidated accounts 



 

17 

of the Ministry). The FMS will be required to produce quarterly unaudited interim financial 

reports (IFRs) and annual financial reports in accordance with IPSAS Cash Basis, from the Sun 

Accounting software. The IFRs must be submitted to the Bank within 30 days after the end of 

the quarter reported on, while the annual audited financial reports must be submitted not later 

than six (6) months after the end of the applicable financial year. MOFA internal control 

systems, including the internal audit function (which appears adequate and operating 

effectively) shall be extended to the cover project operations too. A Project Implementation 

Manual (PIM) consisting of Technical Implementation, FM procedures and Administrative 

procedures components will be developed and adopted from the NRGP PIM, to guide project 

implementation, streamline FM practices and administrative procedures. Previous audits of 

MOFA managed Bank financed projects were generally satisfactory, however the finance staff 

tended to leave the service of MOFA/the project on completion of the project activities. 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement: Two of the Bank’s four disbursement methods are recommended to be 

used in disbursing funds to the project: (i) Direct payments; and (ii) Payments through Special 

Account (SA). Direct payments method will generally be used for the larger contracts signed 

between project management and contractors/suppliers/ service providers, while the SA method 

will be used for meeting recurrent/ administrative expenses and smaller contracts. A US Dollar 

denominated SA will be opened at the Bank of Ghana (BoG), to receive ADF resources from 

the Bank. A GHS (local currency) account will be opened at BoG to receive transfers from the 

SA for making payments in Ghana Cedis. A second GHS account will be opened at the BoG to 

receive counterpart cash contributions from the Government of Ghana. All project accounts 

will be managed by the PCMU. All disbursements under the project will follow the 

disbursements procedures outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook.  

 

4.1.11 Audit: The project will be audited by an external audit firm, selected competitively, and 

in accordance with agreed procedures involving the Ghana Audit Service (GAS), which despite 

having the constitutional mandate for all government audits, tends to outsource the audits of 

donor projects to acceptable audit firms. The audit will be conducted on terms of reference 

acceptable to the Bank, and shall be submitted to the Bank no later than six months after the 

end of the year audited.  

 

4.1.12 Overall Conclusion: The overall FM risk is assessed as moderate. To mitigate the risk 

further, MOFA is expected to hire an FMS and Accounts Officer for the project; develop a PIM 

which includes technical, financial management and administrative procedures components; 

and adopt/ upgrade the existing Sun Systems accounting software for use by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual 

(POM) which will be prepared by the PCMU shortly after project loan approval. MOFA will 

monitor overall operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of 

the project, implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national 

standards. The PCMU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project including 

environmental and social compliance and performance and compile the project’s quarterly and 

annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, MOFA, other line ministries, and SADA. 

A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken two years after project start to review the 

project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon completion of project investments at 

the end of program year four, the PCMU will prepare a Borrower’s project completion report.  

 



 

18 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Ghana 

Statistical Service leads the efficient production and management of quality official statistics 

based on international standards, and will be used to assess the contribution of the project 

towards the country and regional development goals and objectives as defined in the relevant 

development plans. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-

based framework, project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected 

to take special note of changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into 

development outcomes. In developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be gender 

disaggregated. The key functions of the M&E Officer in the PCMU will be to ensure quality 

and accountability of monitoring; information management; facilitation of knowledge building; 

and knowledge sharing on monitoring and evaluation. 

4.3. Governance 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Ghana, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of SAZAPIP 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to District levels. This is in relation to 

better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of resources. 

Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will 

serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4. Sustainability 

 

The ownership of the SAZAPIP is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders played 

during formulation and preparation of the Project. The Ministry of Food and Agriculture put up 

a technical team of experts to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The 

maintenance of the access roads and sundry infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the District Assemblies where the project sites reside. The present Project 

will build capacities of the Regional agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure 

profitability for the value chain actors. 

4.5 Risk management 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Ghana have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group 

will engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-sensitive approaches 

and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. SAZAPIP is expected to be 

classified as a Category 2 because the project activities are expected to have environmental and 

social impacts that can be avoided and minimised since they will mostly be site-specific. 

Climate screening is yet to be done. The following are the main risks identified and with 

mitigation measures.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

19 

Risks  Mitigation measures 

Macroeconomic risks - High 

probability: slow economic growth 

and deterioration of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to fall in cocoa 

and other commodity prices.  

Mitigation measure: The Bank will intensify the dialogue with 

the government to adopt supportive macroeconomic policies to 

rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce exchange rate flexibility, 

strengthen the banking system to prevent systemic crisis, and 

implement structural reforms for economic diversification. 

Environmental, Social and Climate 

Risk – Medium probability: The 

project activities are anticipated to 

have site specific environmental and 

social risks. The proposed project 

area is prone to climate change 

impacts. 

Mitigation measures: An ESMF has been developed for the 

project. During project implementation, site specific ESMPs will 

incorporate integrated pest management plans and climate risk 

mitigation and adaptation measures. ESMP development and 

implementation will be part of the monitoring and reporting of the 

project activities.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach 

in agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be 

monitored closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized 

implementation unit located in the District; the role of value chain actors including farmers and 

farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge 

will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and 

periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside 

the production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the 

Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). For the purposes of publicity and sharing of project results, the project could 

recruit a local firm as and when the need be. The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of 

innovative knowledge and information sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other 

actors of the value chain to train their peers, share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing 

their overdependence on the public extension agents. This will also expand significantly the 

number of value chain actors having access to the disseminated knowledge and information. 

The technical assistance supports will introduce and consolidate knowledge and skills, and 

facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the community and national levels. It is 

envisaged that knowledge generated by the pilot demonstration plots will form the basis for 

private sector investment in the agribusiness in the ecological zone as part of TASI.  

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1.  Legal instrument 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an ADF loan agreement for UA 27.86 million 

between the Republic of Ghana and the Bank.  

5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank Group intervention  

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 

 



 

20 

A. Conditions precedent to first disbursement 
 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the members of the Project Coordination 
and Management Unit (PCMU), which will comprise the following key officers: 

(a) Project Coordinator; (b) Financial Controller; (c) Accounts Officer; (d) 

Agronomist; (e) Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists; (f) Agribusiness 

Specialist (g) Agricultural Engineer; and (h) Procurement Specialist, whose 

experience and qualifications shall be acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 

4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

(ii) Provide evidence satisfactory to the Fund that it has opened a foreign currency 
Special Account (SA) and a local currency account (LCA) with a bank acceptable 

to the Fund 

  

Other Conditions:  
 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(ii) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(iii) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable 
to the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including 

any implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF loan of UA 27.86 

million to the Republic of Ghana for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report. 



 

I 

Annex I 

Ghana 

Country Comparative Socio-economic Indicators 

 

 
 

  

Year Ghana Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2016 239 30,067 97,418 36,907
Total Population (millions) 2016 28.0 1,214.4 6,159.6 1,187.1
Urban Population (% of Total) 2016 53.7 40.1 48.7 81.1
Population Density  (per Km²) 2016 123.2 41.3 65.1 33.8
GNI per Capita (US $) 2015 1480 2 153 4 509 41 932
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2016 77.1 65.7 63.5 60.0
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2016 75.6 55.7 48.9 52.1
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2016 99.2 100.1 106.0 105.0
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 187 countries) 2015 139 ... ... ...
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2005 25.2 ... 24.2 ...

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2016 2.3 2.5 1.3 0.6
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2016 3.2 3.6 2.4 0.8
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2016 38.8 40.9 27.9 16.8
Population 15-24 y ears (%) 2016 19.3 19.3 16.9 12.1
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2016 3.4 3.5 6.6 17.2
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2016 73.0 79.9 54.3 52.0
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2016 25.3 24.0 25.7 22.8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2016 61.7 61.5 69.9 80.8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2016 62.7 63.0 72.0 83.5
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2016 31.7 34.4 20.7 10.9
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2016 8.7 9.1 7.6 8.6
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 42.8 52.2 34.6 4.6
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 61.6 75.5 46.4 5.5
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2016 4.1 4.5 2.6 1.7
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 319.0 476.0 237.0 10.0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2016 30.5 31.0 62.2 ...

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2005-2015 9.6 41.6 125.7 292.2
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2005-2015 92.6 120.9 220.0 859.4
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2015 73.7 53.2 69.1 ...
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 88.7 71.6 89.4 99.5
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 14.9 39.4 61.5 99.4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2015 1.6 3.4 ... ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2015 160.0 240.6 166.0 12.0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2015 97.0 81.8 ... ...
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2015 89.0 75.7 83.9 93.9
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2015 11.2 18.1 15.3 0.9
Prev alence of stunding 2010-2014 18.7 33.3 25.0 2.5
Prev alence of undernourishment (% of pop.) 2015-2016 5.0 16.2 12.7 ...
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2014 2.1 2.6 3.0 7.7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2016 109.9 101.2 104.9 102.4
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2016 109.9 98.4 104.4 102.2
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2016 71.0 52.6 71.1 106.3
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2016 69.1 50.2 70.5 106.1
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2016 38.9 47.1 59.8 81.0
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2015 76.6 66.8 82.3 ...
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2015 82.0 74.3 87.1 ...
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2015 71.4 59.4 77.6 ...
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2015 6.2 5.0 4.0 5.0

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2014 20.7 8.7 11.2 10.3
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2014 69.0 41.7 37.9 36.4
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2014 40.9 23.2 31.4 28.8
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2014 0.5 1.1 3.5 11.0

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Ghana

June 2017

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

Gh an a Afri ca

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500
2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

GNI Per Capita US $

Gh an a Afri ca

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Population Growth Rate (%)

Gha na Afri ca

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

Gh an a Afri ca



 

II 

Annex II 

Organizational Structure for Project Implementation 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Project 

Steering Committee 

(Chairperson) 

 

Ministry of Food and 

Agriculture 

(Minister) 

 

Project Coordination and Monitoring Unit 

(Specialists) 
 

Project Coordination and 

Monitoring Unit 

(Coordinator) 

 

 

Value Chain Actors 
(Producers, Processors, Marketers, Linkages) 

Chief Director 

MOFA 

 

Northern Regional 

Director, MOFA 

 



 

III 

Annex III 

 

Bank portfolio in Ghana as at August 2017 

 

 

  

No Project Name Window Date of 

Approval 

Net Amount  

(UA million) 

Disbursement 

(%) 

Closing 

date 

1 Accra Urban Transport Project ADF 9/28/2016 60.00 - 12/31/2020 
 

Subtotal Transport     60 0   

2 Electricity Distribution System 

Reinforcement 

ADF 02/26/2014 28.60 13.6 03/31/2018 

ADF-G 02/26/2014 19.86 7.4 03/31/2018 

3 Renewable Mini-Grids & Solar Stand Alone 

Systems 

SREP 06/04/2015 0.65 - 12/31/2018 

4 Net Metered Solar PV for SMEs & lighting SREP 06/16/2015 0.44 - 12/31/2018 

 Subtotal Energy     49.55 10.8   

5 A Business Approach for Improved 

Sanitation  

AWF 05/16/2013 0.91 100 08/30/2017 

6 Sogakope-Lome Water Transfer Project 

(MULT) 

AWF 12/18/2013 1.13 22.2 12/31/2018 

7 Greater Accra Sustainable Sanitation and 

Livelihoods Improvement Project 

ADF 03/29/2017 35.95 0 03/31/2022 

 
Subtotal Water and Sanitation     37.99 3.04   

8 Rural Enterprises Project III ADF 12/19/2012 26.69 8.4 12/31/2019 

  ADF-G 12/19/2012 23.00 23.2 12/31/2019 

9 -Engaging Local Communities in REDD++ ADF-G 1/22/2014 3.20 24.4 12/31/2019 

  SCF 1/22/2014 7.00 38.4 12/31/2019  
Subtotal Agriculture     59.39 18.3   

10 Development of Skills for Industry Project ADF 06/20/2012 45.00 67.6 06/30/2018 

  ADF-G 06/20/2012 25.00 41.2 06/30/2018  
Subtotal Social     70.00 58.1   

11 ISP to Oversight and Business Support ADF-G 09/10/2012 9.59 63.6 04/30/2018 

12 GBS – Public Fin. Mgmt and Private Sector 

Competitiveness 

ADF 12/16/2016 35.0 100 12/31/2017 

 Sub-total Multi- Sector     44.59 91.7   
 

Subtotal  Non-Sovereign Loan 

Operations 
  321.52 30.9  

13 Ghana MSME Business linkage Program ADB 04/27/2014 0.67 18.8 12/31/2018 

14 Kempinski Hotel Project  ADB 09/27/2010 11.62 100.0 06/29/2012 

15 Takoradi  II Expansion Power Project ADB 07/11/2012 14.43 100.0 01/31/2020 

16 UT Bank  Ltd. TF  LoC   ADB 05/22/2013 13.19 100.0 05/18/2017 

17 UniBank TFLOC  ADB 10/14/2015 10.78 100 3/23/2018 

18 Ghana Airports Company Ltd ADB 10/14/2016 85.71 41.7 10/03/2020 

19 FORM Ghana ADB 13/07/2016 10 89.4 12/07/2021 

SCF 09/28/2016 7.14 0.0 05/01/2017 
 

Sub-total  Non-Sovereign Loan  

Operations 

    143.47 59.8   

 

Grand Total   467.04 39.9  



 

IV 

Annex IV 

Map of Project Area  

 

 
 

  



 

V 

Annex V  

Summary of Procurement Arrangements 

  UA’000    

 BPS BMP  

PROJECT CATEGORIES 
OCB 

(National) 
OCB 

(International) SHORTLIST Others Total 

A. WORKS      

Rehabilitation of Botanga and Golinga Irrigation Schemes 0.00 (1.57)       0.00 (1.57) 

Development of Lowland Rain-fed Ecologies-Flood 
Recession Schemes 0.00 (3.93)    0.00 (3.93) 

Rehabilitation of Selected warehouses 0.00 (0.93)    0.00 (0.93) 

Construction of Farm Access Roads 0.00 (0.21)    0.00 (0.21) 

Rehabilitation of Feeder Roads 0.00 (0.53)    0.00 (0.53) 

Rehabilitation of Kumasi Seed Processing Centres 
Facilities 0.00 (0.08)    0.00 (0.08) 

Rehabilitation of Winneba Seed Processing Centres 
Facilities 0.00 (0.19)    0.00 (0.19) 

Rehabilitation of Ho Seed Processing Centres Facilities 0.00 (0.08)    0.00 (0.08) 

Rehabilitation of Tamale Seed Processing Centres 
Facilities 0.00 (0.05)    0.00 (0.05) 

B. GOODS      

Mechanization Equipment and Tools  0.00 (1.85)   0.00 (1.85) 

Fertilizers  9.45 (9.45)   9.45 (9.45) 

Seeds  2.15 (2.15)   2.15 (2.15) 

Tractors and Accessories  0.46 (0.18)    0.46 (0.18) 

Logistics to Support Demonstration Sites 
 0.00 (0.36)      0.00 (0.36) 

Seed Processing Equipment and Materials 
 0.00 (0.79)      0.00 (0.79) 

IT Equipment and Furniture 
 0.00 (0.02)      0.00 (0.02) 

Vehicles 
 0.00 (0.13)      0.00 (0.13) 

Soil Testing Equipment 
0.00 (0.17)    0.00 (0.17) 

Laboratory Equipment 
0.00 (0.11)    0.00 (0.11) 

C. SERVICES      

Soil Fertility Testing and Soil Information Management    0.00 (0.30) 0.00 (0.30) 

Training and Re-Organization of Extension Agents, 
Farmers, Water Users and FBOs    0.00 (0.40) 0.00 (0.40) 

Preparation of New Boost Yielding Technologies 
Technical Manuals for Selected Crops    0.00 (0.01) 0.00 (0.01) 

Training of Out growers   0.00 (0.01)  0.00 (0.01) 

Technical Assistance 7No.Experts services    0.00 (0.54)  0.00 (0.54) 

Project Mid-Term Review    0.00 (0.01)  0.00 (0.01) 

Project staff trainings   0.00 (0.02)  0.00 (0.02) 

E-Agriculture   0.00 (2.00)  0.00 (2.00) 

Annual Project Financial Audit and Procurement Audit   0.00 (0.10)  0.00 (0.10) 

Environmental and Social Mitigation Plan   0.00 (0.13)  0.00 (0.13) 

Capacity strengthening of the Community Health Worker   
 0.00(0.04) 0.00(0.04) 

Technical Requirements Specifications and Supervision 
for Seed Processing Facilities and Warehouses 
Rehabilitation   

0.00(0.19) 

 

0.00(0.19) 

Design Review and Supervision of Irrigation Schemes 
Rehabilitation   

0.00 (0.19) 
 

0.00 (0.19) 

Design and Supervision of Flood Recession Schemes   0.00 (0.48)  0.00 (0.48) 

Design Review and Construction Supervision of Feeder 
and Farm Access Roads   

0.00 (0.09) 
 

0.00 (0.09) 

D. Other Costs      

Operations and Maintenance    0.21 (0.57) 0.21 (0.57) 

TOTAL 0.46 (9.33) 11.60 (13.45) 0.00 (3.76) 0.21 (1.32) 12.27 (27.86) 

      

Note: Figures in parenthesis are the respective amounts financed by ADF  

“Others” includes; include Direct Contracting (DC), Limited Competitive Bidding (LCB) etc 



















































Langue : ANGLAIS


 

Translated Document 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 

 

 
 

 

GUINEA-BISSAU 

 

 

 
RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA 

AND OIO REGIONS 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OSAN//GECL 

January 2017 

P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
 

A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

 

 



 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 

I. Strategic Thrust and Rationale ........................................................................................ 1 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives ............................................. 1 

1.2. Rationale for Bank Involvement .................................................................................. 1 

1.3. Aid Coordination .......................................................................................................... 2 

II. Project Description ........................................................................................................ 3 

2.1. Project Components ..................................................................................................... 3 

2.2. Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored ............................................ 4 

2.3. Project Type ................................................................................................................. 5 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements ................................................................... 5 

2.5. Project Target Area and Beneficiaries ......................................................................... 7 

2.6. Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation ........... 8 

2.7. Bank Group Experience Reflected in and Lessons Learned from Project Design....... 8 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators ......................................................................................... 9 

III. Project Feasibility .......................................................................................................... 9 

3.1. Financial and Economic Performance.......................................................................... 9 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact .............................................................................. 10 

IV. Implementation ............................................................................................................ 13 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements ................................................................................... 13 

4.2. Monitoring .................................................................................................................. 15 

4.3. Governance................................................................................................................. 16 

4.4. Sustainability .............................................................................................................. 16 

4.5. Risk Management ....................................................................................................... 17 

4.6. Knowledge Building .................................................................................................. 17 

V. Legal Framework ......................................................................................................... 17 

5.1. Legal Instrument ........................................................................................................ 17 

5.2. The legal framework of the project will be a Protocol Agreement and a Loan                        

Agreement signed between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. ............... 17 

5.3. Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention ................................................. 18 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies ................................................................................. 18 

VI. Recommendation.......................................................................................................... 18 

 

Annex I: Guinea-Bissau’s Comparative Socio-economic Indicators ......................................... I 

Annex II: Table of AfDB Portfolio in Guinea-Bissau (as at 30 September 2016) ..................... I 

Annex III: Map of Project Area ................................................................................................ III 

Annex IV: Fragility Context……………………………………………………………...…….IV 

Annex V: Rationale for Requesting a Waiver Allowing the Bank to Finance 92% of the Total    

Project Cost …………………………………………………………………………………. V 

 



 

i 

Currency Equivalents  

(October 2016) 
 

Currency Unit  =  CFAF 

UA 1    =  CFAF 820.353  

UA 1    =  USD 1.39581 

UA 1    =  EUR 1.25062  

 

 

Fiscal Year  

1 January – 31 December 

 

 

Weights and Measures  

1 metric tonne  = 2 204 pounds  

1 kilogramme (kg) = 2 200 pounds 

1 metre (m)  = 3.28 feet 

1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inch 

1 kilometre (km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 



 

ii 

Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 

AAAC  Competent Environmental Assessment Authority 

ADF  African Development Fund 

ADPP  NGO for People-to-People Development Assistance 

AfDB  African Development Bank 

ANAG  National Association of Farmers of Guinea-Bissau 

BOAD  West African Development Bank 

CES  Water and Soil Conservation 

CSP  Country Strategy Paper 

CSS  Consequences of Climate Change 

DU  Demonstration Unit 

ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States 

ERR  Economic Rate of Return 

ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

ESMP  Environmental and Social Management Plan 

EU  European Union 

GAPLA  Agricultural Planning Cabinet 

GIE  Economic Interest Grouping 

GIFS  Integrated Fertility and Soil Management 

Ha  Hectare 

HIMO  Labour Intensive 

IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development 

INE  National Institute of Statistics 

IRR  Internal Rate of Return 

Km  Kilometre 

LPDA   Letter of Agricultural Development Policy 

LTS  Long-Term Strategy 

MADR  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

NGO  Non-Governmental Organization 

NPV  Net Present Value 

PANA  National Action Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change 

PDCV-Riz Rice Value Chain Development Project 

PECA II  Technical Assistance Project 

PMU  Project Management Unit 

PNIA   National Agricultural Investment Programme 

PNIMT   National Medium-Term Investment Programme 

PRESAR Agricultural and Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 

PRP/AGIR Study on Country Priority Resilience Programme/Global Alliance for Resilience 

PSO  Strategic and Operational Plan 

QNCOCPA National Consultation Framework of the Farmers’ and Agricultural Producers' 

Organization of Guinea-Bissau 

RGPH  General Population and Housing Census 

TFPs  Technical and Financial Partners 

UA  Unit of Account 

UAM  Million Units of Account  

UNO  United Nations Organization 

WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union 



 

iii 

Project Information Sheet  

 

Client Information  

 

BORROWER /DONEE: Republic of Guinea-Bissau  
 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development   

   (MADR) 

 

Financing Plan  

Source  Amount  Instrument 

ADF 
 UA 0.493 million 

 UA 3.722 million 

Grant 

Loan 

Government  UA 0.14 million - 

Beneficiaries   UA 0.21 million - 

TOTAL COST  UA 4.56 million  

 

Key Information on ADF Financing  

 

Distribution of ADF resources 
Loan 

(UA M) 

Grant 

(UA M) 

Total 

(UA M) 

Country allocation under ADF-13 - PBA 0.118 0.082 0.200 

Country allocation under ATF-13 Pilar 1 3.325 -0.008 3.317 

Remainder of resources deriving from ADF cancellations 0.279 0.017 0.296 

Remainder of resources deriving from ATF Pilar 1 cancellations - 0.402 0.402 

TOTAL  3.722 0.493 4.215 

 

ADF grant currency  

ADF loan currency  

UA 

UA 

  

Loan maturity  40 years 

Grace period  10 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) 

ERR 

NPV 

 

14.6% 

17.1% 

CFAF 7.378 million 

 

Timeframe – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note approval  3 October 2016 

Project approval  14 December 2016 

Effectiveness  February 2017 

Closing of the loan and grant  31 December 2020 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

iv 

Executive Summary 

Project overview: The Rice Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) was designed as part of a 

participatory and inclusive process bringing together all the stakeholders, including producer 

organizations, local communities and local technical services. Those discussions as well as the studies 

conducted by the Bank helped to make a thorough assessment of the situation and identify the 

development needs of the rice value chain, and the most suitable methods of implementation in the two 

regions concerned. The formulation of PDCV-Riz also took into account the fragile context in the 

country, lessons drawn from Bank projects and those of other partners in Guinea-Bissau, while 

developing synergies and complementarities. Factoring in the Bank’s strategic orientations for the 

country, the project was formulated with special emphasis on the following: (i) hydro-agricultural 

infrastructure and access to markets; (ii) food and nutrition security; (iii) value chain development; (iv) 

employment of young people and women; and (v) adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 

The specific goal of the proposed project, which is expected to cost UA 4.56 million and last four years, 

will be to ensure the sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the Bafata and Oio regions. In 

addition to basic structuring infrastructure resulting from the project (development of 470 hectares of 

lowlands and mangroves, 7 km of roads, 2 markets, 5 stores and shops, etc.), innovative techniques 

needed for quality assurance, conservation and processing of food products will also be developed and 

disseminated. These activities will be accompanied by local and organizational capacity building, and 

specific focus will be placed on women’s access to land and all project benefits. The project will affect 

close to 1 720 farmers directly, 55% of whom will be women, representing about 12 000 members of 

agricultural households. It will have an indirect impact on approximately 60 000 people. 

Needs assessment: The project area is located in two of Guinea-Bissau’s nine regions, namely Bafata 

and Oio, which occupy 31.5% of the national territory and in 2015 had a population estimated at 494 

000 (27% of the national population). The project area is rich in water and land resources, owing in 

particular to the Corubal, Geba and Mansôa river basins. In keeping with the country’s strategic 

orientations, the project will help to improve productivity and production in the flagship sector for food 

security: rice. The country has an annual rice deficit of more than 80 000 tonnes. The project will also 

develop market gardening, the current production of which covers only 60% of needs, for certain sites 

and school canteens. This activity will help to improve the nutritional status of the beneficiary 

population, particularly women and children. The project will serve as a catalyst for agricultural 

development in the area by facilitating water control, strengthening agricultural infrastructure, 

promoting sustainable production, packaging and processing technologies, and facilitating access to 

product markets by supporting the development of the strategic sectors of rice and market gardening. 

Value added for the African Development Bank: Agriculture remains the main focus of development 

policies and the principal source of employment. In 2006, the Bank financed the Agricultural and Rural 

Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR), which was followed by three studies on the agricultural 

sector financed by trust funds between 2012 and 2014. These operations helped to develop specific 

expertise and shed new light on key areas (irrigation, seed production and control, solar energy, 

processing, etc.). To consolidate these gains, the Bank and the Government elected to finance the Rice 

Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz), as a way of setting up production areas. By supporting 

the development of infrastructure in areas that are economically and socially depressed but have 

considerable irrigation potential, the Bank’s activities will help to reduce poverty, promote the 

employment of young people and women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the 

resilience of people who are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.  

Knowledge management: PDCV-Riz will contribute to farmers’ training and consolidate their 

expertise. It will allow young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial skills in an 

inclusive manner by setting up operations on land that has modern operational resources and 

infrastructure, and promote the expansion of para-agricultural activities. With regard to resilience to 

climate change, the project will develop and disseminate innovative agricultural technologies for 



 

v 

production, storage and processing, while promoting local expertise. It will support the development of 

drip irrigation expertise with the establishment of a demonstration site. Knowledge management will 

also be carried out through mechanisms for communication and capitalization of project results and best 

practices, and through the process of generating endogenous value for vulnerable groups by developing 

value chains.  

 



 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework  

 

 Guinea-Bissau: Rice Value Chain Development Project in the Bafata and Oio Regions (PDCV-RIZ)  

 Project Goal: The goal of the PDCV-Riz is to contribute to the improvement of the of food and nutrition security, and poverty reduction in at the national level 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline Situation  Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Food and nutrition security is improved and the 

incidence of poverty reduced 

Prevalence of severe/moderate food insecurity 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (0-23 

months) 

Percentage of the total population of poor 

people, including women  

19% (2014) 

34.7% (2014) 

 69.3% and 75.6%) (2010) 

18% (2018) and 15 % (2020) 

32% (2018) and 28% (2020) 

65.5% and 70% (2018) and 60% and 65% 

(2020) 

-PRP/AGIR/EDS 

-MICS  

-ILAP/CILSS 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

The volume of rice and market gardening production is 

increased 

Volume of rice production  

Volume of market gardening production  

Rice: 819 T (2015) 

Market gardening: 35 T 

(2015) 

Rice: 3 058 tonnes (2020) 

Market gardening products: 570 tonnes 

(2020) 

-Annual reports; Agricultural  

statistics  

 

- Periodic project monitoring 

reports  

 

-Mid-term review report and 

project completion report  

Risks:  

- Political instability coupled with a difficult 

economic situation  

- Weak project ownership  

 

Mitigation measures:  

- Contribution to the improvement of socio-

economic and environmental resilience to 

ensure greater stability  

- Involvement and participation of 

beneficiaries in all stages and capacity-

building (producers and MADR) 

- Stakeholder involvement in the project’s 

external communication  

 

Improved additional income for producers in rural areas 

and in the two regions  

 

Average annual income of rice-producing 

households (including women) 

 

Average annual income of market gardeners 

 

CFAF 114 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 37 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 359 000 / per farmer (2020) 

 

 

CFAF 373 100 /per farmer (2020) 



 

vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Agric. infrastructure s modernisation and development 

 

Rehabilitation/development of rice-growing areas 

1.1 Development of lowlands 

1.2 Development of mangroves/anti-salt structures 

1.3 Areas under full control 

 Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas 

1.4 Improved areas with wells and motor pumps 

1.5 Market gardening areas with solar energy 

1.6 Pilot market gardening areas used as ADPP training 

centres 

 Agricultural infrastructure  

1.7 Development of access roads 

1.8 Rehabilitation/revitalization of markets 

1.9 Construction of shops for sale of agricultural inputs 

1.10 Construction of stores for market gardening 

 products 
 

 

 

 

1.1 Area of lowland developed  

1.2  Area of mangroves developed 

1.3 Area of lowland under full control 

 

1.4 Developed area with wells and pumps 

1.5 Area equipped with solar energy panels 

1.6  ADPP developed drip irrigation area  

 

 

1.7 Length of road rehabilitated  

1.8 Number of markets rehabilitated  

1.9 Number of input shops built 

1.10 Number of stores built 

  

 

 

 

1.1 NA 

1.2  0 

1.3 NA 

 

1.4 NA 

1.5 0 ha 

1.6 0 ha 

 

 

1.7 0 km 

1.8 0  

1.9 NA 

1.10 NA 

 

Target indicator in 2020 

 

1.1 185 ha (50% W) 

1.2 180 ha (10% W) 

1.3 105 ha (50% W) 

 

1.4 15 ha (80% W) 

1.5 4 ha (80% W) 

1.6 1 ha (50% W) 

 

 

1.7 7 km 

1.8 2 

1.9 2 (50% of beneficiaries are women) 

1.10 3 irrigated areas for women market 

gardeners  

-Progress reports of technical 

services in charge of 

monitoring the 

implementation  

 

-Contracts signed with 

enterprises 

 

-Reports of control agencies  

 

- Project progress reports  

Risks 

 

- Procurement delays, weak capacity of 

technical services  

- Weak capacity of enterprises  

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Preparation of priority CBDs based on 

available BOAD studies  

- Use of PRESAR’s Project Management 

Unit (PMU)  

- Use of specialized NGOs  

- Central State services supported in the 

sovereign activity  

  2.  Development of value chains 

  Advisory support  and structuring 

2.1 Demonstration Units (DUs) set up 

2.2 Number of farms monitored and support 

2.3 Developed sites secured in terms of land use 

2.4 Conflict management committees established 

2.5 AHA management committees set up 

2.6 Grassroots POs and their umbrella organizations  

established  

Access to means of production and processing 

2.7 Revolving funds in place for procurement of seeds 

2.8 Input shops operationalized 

2.9 Drivers of tillers and artisans trained 

2.10 Post-harvest equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Women's processing EIG set up 

Agricultural and nutrition entrepreneurship 

2.12 Young entrepreneurs trained at ADPP and established 

2.13 Youth trained, business plan and  established 

2.14 Pilot school canteens supported 

2.15 Women's awareness raised concerning  nutrition 

education 

 

 

2.1 Number of DUs in place 

2.2 Number of farms monitored 

2.3 Number of sites secured 

2.4 Number of local agreements established 

2.5 Number of management committees 

established 

2.6 Number of POs and umbrella 

organizations set up 

 

2.7 Quantity of seeds procured 

2.8 Number of shops operational 

2.9 Number of beneficiaries trained 

2.10 Number of equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Number of women's EIGs set up 

 

2.12 Number of youths trained at DAPP 

centres and established 

2.13 Number of other youths trained  and 

established 

2.14 Number of school canteens supported 

2.15 Number of women sensitized 

 

 

2.1 0  

2.2 0  

2.3 0 

2.4 0 

2.5 0  

2.6 NA 

 

 

2.7 0 

2.8 0 

2.9 NA 

2.10 NA 

2.11 NA 

 

 

2.12 NA 

2.13 0  

2.14 NA 

2.15 NA 

 

2.1 75 

2.2 1 720, including 960 owned by 

women- 

2.3 11 (55% of them belonging to women) 

2.4 5 

2.5 30 (10 irrigated areas for women 

market gardeners) 

2.6 60 (30% F) and 10 (umbrella org.) 

 

2.7 4.5 t (base) 50 t (certified) in 2017 

2.8 2 in 2018 (50% benefiting women) 

2.9 Drivers (15), artisans (8) 

2.10 20 (50% for women) 

2.11 15 (all - 100%- belonging to women) 

 

2.12 70, of whom 40 are established (30% 

of them women 

2.13 8 trained and established (30% of them 

women) 

2.14 3 (2017 and 2018)  

2.15 2 000 (all of them women) 

-Project progress reports  

 

 

- Bank’s supervision  reports  

 

 

- Government’s external 

monitoring reports  

Risks 

 

- Mobilization of counterpart funding 

- Limited infrastructure ownership and 

management 

- Conflicts between farmers /herders 

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Counterpart funding limited to the 

provision of premises and payment of the 

salaries of project employees (3.5% of the 

project's total cost) 

- Participatory approach initiated 

- Involvement, organization and training of 

local actors 

- Framework for consultation between 

farmers and stockbreeders, facilities 

designed in a concerted manner, 

development, fencing of market gardens. 



 

viii 

 

3.  Project Management  

3.1 Procurement activities 

3.2 Project activities carried out 

3.3 Financial management assured 

3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 

3.5 Communication ensured  

 

 

3.1  Procurement plan (PP) adopted and 

implemented 

3.2  Compliant disbursement rate 

3.3  Audit reports produced   

3.4  Operational M&E system 

3.5  Communication plan implemented 

 

 

3.1  PP prepared (end-2016) 

3.2  0% (December 2016) 

3.3  Firm hired (June 2017) 

3.4  Established (1st half of 

2017) 

3.5  Plan developed (2017) 

 

 

3.1  PP updated at least once a year  

3.2  25% a year on average  

3.3  Four annual audit reports validated 

3.4 Mid-term final M&E reports produced   

3.5  Communication tools disseminated  

 

 

PP 

SAP system 

Audit reports  

Progress and M&E  reports  

Brochures, website, films, etc. 

Risks 

- Weak capacity 

 

Mitigation measures  

- Confirmation of PRESAR’s PMU after 

evaluation, performance contracts, review of 

accounting and monitoring tools  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  

COMPOSANTES RESOURCES 

Component A: Agricultural infrastructure modernisation and development  

Studies, works implementation and control (lowlands, mangroves, market gardening, irrigated areas, roads, markets, shops and stores, etc.).  

Component B:   Development of value chains  

Advisory support, structuring, securing of land, access to seeds and fertilizers, support for mechanization, training and installation of young 

people, support for women, nutrition support, etc.  

Component C:   Project management  

Coordination, procurement, monitoring/evaluation, financial management, audit, communication, leadership, etc. 

Components  Sources of Financing 

Component A           :  UA 2.57 million (56%) ADF (loan and grant) :  UA 4.215 million (92.4%) 

Component B           :  UA 1.23 million (27%) Govt. : UA 0.14 million (3.0%) 

Component C           : UA 0.76 million (17%) Beneficiaries  :  UA 0.21 (4.6 %) 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Implementation Schedule  

 

 
 

 Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

 Quarter T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                        

 PDCV-Riz financing negotiations                        

 ADF grant and loan approval                       

 Signing of financing agreements                        

 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to 1st  disbursement                        

 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                       

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                       

 PMU staff Confirmation                       

 Preparation of priority procurement  agreements and documents                       

 PDCV-Rice launching mission                       

 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, IT, etc.)                       

 Signing of agreements with partner entities                       

3 AGRIC. INFRASTRUCTURE MODERNIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT.                       

 Development of documents on priority infrastructure and projects                       

 Procurement for priority infrastructure and structures                       

 Studies on  complementary hydro-agricultural infrastructure, roads and buildings                       

 Works on irrigation and roads                       

 Works on marketing and processing infrastructure                       

 Implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plan                       

4 VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT                       

 Extension and improvement of access to production resources                       

 Support for the structuring and of POs and umbrella organisations                       

 Support for the conservation, processing and marketing of products                       

 
Development of agricultural entrepreneurship and mechanization in collaboration 

with DAPP 
                  

    

 Support for nutrition and 3 school canteens                       

 
Support for the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) and 

Stakeholders 
                  

    

5  PROJECT MANAGEMENT                       

 Updating management and monitoring-evaluation tools                       

 Baseline situation and implementation of the monitoring and evaluation system                       

 Coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation and communication activities                       

 Annual accounts audit                       

 Mid-term review                       

 ADF and Government Completion Report                       



 

1 

RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA  

AND OIO REGIONS  
 

Management hereby submits this report concerning a proposal to extend a loan of UA 3.722 million 

and award a grant of UA 0.493 million to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to finance the Rice Value 

Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) in the Bafata and Oio regions. 

I Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 Accounting for 67% of GDP and 80% of jobs, agriculture remains the focus of development 
policies and, over the medium term, will continue to be the driver of growth and the main source of 

employment. Rice is the dominant food crop and the food deficit is made up annually by importing 

approximately 80 000 tonnes of rice. PDCV-Riz, which aims to improve food and nutrition security and 

boost producers’ income by promoting rice production and market gardening in targeted areas, is in line 

with the strategic objectives for Guinea-Bissau.1 These are set out in such documents as the Letter of 

Agricultural Development Policy (LPDA) and its plan of action, aimed at ensuring food security, 

increasing and diversifying agricultural exports, while ensuring sustainable management of agricultural, 

silvicultural and pastoral resources, and improving the living conditions of the rural population. Similarly, 

the strategic pillars of the strategic and operational plan for the period 2015-2020, known as Terra Ranka, 

developed and adopted by the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, includes the following 

pillars: (a) governance and peace; (b) infrastructure; (c) industrialization; (d) urban development; (e) human 

development; and (f) biodiversity. The strategy underscores the need to work towards economic recovery 

based on structural reforms, in order to ensure sustainable development. It also highlights the four main 

engines of economic growth, including agriculture and agro-industry, which will be based on the 

development of cashew and rice production, while aiming for gender parity, equity and women’s 

empowerment. 

1.1.2 PDCV-Riz also plugs into Sub-programme 1 of the National Agricultural Investment Programme 
(PNIA) (“Promotion of Plant Production”), which focuses on the development of food crops (including 

rice) and market gardening, through better control of water and factors of production. It is also in line with 

the orientations of (a) the National Food Security Programme (PNSA), which aims to contribute to the 

gradual eradication of hunger and food insecurity, and promotion of the people’s comprehensive and 

sustainable socio-economic development; (b) the National Medium-Term Investment Programme 

(PNIMT), whose major goal is to speed up the growth of the agricultural and fisheries sector by increasing 

the flow of capital directed towards the sector, but also by enhancing the effectiveness of investments in 

terms of growth and poverty reduction; and (c) the Rice Farming Development Programme (PDR - 2016), 

which aims to stimulate rice production in sufficient quantity and quality to ensure supply and improve the 

balance of trade. The project is in keeping with the “Develop infrastructure to promote inclusive growth” 

pillar of the CSP 2015-2019 through the development of agricultural infrastructure and opportunities in 

agriculture (in particular for young people and women).  

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.2.1 According to the agriculture sector study conducted in 2014 (Portuguese Cooperation Trust 

Fund), it is essential to optimize the use of farmland, considering the limited land resources, to create added 

value for products, but also to enable households to generate sufficient income to purchase certain 

commodities that have to be imported. Rice is the staple foodstuff and food deficit is made up annually by 

rice imports of about 80 000 tonnes. The constraints in the sector are primarily the remoteness of production 

areas, the degradation of production systems, particularly mangroves, caused by salinity and acidity, 

                                                 
1  It also draws on the main findings of studies conducted by the Bank on the gender profile (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund and in partnership with 

UN-Women); agriculture (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund); Fragility in Guinea-Bissau, 2014 (financed by the Bank); and capitalization of 

PRESAR (financed by the South-South Cooperation Fund). 



 

2 

insufficient access to inputs, and weak processing capacity. It is against this backdrop that PDCV-Riz was 

prepared, to support the development of infrastructure in two of the country’s most vulnerable regions 

(poverty rates of 79% in Oio and 72% in Bafata). The Bank’s involvement will help to reduce poverty and 

regional and social disparities. The development of hydro-agricultural facilities, the integration of value 

chains and agricultural entrepreneurship will help to promote the employment of young people and 

women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the resilience of the segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutritional insecurity.  

1.2.2 The objectives of PDCV-Riz are aligned on the Bank’s “High 5s” (five priorities), which 

include feeding the people of Africa by 2025 and improving their living conditions by developing the 

rice value chain, building the capacity of actors, creating jobs and generating income. The project is 

aligned on the Bank’s Long-Term Strategy (LTS 2013-2022) and its two overarching objectives: 

inclusive growth and transition to a green economy. The project is built on the three areas of special 

emphasis of the LTS: fragile States, agriculture and food security, and gender. PDCV-Riz is aligned on 

the Bank’s new strategy: “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-

2025)”, which puts special emphasis on the development of value chains and agricultural 

entrepreneurship. The project also plans to rely heavily on grassroots associations, local NGOs and the 

private sector, thereby fulfilling the requirement for non-State actors to participate in the Bank’s 

operations, identified in the CSP as a way of strengthening the country’s resilience to fragility. The 

project is also in conformity with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-2018) “Investing in Gender 

Equality for Africa’s Transformation”, more specifically Pillar II, “Economic Empowerment”. It also 

follows the recommendations of the gender profile prepared by the Bank and UN-Women in 2015, on 

the need to integrate women into value chains and provide extension services for women’s economic 

entities in rural areas.  

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 Since the crisis of April 2012, the TFP consultation framework that was operating through 

multi-sector thematic groups has been put on hold. However, it should be noted that, in general, aid 

coordination and monitoring mechanisms have always suffered from the structural weaknesses of public 

administration. In this regard, before the coup d’état of 2012, the Bank approved a technical assistance 

project (PECA II) to build coordination capacity. The project included the convening of donor round 

tables in Brussels in March 2015 as well as capacity-building activities organized by the Ministry of 

Economy and Finance. 

1.3.2 Based on the Letter of Agricultural Development Policy, several bilateral and multilateral 

partners provided significant support for rural development and food and nutrition security in Guinea-

Bissau, including Spain, Italy, Brazil, Portugal, China, the European Union, the World Bank, AfDB, 

the West African Development Bank (BOAD), IFAD and the United Nations system. From an 

institutional standpoint, the activities of partners are coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and 

Finance. For agriculture in particular, the partners reached a consensus on the sector strategy, notably 

the PNIA, during the partners’ round table convened in Brussels in March 2015. The Food and 

Agriculture Organization plays a major role in policy support and coordination of activities. More 

broadly, in the rural sector (agriculture, stock raising, fishery, environment), the involvement of the various 

partners is presented in Annex A4 of volume 2 and is summarized as follows: 

 



 

3 

Sector or Sub-sector* 
Size of 

GDP Exports Labour 

[Rural Sector] [+50%] 93% 80% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (on-going programmes or projects) 

Government Donors   Amounts (USD M) 

 
 

  Period 

 World Bank 0.76 2015-2020 

 ADF 0.20 2014-2015 

0.73 IFAD 16.91 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 BOAD 2.95 2015-2020 

 EU 1.21 2014-2019 

 WAEMU 11.34 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 

Existence of thematic working groups No 
Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

AfDB’s role in aid coordination Participation  
 

 

II Project Description 

 

2.1 Project Components 

The overall objective of PDCV-Riz is to help improve nutritional and food security and reduce poverty 

across the country. Its specific objective is to ensure sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the 

Bafata and Oio regions by improving productivity, strengthening infrastructure, ensuring resilience to 

climate change, managing natural agricultural resources in a sustainable manner and reducing gender 

inequality. Lasting four years, PDCV-Riz revolves around three main components: (i) Modernization 

and development of agricultural infrastructure; (ii) Development of value chains; and (iii) Project 

management. The table below shows a summary of the activities selected. A detailed description is 

provided in Annex C3 of Volume 2. 
  



 

4 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Component Cost Description of Components 

A- 

Modernization 

and 

development of 

agricultural 

infrastructure 

UA 

2.57 

million 

(56%) 

A1 Rehabilitation/development of rice production infrastructure and facilities: (i) development 

of 185 hectares of lowland; (ii) development of 180 hectares of mangroves/anti-salt facilities; 

(iii) development of 105 hectares of areas with full water control; (iv) protection of developed 

areas with area dykes and erosion abatement measures. 

A2 Rehabilitation/development of land for market gardeners: (i) development of 15 hectares 

with improved wells and pumping motor units; (ii) setting aside a 4-hectare piece of land for 

market gardening by women, with solar energy; (iii) installation of a 1-hectare drip irrigation 

system at the NGO for People-to-People Development Assistance (ADPP) training centre in 

Bissora. 

A3 Development of various agricultural infrastructure: (i) development of 7 km of access 

roads, including a road dyke for access to the Olom site; (ii) rehabilitation/operation of 2 

markets (Bissora and Bantandjan); (iii) construction of two input shops and three stores for the 

storage and conservation of market gardening products. 

B- 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

1.23 

million  

(27%) 

B1 Advisory support and structuring: (i) advisory support and research/development; (ii) 

support for the emergence and strengthening of the capacity of grassroots producer 

organizations (farmers’ organizations) and associated umbrella groups; (iii) support for the 

securing of developed sites; (iv) establishment and structuring of committees for the 

management of developed infrastructure. 

B2 Improvement of access to means of production and processing: (i) strengthening of access 

to certified seeds and quality inputs (in line with INPA and DCCS); (ii) establishment of 

revolving input funds (Japanese Cooperation); (iii) promotion of mechanization (Japanese 

Cooperation) and supply of post-harvest equipment (threshers, hulling machines, mills); (iv) 

support for 10 women’s economic interest groupings (EIGs) (parboiling of rice, drying and 

processing of vegetables, etc.). 

B3 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship: (i) training of 70 young people (from the 

Oio and Bafata regions) at the ADPP training centre in Bissora; (ii) entrepreneurship training 

for 10 young people or groups proposing agricultural and para-agricultural projects and support 

for them to set up their operations. 

B4 Nutrition support: (i) education, nutritional monitoring and aid for diversification of food 

rations among the population, particularly among infants aged 0 to 23 months; (ii) pilot 

operation for supplying local products to three school canteens (in line with WFP); and (iii) 

support for the promotion of family and community vegetable gardens. 

B5 Support for MADR and partners: (i) capacity building for the services and technicians 

involved in implementing PDCV-Riz; (ii) support for strategic discussions at the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). 

C- 

Project 

management 

UA 

0.76 

million 

(17%) 

(i) Coordination and piloting of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial 

management; (iii) procurement of goods, works and services; (iv) implementation of a 

communication plan; (v) monitoring and evaluation of project execution; and (vi) 

environmental monitoring.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for PDCV-Riz are based on field data and lessons drawn from 

similar projects, including those obtained from the PRESAR capitalization study, and on design 

methods tailored to the specific context of the two regions and each of the sites. 

 

2.2.2 With regard to the pre-selected sites, only the Bafata sites offered conditions conducive to the 

development of facilities with full irrigation water control. Several technical options were available in 

the Bafata region, including that of developing a single large area with water pumped from the Gébà 

River, where the project would be concentrated. That option was rejected in light of the management 

difficulties encountered in the past and the complexity of operating that type of facility, and the 

difficulty of having sufficient labour to develop the investments. The alternative was to develop several 

small areas on different sites, which would be easier to manage and set up. For other lowlands, the 



 

5 

solution adopted was that of partial control of runoff (cascading dykes equipped with regulators), but 

using manufactured structures, to ensure greater durability. For the mangrove sites, partial irrigation 

water control was the only technical solution possible. In essence, the process entails building an anti-

salt dyke equipped with regulators and partitioning the area using dykes and bunds for the retention and 

distribution of irrigation water on the parcels and partitions.  

 

2.2.3 Market gardening is a vitally important activity for improving the nutritional intake of 

households and is also a source of income for women. However, it has been noted that several pieces of 

land belonging to women, developed summarily, are abandoned owing to poor design and technical 

solutions that do not alleviate the tedious work of watering. To develop those pieces of land, the 

underground water will need to be captured by building or using large wells and/or boreholes, and 

equipping them with a dewatering system powered by a generator and/or solar panels. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Brief Description Reason for Rejection 

Develop just one 

large area with total 

control where the 

project would be 

concentrated 

Construction of a large pumping 

station, covered water 

transportation canals with large 

civil engineering structures for 

the collection, carriage and 

distribution of water to the 

various blocks and 

neighbourhoods. 

This alternative does not ensure the availability of 

labour, in terms of quantity or quality, for the 

development of the facilities and the investments 

required. It is quite likely that the area will not be 

fully used, whereas on several sites available labour 

could make better use of the irrigated areas and 

develop the project. 

Develop market 

gardening areas 

with improved 

wells without any 

dewatering 

mechanism 

Construction of one or more 

large wells (one well per hectare) 

where irrigation water is 

collected manually and carried 

to the parcels by the operators.  

The constraint for the development of market 

gardening production is manual dewatering of the 

wells. This takes up an enormous amount of work 

time, makes the task, which is carried out mainly by 

women, very tedious and limits the production 

capacity of women engaged in market gardening, 

causing them to lose interest. 

Develop animal-

drawn cultivation 

in the intermediary 

phase instead of 

motorizing soil 

cultivation 

activities 

Animal-drawn cultivation 

practised in the project regions is 

suited for light soils with limited 

humidity, to ensure high 

productivity. Its effectiveness 

depends a great deal on the 

physical conditions of the area to 

be cultivated.  

Large arable land in the region, the short period 

available for soil preparation and the short rainy 

season are factors militating against animal-drawn 

cultivation and in favour of motorized soil 

cultivation. The consolidation of the network of 

providers of agricultural mechanization services in 

the project region will help to achieve this goal. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

PDCV-Riz is an investment operation financed with ADF resources. The Government of Guinea-Bissau 

has not yet started implementing projects and programmes through the sector-based approach, given a 

number of institutional constraints and the context of fragility. At this juncture, the project approach is 

the most appropriate to ensure effective and efficient use of the resources allocated to the project, which 

will also consolidate the gains achieved with PRESAR. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The project cost is estimated at UA 4.56 million, excluding taxes and custom duty (CFAF 

3.742 billion), with UA 1.45 million (CFAF 1.193 billion) in foreign exchange and UA 3.11 million 

(CFAF 2.549 billion) in local currency. Custom duty and taxes will be covered by the State, which will 

have to take the necessary measures to implement this provision. The foreign exchange portion 

represents 31.9% of the total cost, net of taxes, and the local currency portion represents 68.1%. The 



 

6 

physical contingency rate applied was 5% for works and 5% for equipment. A provision for 

compounded price escalation of 3% was applied on all components. The summary of the project cost 

by component and by expenditure category is presented in Tables 2.3 and 2.4 below. 

 
Table 2.3: Estimated Costs by Component 

COMPONENTS 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. F.E. Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural 

infrastructure 
1 105.8 816.1 1 921.9 1.35  0.99  2.34  42.5% 

Support for the development of value chains 726.6 220.7 947.4 0.89  0.27  1.15  11.9% 

Project management 530.6 55.7 586.3 0.65  0.07  0.71  9.5% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88  1.33  4.21  31.6% 

Physical contingencies 30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04  0.04  0.08  53.2% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19  0.08  0.27  29.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11  1.45  4.56  31.9% 

 

Table 2.4: Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Works 836.7 725.5 1 562.2 1.02 0.88 1.90 46.4 41.8% 

Goods  214.0 250.1 464.1 0.26 0.30 0.57 53.9 12.4% 

Services 802.0 117.0 919.0 0.98 0.14 1.12 12.7 24.6% 

Operation 135.4 0.0 135.4 0.17 - 0.17 - 3.6% 

Personnel 374.9 0.0 374.9 0.46 - 0.46 - 10.0% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88 1.33 4.21 31.6 92.4% 

Physical contingencies  30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04 0.04 0.08 53.2 1.7% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19 0.08 0.27 29.9 5.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.56 31.9 100.0% 

 

2.4.2 The project will be financed by a grant of UA 0.493 million and loan of UA 3.722 million 

from the African Development Fund (ADF), representing 92.4% of the project cost, net of taxes and 

custom duty. Considering the country’s fragile state (see Annexes IV and V), the Government’s 

financial contribution, estimated at UA 0.136 million, will be limited to covering the salaries of civil 

servants seconded to the project and providing office space for the Project Management Unit 

(headquarters in Bafata and liaison office in Bissau), and setting up a revolving fund for the procurement 

of inputs (fertilizers and seeds). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to the computation of 

their participation in easy-to-undertake on-going development and maintenance work, estimated at UA 

0.21 million. The breakdown by source of financing is indicated in Table 2.5 below. 
 

Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

SOURCES 

CFAF Million UA Million 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

ADF loan 2 053.4 999.9 3 053.4 2.50 1.22 3.722 81.6% 

ADF grant 211.3 193.1 404.4 0.26 0.24 0.493 10.8% 

Govt. 112.0 0.0 112.0 0.14 - 0.136 3.0% 

Beneficiaries 172.0 0.0 172.0 0.21 - 0.210 4.6% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.561 100% 



 

7 

2.4.3 The expenditure schedule is as follows: 

 
Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

COMPONENTS 2017 2018 2019 2020 Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural infrastructure  0.41 1.48 0.44 0.02 2.34 

Support for the development of value chains 0.40 0.44 0.24 0.08 1.15 

Project management 0.25 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.71 

Base cost 1.07 2.07 0.83 0.25 4.21 

Physical contingencies 0.01 0.05 0.01 - 0.08 

Price escalation 0.03 0.13 0.08 0.03 0.27 

TOTAL 1.11 2.26 0.92 0.28 4.56 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project target area consists of two regions – Bafata and Oio – out of the eight (in addition 

to the autonomous region of Bissau) in Guinea-Bissau. It covers 31.5% of the national territory 

(representing a surface area of 36 125 km2) and has a population estimated in 2015 and 494 000 

inhabitants, compared with 1 783 000 inhabitants in the country (projection based on the General 

Population and Housing Census, 2009)2 The area is endowed with huge water resources (rain, the 

Corubal, Geba and Mansôa Rivers, sedimentary basin) and has strong potential of lowlands that can be 

developed (especially in Bafata) and mangrove plains (particularly in Oio). 

2.5.2 The project areas were selected following a multi-criteria analysis based on: (i) accessibility; 

(ii) existence of community/local operational dynamic; (iii) absence of latent land conflicts; and (iv) 

overall consistency with the project objectives (availability of labour, level of organization and sense of 

initiative of the future beneficiaries, expertise, participation of women and young people). A wide 

variety of sites were pre-identified: (i) Development of lowlands: (a) with partial irrigation water control 

(Carabina, Gêba, Cumuda and Olom sites); (b) with full irrigation water control (Contuboel, Gêba, 

Cumuda and Ponta Nova sites); (ii) Development of mangroves: partial irrigation water control 

(Binhomi); (iii) Market gardening areas: Contuboel, Carabina, Sormone, and ADPP training centre in 

Bissora.  

2.5.3 The majority of the population of the area is engaged in agriculture (rice, corn, cassava, 

peanuts, sorghum/millet, black-eyed peas, fruits and vegetables, cashew nuts, etc.), stock raising and 

trading. Traditional and family farming faces a variety of constraints, including the absence and age of 

facilities, difficulties in accessing factors of production (certified seeds, quality inputs, tilling and post-

harvest equipment, etc.). Women are involved in all rural farming activities and most participate in rice 

cultivation and market gardening work, and in product processing and marketing. The project target 

group comprises smallholders, in particular women and young people, the main segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity and poverty. The project will affect 1 720 

households/farmers, including 960 women farmers (55%), representing about 12 000 people (direct 

beneficiaries), including 6 400 women. The other direct targets are artisans, processors, traders, young 

entrepreneurs, about 200 students from three pilot school canteens, various service providers and NGOs, 

etc. In addition to infrastructure, innovative techniques needed for quality maintenance, conservation 

and processing of food products will be developed and disseminated, and accompanied by local and 

organizational capacity building. Specific attention will be paid to access to land for women and young 

people and all project beneficiaries. Therefore, PDCV-Riz will affect more than 60 000 people in all. 

 

                                                 
2  National Institute of Statistics (INE) / General Population and Housing Census 2009. 



 

8 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project design was based on a participatory approach involving all stakeholders: 

administration, producer organizations, women’s groups, civil society, private sector, technical and 

financial partners (TFPs), projects, etc. These broad-based consultations, which began with PRESAR 

and during studies supported by the Bank, continued during the PDCV-Riz preparation and appraisal 

mission. The consultation meetings convened in each of the two regions with all the parties (local 

technical services, NGOs and advisory support associations, local communities, representatives of 

beneficiaries, including women) helped with the identification by consensus of constraints and needs in 

the project area and for the two sectors involved. Focused discussions with institutional local partners 

and civil society and visits to different potential sites, followed by working sessions with beneficiaries, 

including women and young people, helped to fully examine the development of the area, identify 

support needs for the two sectors and the most appropriate methods of implementation, as well as the 

appropriate measures for effective implementation. The sites and activities were chosen following 

several investigations and fruitful discussions with beneficiaries and other actors involved. 

2.6.2 This entire participatory process showed that there was great interest for the project, which 

builds on the achievements of PRESAR and other past and on-going projects, and a broad consensus on 

its design and methods of implementation. Producers reaffirmed the need to fully exploit the project 

area’s considerable potential (land, natural watercourses, mangroves, lowlands, etc.). Women expressed 

their interest for market gardening, processing and marketing of farm products, with modernization of 

production and processing tools and improved access to markets. Following visits to various sites, the 

status of the existing facilities and infrastructure was assessed and technological options to be adopted 

for their construction/rehabilitation were proposed. The development of a good communication strategy 

centred on PDCV-Riz and the maintenance of a participatory approach during its implementation are 

guarantees that local actors will take ownership of the project during the execution phase.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience Reflected in and Lessons Learned from Project Design  

2.7.1 It will be recalled that since the start of cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, the Bank has carried 

out operations in the agricultural sector through five projects, the last of which was the Agricultural and 

Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR) costing UA 5.80 million, completed in September 

2012. The project completion report, which was submitted in February 2014, showed satisfactory results 

(score of 3.12 out of 4), in a difficult socio-economic context. PRESAR contributed to the rehabilitation 

of rice farming land and other agricultural community infrastructure, while building administrative 

capacity. The formulation of PDCV-Riz takes into account, to a large extent, lessons drawn from Bank 

projects in Guinea-Bissau, particularly PRESAR, and in the sub-region, while striving to integrate the 

country’s context of fragility, and rectifying some of the weaknesses identified during project 

implementation and highlighted during portfolio reviews and in completion reports. During the last 

review in September 2016, the portfolio’s performance was deemed satisfactory, but efforts will have 

to be made in terms of: (i) availability of studies to improve the quality-at-entry of operations; (ii) timely 

designation of project management teams, including the coordinator and financial management and 

procurement officers; (iii) compliance with the procurement schedule; (iv) systematic establishment of 

performance contracts and annual evaluation of the contracts on an objective basis; and (v) timely 

development of the baseline situation and establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems. It is 

worth noting that even though the current portfolio does not include any problem projects (PPs), two 

projects have suffered considerable implementation delays and may be cancelled pursuant to Directive 

No. 02/2015: (i) the Economic Governance Strengthening Support Project (PARGEF), approved on 1 

July 2015, and the Project to Improve Electricity Service in the City of Bissau (PASEB), approved on 

8 July 2015. 

2.7.2 Therefore, the design of PDCV-Riz took into account: (i) enhancement of the quality-at-entry 

of the project by making feasibility studies available and preparing the first computer-assisted designs 

(CADs); (ii) special focus on the involvement of local actors, in particular producers directly concerned, 



 

9 

through an inclusive participatory process; (iii) involvement of other partners (BOAD, WFP, etc.), to 

ensure coherence, complementarity and synergies in selected activities; (iv) focus on the procurement 

process and methods, relying on an experienced project team that was already in place; and (v) 

indispensable capacity-building needs of the various actors. Taking into account the aforementioned 

strategic guidelines, the project formulation also emphasized certain topics, in particular: (i) food and 

nutrition security; (ii) value chain approach; (iii) employment of young people and women; and (iv) 

resilience to climate change. To ensure good quality-at-entry and to anticipate performance essential to 

the start-up of activities, the initial sites chosen for development were those for which studies were 

available or at an advanced stage (market gardening sites, Contuboel, National Agricultural Research 

Institute (INPA) station, etc.). All these arrangements will help to satisfy the design and implementation 

criteria set out in Presidential Directive No. 002/2015. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation specialist will be responsible for the internal monitoring and evaluation 

of project activities and logical framework indicators, working in liaison with the technical experts (rural 

engineer, food crop specialist and producer organizations). Special emphasis will be placed on the 

targeting of areas that might be monitored and collected internally, and those relating specifically to 

women and young people (data disaggregated for women and young people). The main performance 

indicators that will be monitored from the baseline scenario include: (i) surface area of lowlands and 

mangroves developed with partial control for rice; (ii) surface area of rice-growing areas developed with 

full control; (iii) surface area of market gardening areas developed; (iv) infrastructure developed 

(number of markets commissioned, kilometres of farm roads, number of stores for storage of produce, 

number of input shops, etc.); (v) level of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (vi) 

number of farmers (including women) per type of facility; (vii) number of demonstration units (DUs), 

technological review workshops organized; (viii) number of structured producer organizations and 

management committees established, (ix) growth level of farmers’ income, including those of women 

and young people; (x) number of jobs created for young people and women through entrepreneurial 

initiatives and number of young entrepreneurs who set up operations; (xi) number of producers, 

processors and traders trained and organized; (xii) level of involvement of women in decision-making 

bodies and their rate of access to post-development land; (xiii) number of processing units established 

and allocated (including for women); and (xiv) number of nutrition activities supported and level of 

incidence on food and nutrition security. All indicators selected for the project will be aligned on those 

selected for the PNIA and will help to enhance the performance of the agricultural sector in Guinea-

Bissau. The Bank’s various supervision missions and periodic activity reports will reflect the level of 

achievement of the indicators. 

III Project Feasibility 

 

3.1 Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) CFAF 7,378 million  

IRR (baseline scenario) 14.6% 

ERR (baseline scenario) 17.1% 

 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic analysis was conducted based on cost/benefit of 

additional cash flow from the production models of the two priority sectors (rice and market gardening). 

The following assumptions were used: (i) the period for evaluating the impact of PDCV-Riz is 25 years; 

(ii) the average basic prices, yields and production costs of the 2015/2016 farm year were selected for 

the baseline scenario and realistic projections were made up to the cruising period of the project, taking 

into account the existing potential and the absorptive capacity of beneficiaries; (iii) additional income 

was determined by calculating the difference between the baseline scenario and the with-project 



 

10 

scenario, based on gross proceeds less production costs; (iv) an equal inflation rate was selected for jobs 

and resources on the cash flow table; (v) for the calculation of the economic rate of return, a cost 

correction coefficient was added for factors related to distortions inherent in customs duty. The detailed 

assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, the tables of the operating models (baseline 

scenario and with-project scenario) and financial and economic flows are presented in Annex B7 of 

Volume 2. The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PDCV-Riz is financially and 

economically sustainable. 

3.1.2 Financial performance: The additional income resulting from the different development and 

operating models selected is as follows: (i) mangroves with partial water control (rice): CFAF 555 

000/hectare and CFAF 278 000 per operator; (ii) lowlands with partial water control (rice): FCFA 676 

000/hectare and FCFA 290 000 per operator; (iii) lowlands with full water control (double cropping of 

rice and seeds): CFAF 2 220 000/hectare and CFAF 555 000 per operator; (iv) lowlands with full water 

control (double cropping of rice for final consumption): CFAF 1 376 000/hectare and CFAF 344 000 

per operator; and (v) irrigated market gardening: CFAF 3 415 000/hectare and CFAF 341 000 per 

beneficiary. The additional income generated will help to increase the overall value added of the project 

and hence its contribution to the agricultural GDP. The internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 

14.60%, for an NPV of CFAF 6,974 million. With sensitivity tests established based on a 10% income 

reduction, a 10% cost increase and a 10% simultaneous cost increase and income reduction, the IRR 

comes to 12.3%, 12.5% and 10.3%, respectively. This IRR is relatively satisfactory and will help to 

reduce the poverty rates in the project area.  

3.1.3 Economic performance: The economic rate of return (ERR) stands at 17.1%, for a net present 

value (NPV) of CFAF 7,378 million. In the context of Guinea-Bissau, this amount is significant: by 

comparison, it represented 11.2% of the country’s tax revenue or 1.3% of its GDP in 2014. The 

sensitivity tests established on the same basis as above bring the ERR to 14.6%, 14.8% and 12.5%, 

respectively. The other project economic impacts can be summarized as follows: (i) upstream effects of 

additional income on providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, engineering firms); (ii) downstream 

effects of the generation of additional income on producers, traders and processors, essentially women; 

(iii) decrease in foreign exchange costs owing to the sharp reduction of rice import costs in the trade 

balance; and (iv) the incidence on wealth creation in the country owing to an increase in GDP resulting 

from the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will translate 

into, among other things, better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of child-bearing age 

and the elderly); reduction of medical bills and the difficulty of agricultural tasks, especially those 

performed by women; decrease in the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty; strengthening 

of livelihoods and resilience of the targets of PDCV-Riz in relation to food insecurity and the effects of 

climate change. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The environmental and social impacts of the facilities of PDCV-Riz will not be 

significant. The facilities will be relatively modest and will be built in less environmentally sensitive 

communities. Their dispersion throughout the two regions of Oio and Bafata will also reduce their 

impacts. It is also worth noting that there are no protected areas or reserved forests3 in the project area. 

The main impacts anticipated are quite positive. Appropriate measures will be taken to address the 

potential negative impacts (conflicts between farmers and herders, poor use of pesticides, water-borne 

diseases, etc.). Under the Bank’s Environmental Safeguards Policies, the project was classified in 

Category 2 and was the subject of a strategic environmental assessment, and an environmental and 

social management framework was developed because the sites where the infrastructure will be located 

had not yet been selected. The Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) of Guinea-

Bissau has also classified the project in Category B, the equivalent of the Bank’s Category 2 

                                                 
3 Guinea-Bissau does not have a forest reserve. Its primary forest relics are being gradually replaced by mono-specific cashew farms, considerably 

reducing biodiversity in the two regions.   



 

11 

classification, pursuant to Act No. 10/2010 of 24 September 2010 on environmental assessments. The 

environmental and social management framework as well as its summary were approved by the 

Safeguards Division and published on the Bank’s website on 7 November 2016. 

3.2.2 For the implementation of the environmental aspects of the project, the arrangements made 

with the AAAC include: validation of the environmental and social assessment reports at the national 

level, AAAC’s implication in the environmental screening of sub-projects, validation of impact studies 

related to the sub-projects, and where applicable, oversight of the implementation of mitigation 

measures, as well as environmental monitoring. In this regard, the project will sign a memorandum of 

cooperation with the AAAC for better management of the environmental aspects of the project. The 

budget for future impact studies of sub-projects, implementation of resulting measures, the capacity-

building programme for the administration and the beneficiary population, institutional support for the 

AAAC and environmental monitoring is estimated at slightly more than UA 71 000. The capacity 

building will address directly a constraint identified in the CSP for Guinea-Bissau.  

3.2.3 Climate change: The project was classified a Category 2 project following climate screening 

based on the Bank’s safeguards system against the effects of climate change. This category corresponds 

to projects that may be vulnerable to climate risks and that require a climate risk review and the proposal 

of appropriate adaptation measures to mitigate those risks.  

3.2.4 Main characteristics of the country’s climate: Despite the relative climate stability seen over 

the past few decades, there are still some variability in the country’s climate parameters, in particular 

irregularity in the frequency of rainfall and a worsening of the rainfall deficit in a few regions, notably 

the North and the East. Projections by the Weather Service for 2100 call for an 11.7% decrease in 

rainfall, a 2% increase in temperature and a 50-cm increase in average sea levels. However, rainfall 

surpluses can also be seen from year to year in certain parts of the country, due essentially to exceptional 

climate events attributable, in particular, to global climate disturbances. However, the level of variation 

in rainfall over the past decade remains low. 

3.2.5 Main climate risks in the project area: There is no known history of severe drought in the 

project area. During the rainy season, rice farms may sometimes become flooded in places during 

periods of normal rainfall. This phenomenon is primarily the result of sand silting in the natural canals 

that serve as outlets to the production sites. 

3.2.6 Mitigation measures: To deal with the effects of climate change, the project will adopt the 

measures prescribed by the National Action Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change (PANA) 

following participatory assessments of the country’s vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, 

based on the agricultural sector diagnoses. The PANA offers a set of adaptation measures, most notably 

a significant increase in the level of food security among the people by building the adaptation capacity 

of agricultural production systems, in order to reduce the pressure on forest and fishery resources, while 

improving access to drinking water for human consumption and for cattle. The project fully aligns its 

activities on PANA’s strategic orientations by developing lowlands and horticulture, with a view to 

strengthening the food and nutrition security of the beneficiary population. The project will use a holistic 

approach that is designed to eliminate constraints at all levels of the rice and horticultural value chains. 

More specifically, it will introduce in the horticultural areas solar technology for water control and for 

reducing substantially the use of fossil energies in the dewatering systems.  

3.2.7 For better management of occasional flooding in rice fields, the natural canals of the target 

sites will be drained and resized to allow for the evacuation of any excess flow in the rice-growing 

lowlands concerned. To prevent sanding in rice fields, which is the primary cause of flooding in the 

lowlands, bunds consolidated with soil-fixing plants will be built opposite slopes with strong runoff. At 

the foot of the bunds, evacuators will be created to make it easy for runoff to be drained laterally to 

appropriate deposition areas. Water resources will be better managed with facilities, which will be 

upgraded and equipped with an adequate drainage system. Irrigation will be offered on sites with water 



 

12 

potential that can adequately meet crop water needs. The project will also make it easier for producers 

to acquire certified seeds by putting in place a programme related to the INPA and multiplier 

organizations. It will also introduce reasoned use of fertilizer to improve yields, and hence agricultural 

productivity. The related agricultural infrastructure will be set up and designed with additional measures 

for adapting to climate change, to make them more resilient. 

3.2.8 Involuntary resettlement: The activities of PDCV-Riz will not lead to any resettlement of 

people or restriction of access to goods and means of living. 

3.2.9 Gender: In collaboration with UN-Women, the Bank established a gender profile for Guinea-

Bissau in 2014. The situational analysis shows that, out of a population of 1.7 million people (2014 

estimate), 50.3 % are women. The average number of school enrolment among women is 1.4 and 76.5 

% of women live below the poverty line. This unfavourable situation for women is even more 

pronounced at a time of political instability and weak economic performance in the country. Even 

though more than 80% of women work in the agricultural sector, including in the processing and 

marketing of farm products, access to land, particularly for rice farming, and to factors of production 

remains limited. They are confined to farm work and to processing with rustic implements. In the 

regions targeted by the project, 60% of rice farmers in the lowlands are women. The horticultural areas 

are essentially used by women, who occupy virtually the entire value chain. |For this project, and in 

keeping with its new strategy, the Bank will pay special attention to the strategic interests of women, 

promotion of inclusive growth and improvement of the status of women in the two regions covered.  

3.2.10 The project will give priority to rural activities undertaken by women, for which they have 

recognized expertise (market gardening, lowland rice farming, processing activities, marketing, etc.) 

and from which they can derive an income. The three horticultural areas are essentially reserved for 

women, as is a good portion of lowland rice fields, with land-securing mechanisms that will be 

supported by the project (social assessment, consultation frameworks, licensing, etc.). The increase in 

the purchasing power of beneficiaries (income rising from CFAF 114 000 to 359 000/rice farm and 

from CFAF 37 000 to 373 000/market gardening farm) will enable the 1 720 households concerned, 

particularly the women, to have easier access to basic socio-economic services. The project will apply 

affirmative action in favour of women and vulnerable groups in any area where local practices tend to 

exclude them from decision-making bodies or from certain benefits. In general, the project will ensure 

that women have access to factors of production (developed land, agricultural inputs, production 

equipment and materials), in the organization and management of new infrastructure (stores, markets, 

etc.), as well as access to training. Therefore, it will help to strengthen the economic empowerment and 

decision-making power of women, which will give them greater social visibility and bolster their socio-

economic status. Specifically, the budget allocated specifically to gender promotion activities is UA 

833 000. 

3.2.11 Nutrition: The project will develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality 

of food consumed by the people, especially by women and children, and will collaborate with the World 

Food Programme to develop three school canteens as a pilot. The additional production of rice (2 000 

tonnes) and horticultural products (390 tonnes) will help to improve feeding and nutrition, and hence 

the health of the population. The need to incorporate direct nutrition activities into the project activities 

is essential to have an impact on the nutritional status of the population. Specific and indirect nutrition 

activities of the programme will also help to improve the nutritional status of children and women. The 

setting up of vegetable gardens in some schools with the help of women’s groups will contribute to 

enhancing the food regime within the communities. Activities designed to prevent the resurgence of 

water-borne diseases will also help to improve health and nutrition among the population. 

3.2.12 Social: The different activities undertaken as part of the project (improved access to factors of 

production, technical itineraries for production, processing and marketing) will help considerably in 

ensuring food and nutrition security, and raising income levels. In so doing, they will help to reduce the 

poverty rate considerably. The project will further strengthen connectivity between producers and 



 

13 

markets through partnerships that will be beneficial for all actors of the rice and horticulture value 

chains. Strengthening food security through the developments and raising awareness of good feeding 

practices will help to improve the nutritional status of the population, particularly of vulnerable groups 

such as women of childbearing age and children below the age of five. The rehabilitation of roads, 

construction of storage/conservation stores, rehabilitation of markets and support of processing units 

will contribute to reducing post-harvest losses (expected to decline by at least 20%), make it easier to 

sell products, and therefore increase agricultural production and household income. By making it easier 

for beneficiaries to participate in decision-making processes and to secure land (management of 

community infrastructure, management of conflicts between farmers and herders, maintenance of access 

roads, etc.), the project will also be instrumental in bolstering the local development process and 

promoting good governance.  

3.2.13 The promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women (close to 100 

persons targeted), will help to create a business culture among people proposing projects aimed at 

increasing the income of poor people and creating jobs for young people and women. The development 

of agricultural entrepreneurship will make the rural areas more attractive and create several production 

hubs in the project area, through training of young producers and helping them set up their operations. 

This approach will make it possible to obtain concrete results and ensure that actions are sustainable. 

The project will also make it easier for young promoters to acquire materials, equipment and critical 

inputs (basic kits) based on their business plans and areas of specialization. The training will involve 

basic concepts and specialization modules. There will also be a la carte training, taking into account the 

specific needs identified in the project area  

IV Implementation 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Implementation procedure: The project implementation will hinge on an autonomous 

coordination arrangement, involving a small team based at Bafata and placed under the supervisory 

authority of the MADR, with a liaison office at Bissau. The team will comprise a national coordinator, 

an administrative and financial officer responsible for accounting management, a procurement 

specialist, a monitoring/evaluation officer, a rural engineering expert, an agricultural engineer 

specialized in value chains and a specialist in famer organizations and gender, a liaison officer based in 

Bissau and support staff. Given its experience (proper understanding of Bank procedures, participation 

in formulation, etc.), and good results obtained in the implementation of PRESAR, the PRESAR expert 

team will be responsible for implementing and monitoring PDCV-Riz activities. An order was issued 

by the MADR on 26 October 2016 confirming the team. The experts will all sign a performance 

contract, which will be evaluated annually.  

4.1.2 Considering the weak capacity of State services and actors at the grassroots, NGOs 

(APRODEL and ADPP, which are firmly implanted respectively in Bafata and Oio) will be recruited to 

strengthen the conduct of activities in the areas of leadership, advisory support and training, structuring 

and organization of producers, around value chains. Agreements and protocols will be signed with these 

entities, specifying their respective roles and the expected outcomes. An agreement will also be signed 

with the Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) for the environmental monitoring 

of the project. Furthermore, the project will ensure close involvement of the regional directorates of 

agriculture in Bafata and Oio. Private service providers (contractors, consulting firms, NGOs, individual 

consultants, etc.) will be responsible for the delivery of certain works, goods and services, in accordance 

with the procurement methods defined in the financing agreements. The NGOs known as ADPP and 

APRODEL, which have specific infrastructure and expertise in the project area, will be responsible for 

training, structuring and producer support. The local population will take part in certain labour-intensive 

works (ring dykes, live hedges and routine maintenance) under the supervision of specialized NGOs 

and with the support of the Directorate-General of Forestry and Wildlife. 



 

14 

4.1.3 Supervision of activities: A Steering Committee will be set up, chaired by the Minister in 

charge of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR), or his/her designated 

representative. The Committee's secretarial services will be provided by the Project Coordinator. In 

addition to the relevant MADR technical departments, the Steering Committee will comprise: the 

Directorate-General for Planning, the Ministry of Infrastructure, the Secretariat of State for the 

Environment, the Ministry in charge of Women and Youth, ANAG and QNCOCPA. Its functions will 

include: (i) monitoring the project implementation; (ii) ensuring coherence and planning of eligible 

activities; (iii) conducting an annual review of the progress report, and approving the annual technical 

programme and budget; (iv) evaluating the project impacts and outcomes; (v) identifying constraints to 

and opportunities for the improvement of project impacts; and (vi) ensuring technical and 

methodological compliance with project objectives, the objectives of the Terra Ranka PSO and relevant 

sector policies, including the PNIA and the Rice Development Strategy. The Steering Committee will 

meet twice a year to review the project outcomes, validate the financial statements, discuss the 

programmes and approve the budgets related thereto. 

4.1.4 Procurement: The procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and 

consultancy services financed by the Bank for the project will be carried out in accordance with the 

Procurement Framework for Operations Financed by the Bank Group, October 2015, and in accordance 

with the provisions set out in the financing agreements. However, although progress has been made to 

forge public procurement in Guinea-Bissau into a functional system, substantial progress remains to be 

made, notably in the regulatory and management frameworks, internal and external oversight, the 

complaints mechanism, building the capacity of all actors in public procurement, and putting in place 

mechanisms for the coherent and effective operationalization of the various bodies involved in the 

process (ANAP, DGCP and ARCP). Risk assessment was carried out at the country, sector and project 

levels and the procurement capacity of the executing agency evaluated. The outcomes (substantial risks 

for the most part) helped to guide the selection of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third 

Party) used for specific activities or for a set of similar activities under the project. Therefore, the Bank's 

Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPMPs) based on the relevant standard competitive bidding 

documents (SCBDs) will be used for the procurement of goods, works and consultancy services. 

Appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA Action Plan provided in 

paragraph B.5.2 of Annex B5, Volume 2.  

4.1.5 Financial management: Given that the public management system in force in the MADR was 

deemed unsatisfactory upon assessment, a parallel accounting system based on the SYSCOHADA 

accrual accounting method will be set up and managed by a PMU officer responsible for the 

administrative, financial and accounting management of the project. The PMU of PDCV-Riz will 

comprise, in addition to the other experts, an Administrative and Financial Officer (AFO) who will have 

at his/her disposal the management tools that were procured under PRESAR. These tools, comprising 

the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and the accounting management 

software package, will be updated and adapted to the new project prior to its start-up and the staff trained 

in the use of such tools. The AFO will produce quarterly financial monitoring reports providing details 

on the implementation of activities and the use of the financial resources of the project, and an annual 

financial statements consisting of the balance sheet, table of supply and use, status of the capital assets 

and notes to the financial statements to which the reconciliation statement of the special account will be 

annexed. The satisfactory experience acquired by the Project Management Unit of the Bank-financed 

PRESAR project warrants the maintenance of the same financial management staff since they have the 

requisite qualifications. Training on Bank financial management requirements will be provided by Bank 

experts at project launch. 

4.1.6 Disbursements: The financial implementation of the project will mainly involve the 

reimbursement, special account and direct payment methods. An account will be opened with a 

commercial bank acceptable to the Bank to receive part of the ADF loan resources and will be used to 

finance operating expenses. Opening of this account will be a condition precedent to first disbursement. 



 

15 

This special account will be used for an initial advance whose amount will be determined based on the 

estimated budget for six months of project activities. The special account will be replenished on the 

same basis after the borrower must have justified the use of at least 50% of the amount of the previous 

advance. The direct payment method will be used for expenses relating to goods, services and works 

contracts. Training in Bank disbursement rules and procedures will be provided at the project launch. 

4.1.7 Audits: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to African Development Fund 

financing agreements, the country shall account for the use of the resources that it will be allocated. 

Therefore, an independent and competent external audit firm will verify once a year the reliability of 

the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the project management team, and will assess 

the functioning of the internal oversight system of the entire project. The audit firm will be recruited 

according the Bank’s terms of reference and following a competitive bidding procedure recommended 

by the Bank. The terms of reference shall be subject to the Bank’s prior approval. The continuation of 

audit services during the last two years will be contingent on the Bank's validation of the audit report 

for the first year. The audit expenses will be financed with ADF resources. Audit reports will be 

forwarded to the Bank on an annual basis latest six months following the close of the audited fiscal year. 

4.2 Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The project's monitoring and evaluation system will be designed in 

relation to the activities selected and the expected outputs and outcomes contained in the logical 

framework of the project. The system will be participatory and will provide regular information on 

performance and impact indicators as well as on the implementation of planned activities. The project 

partners will be systematically involved in the data collection and monitoring effort. A baseline situation 

will be established, based on the final hydro-agricultural sites selected. The monitoring and evaluation 

framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to make the outcomes concerning 

women, youths and the most vulnerable groups more visible. Targeted surveys will also be conducted 

to better understand issues relating to income, food security, nutrition, job creation, gender 

mainstreaming, and aspects related to vulnerability and resilience. The information collected will be fed 

into the computerized monitoring and evaluation system to capture actual values and gauge the impacts 

and outcomes of the project. This information will be recorded in periodic progress reports, highlighting 

the level of progress of the project and the achievement of outcomes. External monitoring and evaluation 

missions involving the relevant sector departments and GAPLA will also be organized regularly by the 

Government, in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the African Development 

Bank with the support of its Dakar Office.  

  



 

16 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule: 

 

Activities  Date/ Period   Responsible Entity 

Preparation May-August 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of the ESMF September 2016  AfDB 

Evaluation 1st half October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of priority PDs and CBDs 4th quarter 2016/1st half 2017  PMU 

Appointment of PMU 26 October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

PDCV-Riz negotiation 21 November 2016  Govt./AfDB 

Board of Directors 14 December 2016  AfDB 

Signing of the financing agreement January 2017  AfDB/Govt. 

Effectiveness of the first disbursement February-March 2017  Govt./AfDB 

Launching of PDCV-Riz end of 1st quarter 2017  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Signing of agreements with partners 1st half of 2017  PMU/Partners/ST 

Preparation of remaining PDs and CBDs 2017 to 1st half 2018  PMU/MAEP 

Works implementation and service delivery 2017 to 2019  Contractors/Firms/PMU 

Implementation of operational activities 2017 to 2020  PMU/Govt./Sce. Providers  

Mid-term review 1st quarter 2019  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Project completion date 31 December 2020  PMU/GVT/AfDB 

Completion report 2nd quarter 2021  AfDB/Govt. 

 

4.3 Governance 

4.3.1 Indicators relating to political, economic and social governance remain mixed in Guinea-

Bissau, despite the progress made in recent years. As regards political governance, it is necessary to 

find lasting resolutions to possible conflicts and establish mechanisms for ensuring justice. Indeed, in 

2016, the country was ranked 44th out of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim African Governance Index 

(and particularly 43rd in the rule of law sub-indicator). In the area of economic governance, particularly 

in public financial management, the country’s performance has deteriorated as a result of the crisis and 

the capacity to mobilize domestic resources remains weak, as noted in the Bank’s analysis on the 

governance of projects approved in 2015 and in the CPIA scores for 2016 (Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment).   

4.3.2 As part of PDCV-Riz implementation, and in an effort to mitigate the risks inherent in the 

weaknesses and instability of the administration and improve the project quality-at-entry, it was decided 

to maintain the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Agricultural and Rural Sectors Rehabilitation 

Project (PRESAR), since this PMU was already conversant with Bank procedures, and to capitalize on 

existing implementation studies, particularly those relating BOAD and PESAR capitalization. 

Moreover, although progress has been achieved in aligning the procurement system on WAEMU 

guidelines, the bureaucracy characterizing the procurement system is still one of the main challenges in 

the implementation of development programmes. Regarding procurement, operational arrangements 

were adopted to address the weaknesses observed.   

4.4 Sustainability  

Rudimentary facilities often have a limited lifespan and require major rehabilitation from time to time, 

which may exceed the capacity of beneficiaries, including women, who are heavily involved in rice 

farming. In this respect, the project will pay special attention to the quality and sustainability of the 

facilities that will be put in place. Structuring works will be carried out based on detailed technical 

studies and will involve specialized enterprises or skilled jobbers. That will concern works on large-

scale retention, anti-salt or protection dykes, major drainage ditches and irrigation canals, spillways, 

certain levelling works, etc. Labour-intensive techniques will be reserved only for certain secondary 

developments that can be reasonably carried out by the people, such as routine maintenance of facilities 

that been built already. On the other hand, the facilities enhance the people's adaptive capacity and 

resilience to recurrent climate risks, and reduce the economic vulnerability of beneficiaries. The high 

motivation of the beneficiaries observed during field missions is a factor that guarantees their 



 

17 

participation in all maintenance activities and works, and consequently the sustainability of the facilities. 

Other factors that will contribute to the sustainability of the project include secure tenure rights over the 

land where the project is located, support for the organization of beneficiaries and adoption of 

management tools to ensure the proper maintenance and the settlement of the recurrent costs of 

infrastructure (irrigation schemes, markets, stores, farm-to-market roads, etc.), and enhancement of the 

organization of producers. In addition, activities under the component for the promotion of rural 

entrepreneurship, processing and market access are sources that will generate value added and create 

wealth, which are factors of ownership of project achievements by the direct beneficiaries.   

4.5 Risk Management  

Political instability, coupled with a difficult economic situation, poses a real risk to the implementation 

of this project, and other portfolio operations. The weak capacity of the technical services involved, lack 

of familiarity with the procedures and the cumbersome procurement process, weak ownership of project 

achievements by beneficiaries and risks of conflicts between farmers and transhumant stockbreeders 

could adversely impact adherence to the project implementation schedule and the achievement of 

outcomes. However, these risks will be minimized by the fact that: (i) the development of the 

infrastructure needed to improve socio-economic and environmental resilience will lay the groundwork 

for inclusive growth and improved stability; (ii) the project team (formerly the PRESAR team) is already 

familiar with Bank procedures; (iii) the involvement of technical services and beneficiaries in the 

preparation of PDCV-Riz and the selection of sites, land tenure security measures, and the structuring 

and training of management and maintenance committees involving women, will lead to better 

performance and ownership. Through its second component, PDCV-Riz will scale up the support 

provided to communities in order to guarantee the sustainability and durability of investments, on an 

economically and socially viable basis.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PDCV-Riz operations that will lead to better management and knowledge development may be 

summarized as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in the area of local community resilience 

and adaptability to the recurrent impacts of climate change, through hydro-agricultural works and better 

control of water resources; (ii) dissemination of new production and processing technologies: 

development of expertise in drip irrigation techniques by setting up a demonstration site at the Bissora 

ADPP location, dissemination of solar dryers and onion storage sheds, and promotion of mechanization; 

(iii) establishment of demonstration units and dissemination of best practice: integrated soil fertility 

management (ISFM), sustainable land management (SLM), integrated water resource management 

(IWRM) and integrated pest and production management (IPPM) will help to protect and preserve 

resources, and mitigate the vulnerability of soil resources; (iv) organization of production and 

transformation technology review workshops and exchange visits as tools for encouraging interaction 

between researchers, consultants and producers in an effort to adapt technologies to the local context; 

(v) conduct of awareness and information campaigns through various communication channels 

(community radios, media programmes, websites, films, etc.); and (vi) promotion of innovative youth 

and women's employability actions in conjunction with ADPP, and activities to enhance the resilience 

of vulnerable groups to food and nutrition insecurity.   

V Legal Framework  

 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a Protocol Agreement and a Loan Agreement signed between 

the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. 

 

 



 

18 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

5.2.1 The legal framework of the project will be an ADF Loan Agreement and an ADF Grant 

Protocol between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. The agreements thus signed, to the 

satisfaction of the two parties in both form and substance, will include the terms and conditions of use. 

The effectiveness of the ADF Loan Agreement will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the 

conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan and Guarantee 

Agreements of the Bank (ratification of the Loan Agreement and legal opinion). The ADF Grant 

Protocol will be effective from the date of its signature.  

5.2.2 In addition to the effectiveness of the two financing agreements, the first disbursement of the 

ADF loan and grant will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower/Donee, to the satisfaction of the 

Fund, of the following single condition: 

(i) Provide evidence of opening of an account, in the project's name, with a commercial 
bank acceptable to the Fund to receive part of the ADF loan resources, and including full 

bank references of the account. 

5.2.3 Regarding other terms and conditions, the Borrower/Donee will further transmit, to the 

satisfaction of the Fund, at the latest six months after the first disbursement: 

(i) The agreements signed with APRODEL and ADPP (both NGOs), which must have been 
previously submitted to the Bank for approval. 

(ii) The project's administrative, accounting and financial management procedures manual. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The project will be implemented within the 

framework of the Bank's intervention strategy in Guinea-Bissau, as defined in the CSP 2015-2019. 

VI Recommendation 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to award an 

ADF grant of UA 0.493 million and extend an ADF loan of UA 3.722 million to the Republic of Guinea-

Bissau, for the purpose and according to the terms and conditions set out in this report. 

 



 

I 

Annex I: Guinea-Bissau’s Comparative Socio-economic Indicators 

 

  

Year
Guinea-

Bissau
Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2016 36 30 067 94 638 36 907
Total Population (millions) 2016 1,9 1 214,4 3 010,9 1 407,8
Urban Population (% of Total) 2016 48,5 40,1 41,6 80,6
Population Density  (per Km²) 2016 67,2 41,3 67,7 25,6
GNI per Capita (US $) 2014  550 2 045 4 226 38 317
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2016 72,8 65,6 63,9 60,3
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2016 67,3 55,6 49,9 52,1
Gender -Related Dev elopment Index  Value 2007-2013 0,381 0,801 0,506 0,792
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 187 countries) 2014 178 ... ... ...
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2008-2013 67,1 42,7 14,9 ...

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2016 2,4 2,5 1,9 0,4
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2016 3,9 3,6 2,9 0,8
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2016 40,7 40,9 28,0 17,2
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2016 3,2 3,5 6,6 16,6
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2016 78,4 79,9 52,9 51,2
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2016 98,6 100,2 103,0 97,6
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2016 24,3 24,0 25,7 22,8
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2016 55,8 61,5 66,2 79,4
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2016 57,6 63,0 68,0 82,4
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2016 36,2 34,4 27,0 11,6
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2016 11,7 9,1 7,9 9,1
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 60,3 52,2 35,2 5,8
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2015 92,5 75,5 47,3 6,8
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2016 4,7 4,5 3,5 1,8
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 549,0 495,0 238,0 10,0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2016 17,6 31,0 ... ...

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 7,0 47,9 123,8 292,3
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2004-2013 58,5 135,4 220,0 859,8
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2015 45,0 53,2 68,5 ...
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 79,3 71,6 89,3 99,5
Healthy  life ex pectancy  at birth (y ears) 2013 51,5 54,0 57 68,0
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 20,8 39,4 61,2 99,4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2014 3,7 3,8 ... ...
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2014 369,0 245,9 160,0 21,0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2014 94,0 84,1 90,0 ...
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2014 69,0 76,0 83,5 93,7
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2014 17,0 18,1 16,2 1,1
Daily  Calorie Supply  per Capita 2011 2 304 2 621 2 335 3 503
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2013 1,1 2,6 3,0 7,7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2015 113,7 100,5 104,7 102,4
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2015 109,8 97,1 102,9 102,2
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2015 32,6 50,9 57,8 105,3
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2015 12,1 48,5 55,7 105,3
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2015 21,8 47,6 50,6 82,2
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2015 59,8 66,8 70,5 98,6
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2015 71,7 74,3 77,3 98,9
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2015 48,1 59,4 64,0 98,4
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2014 2,4 5,0 4,2 4,8

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2013 10,7 8,6 11,9 9,4
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2013 58,0 43,2 43,4 30,0
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2013 70,8 23,3 28,0 34,5
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2012 0,3 1,1 3,0 11,6

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

August 2016

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

Gu in ea -Bi ss au Afri ca

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

GNI Per Capita US $

Gu in ea -Bi ss au Afri ca

0,0

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

3,0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Population Growth Rate (%)

Gui ne a-Bis sau Afri ca

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

Gu in ea -Bi ss au Afri ca



 

II 

Annex II: Table of AfDB Portfolio in Guinea-Bissau (as at 30 September 2016) 
 

Active National Projects as at 30 September 2016 

Sector/Operation 

 

Approval 

Date  

Approved 

Amount 

(UA 

million) 

Disbursed 

Amount  

(UA 

million) 

Disbursement 

Rate  

(%) 

Closing 

Date 

 

 SOCIAL 

1 

 

Administration Capacity Building Project 

(PARCA)               - ADF grant 
15-July-09 7.80 1.06 13.6 31-Dec.-16 

2 Education Project III                          - ADF loan 

                                                          - NTF loan  

2-July-03 

2-July-03 

3.65 

3.51 

2.09 

0.39 

57.2 

11.3 

30-Sept.-16 

30-Sept.-16 

3 Emergency Assistance to Fight the Zika Virus. 

(Special Relief Fund (SRF) – Grant USD 1 million) 
8-Sept.-16 0.71 0 0 31-Dec.-17 

  Sub-Total   15.67 3.54 22.6   

 GOVERNANCE 

4 

 

 

 

Emergency Programme to Support Economic and 

Financial Reforms (PUAREF)                                                                     

                                                      - TSF loan 

                                                      - TSF grant  

 

 

13-May-15 

13-May-15 

 

 

3.87 

1.13 

 

 

3.87 

1.13 

 

 

100 

100 

 

 

31-Dec.-16 

31-Dec.-16 

5 

 

 

  Governance Strengthening Support Project 

(PARGEF)                                              - TSF grant 

 

 

1-July-15 

 

 

5.00 

 

 

0 

 

 

0 

 

 

30-June-19 

  Sub-Total   10.00 5.00 50   

 ENERGY 

6 

 

 

 

Bissau City Power Supply Improvement Project 

(PASEB)                                                                    

                                                      - ADF loan 

                                                      - ADF grant 

 

 

8-July-15 

8-July-15 

 

 

7.18 

6.12 

 

 

0 

0 

 

 

0 

0 

 

 

31-Dec.-18 

31-Dec.-18 

7 

 

 

Technical support to PRESAR in the area of 

climate change and the development of renewable 

energy (SSCTF grant) 

21-Dec.-12 0.58 0.58 100 

 

31-Dec.-16 

8 

 

Saltinho Hydropower Plant Project - Studies / 

preparation (SEFA grant) 
16-Sept.-15 0.69 0 0 31-Dec.-18 

  Sub-Total    14.57 0.58 3.9  
 RURAL 

9 

 

Project to Support the Capitalization. Optimization 

and Dissemination of PRESAR Results (SSCTF 

grant) 

21-Dec.-12 0.13 0.13 100 30-Nov.-16 

  Sub-Total  
 

0.13 0.13 100   

 TOTAL (UA million) 
  

40.37 9.25 22.9%   

* Source: SAP September 2016 

Sector distribution: Social Sector (38.8%); Energy (36.1%); Governance (24.8%) and Rural Sector (0.3%) 

 
 

Active Multinational Projects Involving Guinea-Bissau as at 30 September 2016 

 
  

Sector / Operation 

  

Approval 

Date  

Approved 

Amount 

(UA million) 

Disbursed 

Amount  

(UA million) 

Disburs

ement 

Rate  

(%) 

Closing 

Date 

 

 ENERGY          

1 OMVG Energy Project (ADF loan) 30-Sept.-15 3.81 0 0 31-Dec.-20 

 OMVG Energy Project (ADF grant)  30-Sept.-15 0.69 0 0 31-Dec.-20 

 Sub-Total    4.50 0 0  

 TOTAL (UA million)   4.50 0 0%  

* Source: SAP September 2016  



 

III 

Annex III: Map of Project Area  

 

 
 

Project Area  Legend 

Bafata Region   

Oio Region   

 

 

 



 

IV 

 

Annex IV: Fragility Context  

 

1 Guinea-Bissau faces multifaceted economic and structural factors of fragility that affect its 

institutional, geographic, security and socio-economic environment. These ills, which are mutually 

reinforcing, are based primarily on long-standing structural problems bequeathed by the country’s 

colonial system and the ensuing struggle for independence. The main sources of fragility in Guinea-

Bissau that were identified and analysed as part of the appraisal of PDCV-Riz may be summarized as 

follows: (i) poor infrastructure; (ii) extreme poverty and high unemployment among women and young 

people, and the scarcity of opportunities for their social and professional integration; and (iii) 

vulnerability of the economy to exogenous shocks due to its low diversification and high dependence 

on the primary sector, especially cashew-nut production; (iv) socio-economic exclusion of certain 

vulnerable groups; and (v) an unstable and uncertain political context. Other social and demographic 

factors also act as “fragility accelerators” and should be addressed by this project, namely: (a) the 

various forms of gender-based violence; and (b) population growth and rural exodus, which pose a real 

threat to the country's stability. 

2 The main challenge in Guinea-Bissau is to strengthen institutional, economic and social 

resilience, while building the capacity of State and non-State actors, reducing gender disparities and 

supporting the country's structural transformation through the establishment of key infrastructure to 

ensure inclusive and green growth. The country faces an enormous infrastructure deficit, which 

constitutes a major constraint to the sustained and inclusive growth of its economy. The low levels of 

investment in rural areas and the generation of economic and social enclaves have led, since 

independence, to urban growth; however, growth has not been matched with the formulation of 

appropriate development programmes and plans, but has rather occurred against a disorganized 

backdrop exacerbated by political instability. Agricultural areas have remained without connection to 

infrastructure and access to basic services, thus limiting all development initiatives that have the 

potential to generate decent jobs and equitable access to public goods and services throughout the 

country. Rural exodus aggravates unemployment and urban poverty, which in turn poses an additional 

risk of vulnerability. Despite the huge efforts made by the Government to ensure the political and 

economic stabilisation of the country, including through the development and adoption of the strategic 

document called “Terra Ranka” Vision 2015-2025, the country ranked 178th globally out of 188 

countries in the Human Development Index (HDI), according to the United Nations 2015 Report, with 

more than 80% of the population living below the poverty line. Poverty affects mainly young people 

and women. In this context, the agricultural sector may not only serve as a tool for achieving food 

security, but can also help to reduce poverty by curbing rural exodus.   

3 PDCV-Riz will help reduce fragility by applying the following measures during the design and 

implementation stages: (i) strengthen non-State actors such as grassroots associations, local NGOs and 

the private sector in terms of their economic and social commitments; (ii) strengthen dialogue with the 

Government of Guinea-Bissau, as well as with other TFPs in order to keep abreast of developments in 

the political and security situation, and factor political risks into the project's monitoring and evaluation 

system; (iii) ensure that the project takes account of social sensitivities by seeing to it that certain 

segments of the society are not left out and especially that gender equity is taken into account when 

making decisions related to access to land at community level; (iv) ensure that the project includes 

ancillary activities aimed at empowering the most vulnerable segments of society, in line with the policy 

of Ministry of Women, Family and Social Cohesion; (v) under the project, implement activities to raise 

awareness among and empower residents of the project area concerning good nutrition practices and 

ways of achieving food security; and (vi) contribute to the creation of sustainable jobs, especially for 

young people in both in the formal and informal sectors.     

.  



 

V 

 

Annex V. Rationale for Requesting a Waiver Allowing the Bank to Finance 92.4% of the Total 

Project Cost 

1. Context: Generally, the project will help to strengthen the country's resilience. As noted in the 
CSP 2015-2019 and the study on fragility in Guinea-Bissau, the lack of economic opportunities, the 

isolation of some regions, the weak infrastructure and the lack of involvement of non-state actors 

exacerbate the country’s fragility. Hydro-agricultural development and the opening-up of isolated 

regions are ways of boosting the Government’s legitimacy, building trust between the State and its 

citizens and increasing the inclusiveness of growth. PDCV-Riz is in line with the Terra Ranka Vision 

2015-2020 presented by the Government to donors in March 2015. The vision comprises a strategic and 

operational plan in which agriculture features as one of the sector priorities. The project is also in line 

with the second pillar of the Bank's Country Strategy Paper (CSP 2015-2019): “Development of 

infrastructure that will foster inclusive growth”. The inclusive scope of the project also explains its 

alignment on the Bank's Gender Strategy and Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022.   

2. Bank analyses highlight the fact that Guinea-Bissau is plagued by numerous fragility drivers 
characteristic of a post-conflict country: a need for state-building, basic infrastructure and reform 

required for inclusive growth. These fragility drivers plunged the country into a difficult economic and 

socio-political situation in the wake of the April 2012 coup d’état, which was followed by a transition 

period that lasted until mid-2014. With the end of the transition period and the gradual return to 

constitutional rule, despite a difficult political situation in 2016, one of the major challenges facing the 

country is the strengthening and development of basic infrastructure, which, besides fostering the return 

of peace and building institutional resilience, will help to mitigate the drivers of the country's fragility.   

3. Against this backdrop, it is proposed that the project cost, totalling UA 4.56 million, be 
financed to the tune of 92.4% by the Bank and that the Government should provide only 3.0% of this 

cost consisting of salaries of the staff seconded to the Project Management Unit (PMU), rents for PMU 

premises at Bafata and the liaison office at Bissau, as well as the revolving fund for the procurement of 

inputs, while the beneficiaries will contribute only 4.6% in the form of labour participation in the 

performance of certain unskilled, easy-to-undertake tasks. The waiver allows the Bank to finance 92.4% 

of the project cost, in accordance with the Policy on Expenditures Eligible for Bank Group Financing 

(ADBIBDIWP/2007fl06/Rev.2 - ADF/BD/WP /2007/72/Rev.2 of 2 May 2008). The waiver request is 

based on the three requirements laid down  by the above-mentioned Bank policy, particularly relating 

to cost-sharing, namely the country’s budget situation and debt level; the country's commitment to 

implement its development programme and reforms; and, lastly, the financing and capacity building 

levels in the sector targeted by the Bank assistance.   

4. Recent trends in the economic and financial situation: After the return to constitutional 
order in 2014, Guinea-Bissau experienced a gradual economic upturn, with growth rising from 0.9% in 

2013 to 2.7% in 2014 and finally reaching a rate estimated at 4.8% in 2015. Economic recovery was 

driven by a good cashew nuts marketing season and a sharp increase in food crop production. The main 

risks to growth in the short term are the political situation and climate change that may affect the primary 

sector. In 2015 and 2016, the political situation deteriorated, as evidenced by the repeated changes of 

Government and institutional deadlocks, particularly at the parliamentary level. These events took their 

toll on the fiscal situation and stymied the continuity of reforms, auguring a decline in the growth rate 

for 2016, originally estimated at 5.7%. 

5. Despite the resumption of growth in the wake of the transitional period, the bases of structural 
imbalance still remain. The country is heavily dependent on foreign aid and limited sources of income. 

The tax base remains very narrow, characterized by an extremely low number of taxpayers, and is 

mainly concentrated on a small number of revenue sources such as customs duties on imports, cashew 

exports and fishing agreements. The tax burden remains very low at 1.11% in 2016, below the 17% 

convergence criterion set by WAEMU. In addition, the budget structure remains rigid, particularly with 

a high proportion of wage-related expenses (50% of tax revenue at end-2015, compared with a 

community target of 35% maximum). 



 

VI 

 

6. Guinea-Bissau's debt burden has become sustainable since the country attained the Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative completion point in 2010. However, the debt burden remains 

relatively high, albeit been brought down to below the bar set by the WAEMU convergence criterion. 

Outstanding public debt dropped to 59.7% of GDP in 2014 after reaching 164% in 2009 (BCEAO). 

According to the IMF debt sustainability assessment for 2014, the public debt burden is deemed 

“moderate”. In terms of public finances, the situation is difficult in 2016. Since the beginning of the 

year, the country has operated without a voted budget and without budget support. At end-August 2016, 

revenue was 13% lower compared to the same period last year. A financing gap remains and the latest 

information seems to augur a difficult end of year.  




















































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

MULTINATIONAL (SOMALIA /SUDAN) 

RURAL LIVELIHOODS’ ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN 

THE HORN OF AFRICA II (RLACC II) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

AHAI DEPARTMENT  

 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 

P
u
b

li
c
 D

is
c
lo

s
u
re

 A
u
th

o
ri
z
e

d
 

 
 

 
P

u
b

li
c
 D

is
c
lo

s
u
re

 A
u
th

o
ri
z
e

d
 

 
 



 

Contents 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT .................................................................................................. i 

FISCAL YEAR .......................................................................................................................... i 

WEIGHT AND MEASURES ................................................................................................... i 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................. i 

GRANT INFORMATION ....................................................................................................... ii 

FINANCING PLAN ................................................................................................................. ii 

IMPORTANT FINANCIAL INFORMATION ..................................................................... ii 

PROGRAM SUMMARY ....................................................................................................... iii 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................. v 

RLACC II PROGRAM TIME FRAME ............................................................................... ix 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE .................................................................... 1 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ........................................................................................... 4 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY ............................................................................................. 9 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................. 12 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY ......................................................... 17 

VI. RECOMMENDATION ................................................................................................ 18 

 

ANNEX 1: CEO ENDORSEMENT LETTER OF THE FULL SIZE PROJECT 

SOMALIA ............................................................................................................... I 

ANNEX 2: CEO ENDORSEMENT LETTER OF THE FULL SIZE PROJECT 

SUDAN .................................................................................................................. II 

ANNEX 3: ONGOING BANK PORTFOLIO IN SOMALIA AT JUNE 2017 ............... III 

ANNEX 4: ONGOING BANK PORTFOLIO IN SUDAN AT JUNE 2017 ...................... IV 

ANNEX 5: FRAGILITY ASSESSMENT ............................................................................ VI 



 

i 
 

Currency Equivalent 

October 2016 

 

Unit of Account Currency 

1 UA  = 8,63480  (SUDANESE POUND) 

1 UA  = 861,028  (SOMALI SHILLING) 

1 UA  = 1,41733  (US DOLLAR) 

1 UA  = 1,24294  (EUROPEAN EURO) 

 

Fiscal Year 

Sudan: Oct. 1st – Sept. 30th  

Somalia: Jan. 1st – Dec. 31st   

 

Weight and Measures 

1 metric tonne   = 2204 pounds (lbs) 

1 kilogram (kg)  = 2.200 pounds (lbs) 

1 meter (m) = 3.28 feet (ft) 

1 millimeter (mm) = 0.03937 inch (in) 

1 kilometer (km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha) = 2.471 acres 

 

Acronyms and Abbreviations 

AfDB = African Development Bank 

AR-5 = Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC 

ASAL = Arid and Semi-Arid Lands 

COMESA = Common Market of Eastern and Southern Africa 

CSI =   Core Sector Indicator 

DRSLP = Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihood Program 

EIRR = Economic Internal Rate of Return 

FIRR = Financial Internal Rate of Return 

GEF = Global Environmental Facility 

HoA = Horn of Africa 

IGAD = Intergovernmental /// on Development 

IPCC = United nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

LDCF = Least Developed Countries Fund 

LPI = Livestock Policy Initiative 

M&E = Monitoring and Evaluation 

NGO = Non-Governmental Organization 

NPV = Net Present Value 

PAR = Project Appraisal Report 

PIU = Project Implementation Unit 

PCU = Project Coordination Unit 

RECs = Regional Economic Communities 

RLACC = Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change 

SCCF = Special Climate Change Fund 

TADs = Trans-boundary Animal Diseases 

UA = Unit of Account 

USD = US dollar 

 



 

ii 
 

Grant Information 

Client’s Information 

GRANT RECIPIENT Republic of Sudan and Federal Republic of Somalia 

EXECUTING AGENGIES 

Sudan Project:  Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment 

Somalia Project: Intergovernmental Authority on Development 

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (USD) Amount (UA) Percentage Instrument 

GEF Focal Area: 

Climate Change 

Adaptation 

17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

Sudan 7,082,407 4,997,006 41% GEF Grant 

Somalia 9,985,185 7,045,067 59% GEF Grant 

Total Cost 17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

 

Important Financial Information 

Grant Currency USD 

Type of Interest N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee N/A 

Service Charge N.A 

Tenor N/A 

Grace Period N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 17%, NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 millions 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 millions 

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

CEO Approval by the GEF 
Somalia: December, 2016 

Sudan: March 2017 

Project Approval by ADB November, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion January 2021 

Last Disbursement April 2021 

Closing date June 2021 

  



 

iii 
 

Program summary 

Overview. The Rural Livelihood’s Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of Africa – Phase II 

(RLACC II) project is a multinational program that covers Somalia and Sudan. The program activities 

are country-driven and will be implemented through two Projects respectively in Sudan and Somalia. 

- The Sudan component targets the States of White Nile, Gedaref and Kassala, for a total cost of 

USD 7,082,407; 

- The Somalia component targets Somaliland (Awal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and 

Salawley-Cheikh Hared), Puntland (Bari and Nugaal region), and South Central Somalia 

(Galguduud and Hiraan States), for a total of USD 9,985,185. 

Project Outcomes. The project is expected to improve the resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to climate change in the two countries  through: (i) introducing adaptation strategies to 

reduce the negative impacts of climate change and strengthen the capacity of pastoral/agro-pastoral 

households to cope with climatic hazards, (ii) enhancing the capacity of communities to not only absorb 

shocks, but to also effectively adapt their livelihoods to harsher climatic conditions, (iii) helping pastoral 

and agro-pastoral households manage drought risks, (iv) supporting community-led initiatives to protect, 

conserve and restore natural resources in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner, (v) strengthening 

the participation of pastoral communities in planning and implementing activities pertaining to their 

development. 

Although the RLACC II program targets specific villages or regions, an important criterion for the 

selection of targeted sites was their position in the target countries’ migration flows. Due to the seasonal 

migratory nature of pastoralists, the project’s benefits will not be limited to the project sites and their 

surroundings.  

Needs Assessment. Vulnerabilities and risks for the HoA have been assessed with the AR-5 (IPCC) and 

through Bank commissioned regional studies (Sustainable livestock Development in the HoA, 

Assessment and Management of Transboundary Water Resources in the IGAD, etc.). Various needs 

have also been identified through meeting and workshops with government officials and various 

stakeholders. 

Based on these assessments, the AfDB set in place a regional program called “Drought Resilience and 

Sustainable Livelihood Program” (DRSLP) which is currently being implemented to address drought 

and livelihood issues in the rural areas of the HoA. The proposed RLACC (II) program will be 

implemented to compliment the DRSLP.  

Bank’s Added Value. The Bank has significant experience in implementing multinational and regional 

operations, and is already implementing a set of programs covering various countries of greater Horn of 

Africa (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Djibouti, South-Sudan and Sudan) and addressing issues 

with significant trans-boundary implications, notably, the DRSLP which is being implemented in 

successional phases 1, 2, 3, and 4). Furthermore, the Bank is experienced in implementing GEF projects 

in general and GEF climate change adaptation operations in particular. 

Lessons learnt from the Bank’s involvement in these countries were incorporated in the design of the 

current program. The Bank also brings into the programming a fragility lens approach, which makes the 

design, implementation and review of projects more sensitive to the drivers of fragility with the goal of 

building resilience in countries and communities.  



 

iv 
 

Knowledge Management. Knowledge management approach for the project focuses on learning from 

other relevant projects / programs and initiatives, and planning for the project to assess, document and 

share these experiences and expertise with relevant stakeholders. Different knowledge management 

activities will thus be implemented through the RLACC II projects  

The program will also work in close collaboration, and share its best practices and lessons learned, with 

all co-financing projects, as well as other GEF financed initiatives and other projects implemented by 

the Bank and in the region. 

At the regional level, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) will be in charge of 

sharing knowledge product elaborated by the RLACC II and RLACC I at the regional level to foster 

knowledge sharing and utilization. PIUs, which carry out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s 

activities, will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information at the countries levels 

through the IGAD platform. At the regional level, this should result in dynamic and structured flows of 

information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC programs in the HoA. 

  



 

v 
 

Results-based logical framework 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

Im
p

a
c
t 

Contribute to the 

reduction of drought 
induced food 

insecurity through the 
implementation of 

adaptive measures to 

climate change in of 
the  targeted rural 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral communities  

Number of food 

insecure households 
and malnutrition 

rates 

Around 9 

million people 
are food 

insecure and 
the 

malnutrition 

rate is over 
25 % in both 

countries 

Reduce by at 

least 20% the 
number of food 

insecure 
households by 

at least 5% 

malnutrition 
rates. 

National survey 

and  reports 

 

 

Assumption: 
Governments 
continuous 

commitment to 

managing drought 

and building 

resilience 

 

O
u

tc
o

m
e
s 

1.1. Climate change-

related adaptation 

measures are 
integrated into 

development plans of 

targeted local 
communities 

 

Number of 
development plan 

that has at least one 

climate-change 
adaptation measures 

integrated and an 

indicative budget 
for its 

implementation by 

the end of the 
project.  

 

 

1.1.3. None of 
the 

development 

plans at the 
country level 

include at least 

one explicit 
adaptation 

measure and an 

indicative 
budget for its 

implementation 

 

1.1.3. At least 3 
pilot 

development 

plans in each 
country include 

at least one 

adaptation 
measure and an 

indicative 

provision for its 
implementation 

 

 

Government and 

community  

planning 
documents 

 

Risk: Lack or 
insufficient 

ownership of the 

project activities by 
the communities 

 

Mitigation: Early 
and sustained 

sensitization on the 

need for 
communities to 

engage in building 

resilience. 
 

 

 
Risk: Insufficient 

human and 
institutional 

capacities  

 
Mitigation: The 

programme will 

have capacity 
building activities 

in both countries 

 
 

 

Risk: A series of 
years without major 

climate events 

could weaken the 
interest of decision-

makers to address 

climate-sensitive 
initiative and 

investments 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
national and local 

decision-makers to 

the impact of CC 
and measures to 

increase the 

resilience at the 
local level with a 

long-term vision. 

 
 

2.1. Adaptation 

practices are 
developed and 

implemented to 

respond to specific 
climate-change 

induced stress in the 

livestock sector in 
ASALs ecosystems.  

 

Number of 

people/households 

adopting newly 
introduced 

adaptation practices 

that build their 
resilience in the 

face of  CC like 

strengthen women’s 
access to resources 

for sustainable food 

production, 
renewable energy, 

and clean water 

sources 

integration of 

livestock 
agriculture is 

the major 

adaptation 
practice  

 

≥ 4,000 

households 
(≥50% are 

women led) 

project survey, 

Assessment 
Report 

 

2.2. Vulnerabilities to 

climate change 
hazards are reduced 

for targeted pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 
communities 

 

Sources of income 

through 

diversification with 
number and 

percentage of jobs 

(person-days) 
generated by the 

project for women 

and men 

One major 

source of 
income 

 

At least 50% of 

people 

diversified their 
incomes with at 

least two major 

sources of 
income 

≥ 4,000 

households 

Field visit reports 
and project report 

3.1. Project 
coordination, 

Knowledge 

management and 
M&E are well 

implemented and 
coordinated  

Degree of execution 
of the project M&E 

Plan by the 

project’s end 

N/A 

The M&E plan 

is fully 

developed and 
executed in a 

timely manner 

M&E documents, 

PIRs, APRs, 
AWPs 

 O
u

tp
u

ts
 

1.1.1. Sensitization, 

awareness and 

information on climate 
change increased 

among local 

stakeholders 
 

1.1.1. % of men and 

women in project 

sites declaring to 
know what CC is 

and how it affects 

them in project sites. 
 

1.1.1. Lack of 

awareness on 

climate change 
adaptation 

techniques in 

the rural sector 
 

1.1.1. ≥ 60% of 

the people in 

project zones 
(≥40% are 

women)  

declare to know 
what climate 

1.1.1. project 

surveys 

 
 

 

 
 



 

vi 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. National sub-

national, and local 
government officials 

are trained on climate 

change resilience and 
their operational 

capacities are 

strengthened 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. Workshops are 
organized at national, 

state and local levels 

to draw lessons from 
project activities and 

mainstream them into 

development policies 
and strategic 

framework that 

increase adaptive 
capacity.  

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2 Number of 

decision makers and 
planners (men and 

women) trained on 

the integration of 
climate change 

adaptation tools and 

methods (water 
harvesting 

technologies, water 

resources 
management, 

farming methods 

and drought 
resistant varieties, 

alternative income 

generating 
activities) in their 

plans by the end of 

the project 
 

1.1.2. Availability 

of tools and 
methods for the 

integration of CC  

into local 
development plans 

by the end of the 

project, and the 
number of people 

using them 

(disaggregated by 
gender) 

 

1.1.3. Number of 
workshops, study 

tours and meetings 

held where lesson 
from the project 

were discussed by 

the end of the 
project (with 30% 

of women 

benefiting) 
 

1.1.3. Number of 

community-based 
agreements and 

adaptation plans 

that have input from 
both women and 

men, engaging in 
national debate and 

analysis of 

environmental 
impacts, and 

climate change 

policy, regulatory 
frameworks, and 

programs, 

 

 
 

 
 

0 person trained 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. Tools and 

methods are not 
available 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 

change is and 

how it affects 
them in project 

sites  
 

At least 2,440 

people trained 
(≥40% women) 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. ≥ 3 tools 

or methods, 
used by ≥ 1,500 

people (≥40% 

are women) in 
the two 

councils. 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3.  ≥ 8 
workshops, 

study tours and 

meetings 
organized to 

discuss project 

lessons in the 
project areas 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. At least 5 
community-

based 

agreements and 
adaptation 

plans by project 
site, with a 

women 

participation of 
about 40 % 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. training 

reports, project 
reports 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
Project 

implementation 

progress reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. 
Development 

framework, 

policies, plans and 
programs.  

 

 
Risk: Livestock-

related investments 
cost may become 

high given the low 

population density 
and the pastoral 

seasonal mobility 

 
Mitigation: The 

siting of 

infrastructure will 
be planned along 

the corridors so that 

it also caters for the 
needs of the 

transhumant 

pastoralists. 
 

 

 
Risk: Poor 

coordination and 

cooperation among 
key national 

institutions dealing 

with pastoralist 
issues 

 

Mitigation: 
Training and 

coordination of 

stakeholders on this 
issue 

 

 
 

 

Risk: inadequate 
acknowledgement 

of the role of civil 

society and CBOs 
by national and 

local governments. 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
officials on the 

importance of non-

governmental 
organizations 

during the project 

implementation and 
ultimately in the 

resilience-building 
process. 

 

 
 

 

Risk: conflicts 

between pastoralists 

and sedentary 



 

vii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

disaggregated by 

gender 
farmers as well as 

between different 
pastoral groups 

 
Mitigation: 

promotion of 

dialogue and 
conflict resolution 

mechanisms at 

various levels to 
broaden perspective 

and visions. 

2.1.1. Innovative 

adaptive techniques 

are implemented in 
order to ensure that 

pastoral infrastructure 

is climate resilient 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Specific 

adaptive activities and 

measures are adopted 
to ensure that pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities are 
climate-resilient 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Diversification 

of income-generating 

adaptive activities in 

order to lessen 
targeted pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities’ 

vulnerabilities. 

 
2.2.2. Development 

and strengthening of 

the supply chain for 
new income-

generating activities in 

target pastoral and 
agro-pastoral 

communities  

2.1.1. % of 

pastoralists 

benefiting from 
climate change 

compatible 

irrigation, water 

harvesting methods 

and agricultural 

practices 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
2.1.2. % of people 

who have adopted 

community-based 
adaptive activities 

in the context of 

climate-change 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
 

 

2.2.1. % of increase 

in household 

incomes as a result 

of project 
implemented 

adaptation measures 
disaggregated by 

gender 

 
2.2.2. Change in 

wellbeing of 

participating 
households in 

project activities 

(access to water, 
access to market, 

access to improved 

agro-pastoral 
technologies,…) 

  

2.2.2. Number of 
women with access 

to land and credit 

opportunities, smart 
seeds and crops as 

well as  

equipment 

2.1.1. N/A 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Lack of 

community-

based adaptive 
activities 

tackling 

climate change 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. N/A 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. N/A  

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2.N/A 

2.1.1. At least 

50% of target 

areas supplied 
in drinkable 

water and 

irrigation 

agriculture (at 

least 30% 

benefiting are 
women) 

 

 
2.1.2. 50% of 

the pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities 

adopting 

community-
based adaptive 

activities (at 

least 30% are 
women)   

 

2.2.1. 30% 

increase 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. ≥ 4,000 

households 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2. At least 
40 % of 

beneficiaries 

are women  

2.1.1. Survey 

Reports, Project 

Reports 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Project 

Reports and 

Meetings 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Project 

progress reports 

and supervision 

missions reports  
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. Field Visit 

Reports and 

Project Reports 

3.1.1. Knowledge 
products generated at 

national and regional 
level are attained 

 

3.1.2. Timely efficient 
and cost-effective 

project 

implementation and 
M&E systems set up 

and implemented  

3.1.1. Number of 
knowledge products 

developed by the 
project 

 

3.1.2. 
Implementation 

progress of project 

activities and the 
M&E system  

 

 
 

3.1.1. N/A 
 

 
 

 

3.1.2. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

3.1.1. ≥ 5 
knowledge 

products are 
developed 

 

3.1.2. 4 annual 
PIRs and 12 

quarterly 

progress 
reports, 1 Mid-

Term Review, 

1 Completion 
report 

3.1.1. knowledge 
products 

 
 

 

3.1.2. Project 
progress reports 

and M&E 

documents  

  



 

viii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

3.1.2 The generated 

data from the 
RLACC II M&E 

system is fed into 
the overall Drought 

resilience M&E 

framework for the 
HoA 

3.1.2 N/A At least one 

annual update 
of the Drought 

resilience M&E 
system is sent 

by the RLACC 

II.  

 

Components Costs (USD) 

1. Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience of 

their livelihoods to climate change in target areas  
  1,859,515 

2. Improving the sustainability of pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihoods  11,269,034 

3. Project management knowledge and M&E activities    1,801,058 

 Contingencies   2,137,986 

 Total (GEF grant) 17,067,592 
  



 

ix 
 

RLACC II Program Time Frame 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

INITIAL ACTIVITIES                      

Appraisal                      

Loan and Grant negociation and approval                     

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                     

Publication of the General Procurement Notice                     

Recruitment of project staff                     

Project Launching                     

Participatory confirmation and prioritisation of activities with communities                       

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs                     

Signature of agreements with partner entities                     

IMPROVIG ADAPTIVE CAPACITY AND THE RESILIENCE OF LIVELIHOODS TO CC                     

 Training of staff and stakeholders in the project’s various thematic areas                     

Workshops organized for mainstreaming of CC in policies and strategic frameworks at sub-national, national levels                     

IMPROVE THE SUSTAINABILITY OF PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL LIVELIHOODS                     

Meetings related to the adoption of adaptive activities and mesures to ensure targeted communities’ climate resilience                     

Infrastructure rehabilitation and construction                     

Diversification of communities’ economic activities and improvement of their access to markets                     

Introduction of SLM & other activities (pilot farms, distribution of drought-tolerant seeds, etc.) in agriculture & forestry 

sectors 

    
            

    

KNOWLEDGE AND M&E ACTIVITIES                     

Listing of adopters and information during filed visit                     

Field Visit Report                     

Mid-Term Report                     

Project Completion Report                     



 

1 
 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1 Programme linkages with countries and Horn of Africa (HoA) strategies and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The program is consistent with the principles of key regional initiative, policies and projects adopted 

by the governments of the participating countries, namely: (i) The Inter-Governmental Authority on 

Development (IGAD) Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI)”; (ii) Regional 

Programming Paper (RPP, 2013) “To End Drought emergencies in The Horn of Africa” (2012); (iii) the new 

Sendai Framework for DRM (2015–2030), which contains the collective commitment of governments and the 

United Nations to work towards reducing societal vulnerability to disasters generally and stop drought in 

particular. The program also fits in the Bank’s new Regional Integration Strategy and Policy Paper (2014-

2023), the Bank’s Ten year Strategy (2013-22), the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building 

Resilience in Africa (2014-19), and the recent High 5s vision of the Bank. At the national level, the RLACC 

program is in line with the participating countries strategies and priorities. Additional details on the strategic 

fit of RLACC in each country are given in the individual countries’ PARs. 

 

1.1.2 The program is fully aligned with National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) for Sudan and 

Somalia respectively approved in 2007 and 2013. In Sudan, the NAPA emphasizes the rural dimension of 

poverty in Sudan and focuses on three sectors: agriculture, water resources, and public health. By focusing on 

a wide range of interdependent technologies and methods such as the introduction of solar energy for 

communal services, e.g. for water pumping purposes, new irrigation methods for agriculture, rangeland 

rehabilitation and the introduction of veterinary services, the program fully reflects the priorities laid out in 

Sudan’s 2007 NAPA and strategic frameworks included in the revised Sudan National Adaptation Plan (2014).  

 

1.1.3 In Somalia, the NAPA has identified the urgent and immediate activities to address potential negative 

impacts of climate variability and climate change on people and their livelihoods within the context of recurrent 

famine crises and the national priorities over peace-building and economic recovery. Thus, the NAPA 

identifies the following sectors as vulnerable to climate change: water resources, agriculture and food security, 

animal husbandry, grazing and range-lands, health, marine and coastal resources, biodiversity and natural 

disasters. In that framework, the activities in Somalia within this program will focus on supporting pastoralist 

livelihoods and will therefore have a specific emphasis on livestock management, water and land resources 

management. 

 

1.1.4 In addition, both countries Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC) to the 21st Conference 

of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), published in 

November 2015, acknowledges that climatic as well as non-climatic factors such as ecosystems degradation, 

complex disasters and conflicts, limited access to capital, market infrastructure and technology, unsustainable 

management of natural resources, and socio-economic factors such as poverty, lack of income diversity, 

unequal distribution of income, urbanization, population growth, have all weakened people’s ability to adapt 

to changes in climate. These factors are well taken into account by the proposed activities under this program 

in order to build resilience to climate change in Somalia and Sudan.  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 
 

1.2.1 Incidences of climate change (CC) in the Horn of Africa (HoA), as assessed in the AR-5 published by 

the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2014) are: rising temperatures, rainfall 

variability, drought, desertification, deforestation and land degradation, floods and other extreme weather 

events (extreme precipitations, stronger El Niño, etc.)  Additionally, pastoral livelihoods in the ASALs of the 

HoA have been negatively affected by political marginalization, social exclusion, lack of good governance at 

all institutional levels, imbalanced power relations between the state and civil society, and gender inequality. 

These phenomena are the cradle for increasing vulnerability of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral communities 

in the region that rely the most on the environment for their livelihood. The resulting environmental migration 

is in turn causing, among others, competition for natural resources, ethnic tensions, and distrust between the 

original area of migration and the receiving areas. As both Somalia’s and Sudan’s resources are scarce, both 



 

2 
 

countries are prone to such kinds of conflicts. Consequently, taking into account the weight of the pastoralist 

activities and populations, increasing their resilience to climate change represents a vital issue for the HoA 

countries’ stability, economic recovery and future prospects.  

 

1.2.2 The proposed GEF funded project’s focus on climate change adaptation in the rural sector in Somalia 

and Sudan fills a vital missing gap in the pastoralist and agro-pastoralist sub-sectors in both countries which is 

not fully covered by DRSSLP and other partners and is urgently needed to support economic diversification 

in the context of climate change. Multiple feedback loops between severe drought occurrence and vulnerable 

livelihoods due to water scarcity and grasslands farming have led to competition over natural resources access 

between drought displaced households and transhumant pastoralists.  

 

1.2.3 As one of the most important multilateral institutions acting in Africa, the AfDB has an extensive 

experience in supporting and financing community based initiatives and projects in the continent. Investing in 

areas like agriculture, natural resources management and improving livelihoods are crucial for reducing 

poverty and vulnerability to climate change. The Strengthening of Climate Resilience in the Kafue Sub-Basin, 

in Zambia, or the Carla Climate Adaptation for Rural Livelihoods and Agriculture in Malawi are two of the 

many examples of projects financed by the Bank and designed to respond to the climate change effects, reduce 

poverty and enhance food security in some of the most vulnerable communities in the continent. The success 

of these projects shows the Bank’s competency and commitment to implementing climate change adaptation 

measures in the region, including the respective INDCs from the Paris agreement. Therefore, the Bank will 

continue playing a lead role in supporting the governments of both countries in achieving their objectives and 

implementing important measures to fight climate change effects and reduce poverty in Sudan and Somalia. 

 

1.2.4 The Multinational (Sudan and Somalia) rural livelihoods’ adaptation to climate change in the Horn of 

Africa – Phase II (RLACC II) is in alignment with the Bank’s priorities and strategies, which includes bringing 

growth that is not only environmentally sustainable, but also empowering. Indeed, the Bank’s Climate Change 

Action Plan to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa is one 

of the actions aligned with the project.  

 

1.2.5  The Project is fully aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core areas of 

infrastructure and also to one area of special emphasis namely agriculture. The project also contributes to the 

High-5 priorities (2016-2025), namely the Feed Africa and Improve the Lives of Africans priorities. It will 

introduce climate-resilient water harvesting technologies, promote conservative agriculture practices, provide 

capacity building and training on sustainable resources management, and reduce food insecurity risk by 

diversifying the pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihood base of target communities. Moreover, the Project will 

improve rural people participation along the livestock value chain starting from production and processing to 

marketing. The project will thus promote both immediate and longer-term climate-resilient initiatives into 

pastoral livelihoods in arid and semi-arid areas (ASALs) of Sudan and Somalia while ensuring inclusiveness 

of rural men, women and youth as direct beneficiaries. The RLACC I and II activities complement those of 

the recently approved ‘Short Term Regional Emergency Response Project’ (STRERP). 

 

1.2.6 Given its focus on climate change adaptation, the project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate 

Change Action Plan 2 (CCAP2) and in particular with its pillar 1 “Boosting Adaptation and Climate-resilient 

Development in Africa”. As highlighted in the CCAP2, this project by focusing on resilient infrastructures and 

climate adaptation measures, demonstrates the Bank’s effort to leverage its internal resources to strengthen the 

adaptive capacities of countries by supporting the diversification of local economies. Indeed, building on the 

AfDB funded DSRLP, the GEF funding is mobilized by the Bank to build resilience in both countries in the 

agricultural and pastoral sub-sectors. 

  

1.2.7 Finally, the project addresses the programs identified under the Bank’s Somalia Country Brief (CB) 

(2017-2020) and well aligned with its objective to “Build longer term resilience in Somalia, through targeted 

support to the development of relevant infrastructure, institutional capacity, and skills”. Consequently, by 

enhancing pastoralist livelihoods, the project fits well with the CB pillar 1 which seeks to rebuild key 

infrastructure to enhance resilience and diversify livelihoods. The CB highlighted the importance of the 

agricultural sector in Somalia and in particular the livestock sector which contributes to more than 40% of 

national GDP. By tackling the issues related to climate change adaptation in this sector, this project will help 

build resilience with the adoption of adaptive measures combined with resilient infrastructures. 



 

3 
 

 

Baseline Project 
 

1.2.8 The baseline project for the proposed project is the Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihood 

Program (DRSLP), a multi-phased program running over 15 to 20 years. It targets the root causes of drought 

crises in the countries of the HoA, and its first phase was implemented in Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Kenya. 

Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase (DRSLP II). The baseline project was approved by 

the Bank’s Board of Directors in November 2014; and the project started in August 2015. Meanwhile, Sudan 

is covered through the third phase (DRSLP III) in June 2015. Following the same concept and using FEG 

Grant resources, RLACC I was approved in December 2016 covering Djibouti and Kenya to the tone of USD 

5.484 million for Djibouti and USD 2.784 million for Kenya. 

  

1.2.9 DRSLP focuses its intervention on building the necessary infrastructure for mobilizing and managing 

surface and ground water in the context of pastoral and agro-pastoral production systems. This consists of 

rangeland development and rehabilitation works, land development for crop production, and small water 

mobilization and supply infrastructure for crop and livestock production. In addition, the capacity building 

element of the DRSLP will focus its intervention on providing local communities and authorities with 

investments in infrastructure development and capacity strengthening.  

 

1.2.10 On the long run, the DRSLP is a response to the devastating climate change evidenced drought, 

environmental degradation, and poverty in the HoA’s vulnerable communities. However, the baseline alone 

does not sufficiently tackle certain issues related to climate change resilience and the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods. For instance, stakeholders are not fully involved in planning and decision-

making processes. Existing and planned activities under DRSLP II (in Somalia and Sudan) and DRSLP III (in 

Sudan) do not lead to the full integration of CC considerations in community development plans and sectoral 

policies, and climate hazards still need strengthened mitigation. Consequently, the RLACC II project aims at 

completing the activities of the baseline program on these key issues, and is in line with the ongoing RLACC 

I project in Djibouti and Kenya. 

 

1.2.11 Over decades, most interventions to address climate change issues (and especially drought) in the HoA 

have been of emergency humanitarian relief nature. Like the DRSLP (Baseline project), the RLACC II project 

seeks to be innovative as it proposes solutions to tackle this issue in a medium and long-term perspective, 

through an integrated approach that aims at improving water resource mobilization, rangeland management, 

livelihoods diversification, infrastructure for market access and building human and institutional capacity 

within a framework that is sensitive to conflict resolution and management.  

 

1.3 Aid coordination 
 

1.3.1 Regional and International organizations (Swiss Development Cooperation Agency, African Water 

Facility, etc.) are engaged in addressing climate change and livelihoods challenges in the region. However, it 

is noteworthy to mention that, in general, most Development Partners’ (DPs) interventions in CC are mainly 

short-term responses and humanitarian relief-focused.  

 

1.3.2 The Bank discussed with several Partners and donors to garner support for the program. In particular, 

the Bank is supporting the countries of the HoA to access GEF funds from the Least Developed Countries' 

Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) in order to finance the RLACC activities to 

complement the baseline program (DRSLP). During the appraisal mission, consultations were made with many 

relevant DPs including FAO, USAID, IFAD, UNDP and EU to ensure close coordination and harmonization 

of activities towards common goals and objectives of the RLACC. Generally speaking, the consultations 

helped avoiding overlaps and redundancies among the different interventions while funding by the different 

partners was done on an individual basis. 

 

 

 

 



 

4 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Program development goal: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 

communities 

 

2.1 Project components 

 

The activities listed in the table below are indicative. More specific activities for each country 

are contained in their respective PARs. Furthermore the activities in each countries will be confirmed 

and prioritized with the target communities in participatory workshops.  

 
  Table 1: Project components 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

Improving pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive 

capacity and the 

resilience of their 

livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

1,859,515 Trainings in (i) water harvesting technologies, (ii) water resources 

management, (iii) farming methods and drought resistant varieties, 

(iv) management and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, and 

(v) climate resilient rangeland management options.  

 

Women are an important focus of the project, and numerous 

activities will improve their participation and decision-making 

skills in various sectors that will be crucial for the development of 

the communities and its adaptation to climate change 

Improve the 

sustainability of 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 

11,269,034 Water infrastructure: water harvesting infrastructure (hafirs, 

boreholes), and supply network (irrigation, etc.) are constructed or 

rehabilitated, with a focus on community-based implementation 

and capacity building 

 

Rangeland rehabilitation: the project is in line and supports the 

baseline project in the targeted communities through (i) reseeding 

and re-plantation activities, and (ii) training 

 

Improvement of access to market for (i) livestock, and crops 

value chains and (ii) diversification of livelihoods  

 

Developing veterinary and health services, with a focus on cattle-

diseases related to climate change.  

 

Drought tolerant seeds: (i) provide trainings through 

establishment of nurseries to produce and distribute drought 

tolerant seeds for agriculture, but also for pastures and community 

forestry; (ii) training women in agricultural techniques tailored to 

local conditions (iii) establish Pilot Farms to demonstrate / train on 

the efficiency of drought tolerant seeds for agriculture; (iv) training 

on water management and adaptive agricultural techniques.  

 

Diversification of livelihoods: (i) the development of income-

generating activities (handcraft, processing of livestock products, 

the growing of fruit trees, honey and leaf-growing), (ii) give an 

important role to women through trainings and the activities 

organized with women associations, and (iii) is linked as stated 

above, with the improvement of access to market 

 

Soil conservation through: (i) land degradation and desertification 

control measures, and (ii) the various awareness-raising campaigns 

and workshops listed in component 1. 

Project management, 

Knowledge and M&E 

activities 

1,801,058 Annual and quarterly progress reports 

 

Gender sensitive knowledge indicators are expected in order to 

measure the activities related to women empowerment 

 



 

5 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

The project will also develop targeted villages’ climate change 

vulnerability profiles, and share these profiles with relevant 

stakeholders.  

Physical and price 

contingencies 

       2,137,986  

Total      17,067,592 

 

2.2 Project type 

 
RLACC – phase II is a multinational operation using the GEF-managed trust funds ‘Least Developing 

Countries Fund (LDCF)’. Both Sudan and Somalia are benefitting from LDCF resources through the GEF 

Focal Area 1 (Climate Change Adaptation) as grants. The GEF approved the Somalia project in December 13, 

20161 and the Sudan project in March, 2017)2.  As both Somalia and Sudan are under sanctions, the project 

interventions will be limited to technical assistance activities.  

 

2.3 Project cost and financing arrangements 

 
2.3.1 The total RLACC II cost is estimated at USD 17,067,592 (exclusive of tax and customs duty); entirely 

proposed for financing by the GEF from the Least Developed Country Fund (LDCF) to contribute to the 

implementation of the GEF climate change adaptation strategy (GEF focal area Climate Change Adaptation - 

CCA).  The grant amounts to USD 9,985,185 for Somalia and USD 7,082,407 for Sudan.  

 

Table 2: Project cost estimates by components 

 

Components 

  

  

  

US$ 
% 

Foreign Local Foreign Total 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

Sudan 265,088 323,997 589,085 55 

Somalia 482,763 787,667 1,270,430 62 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods 

Sudan 2,261,700 2,450,175 4,711,875 52 

Somalia 2,950,722 3,606,437 6,557,159 55 

Project management knowledge and 

M&E activities 

Sudan 230,059 359,837 589,896 61 

Somalia 229,142 238,494 467,636 51 

Project management costs 
Sudan 128,625 177,625 306,250 58 

Somalia 183,656 253,620 437,276 58 

Total base costs 
Sudan 2,885,472 3,311,634 6,197,106 53 

Somalia 3,846,282 4,886,218 8,732,500 56 

Physical contingencies 
Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 58 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 58 

Price contingencies 
Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project costs 
Sudan 3,256,095 3,826,312 7,082,407 54 

Somalia 4,368,511 5,616,674 9,985,185 56 

Total 7,624,606 9,442,986 17,067,592 55 

 

 

 

 
                                                      
1 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii 
2 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii-0 



 

6 
 

 

  Table 3: Project cost estimates by category of expenditure 

  

Expenditures 

USD 

Local Foreign Total 
% 

Foreign 

1. Works 

Sudan 1,040,267 1,140,588 2,180,855 52.3 

Somalia 1,320,638 1,750,613 3,071,251 57 

2. Goods  

Sudan 252,000 273,000 525,000 52 

Somalia 342,125 401,625 743,750 54 

3. Services  

Sudan 893,813 1,092,437 1,986,250 55 

Somalia 1,228,150 1,563,100 2,791,250 56 

4. Operating costs  

Sudan 690,795 814,205 1,505,000 54.1 

Somalia 924,920 1,201,330 2,126,250 56.5 

Total Base Cost         

Sudan 2,876,875 3,320,230 6,197,105 53.6 

Somalia 3,815,833 4,916,668 8,732,501 56.3 

Physical Contingencies  

Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 57.5 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 57.5 

Price Contingencies 

Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project cost  

Sudan 3,247,498 3,834,908 7,082,407 54.1 

Somalia 4,338,062 5,647,124 9,985,185 56.5 

Total 7,585,560 9,482,032 17,067,592 55.5 

  



 

7 
 

Table 4: Expenditure schedule by component 
        

Components  

Costs (US$) 

Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience 

of their livelihoods to climate change in target 

areas 

        

Sudan 190,564 381,129 508,172 190,565 

Somalia 88,363 176,726 235,634 88,362 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 
       

Sudan 983,574 1,967,148 2,622,863 983,574 

Somalia 706,781 1,413,563 1,884,750 706,781 

Project management knowledge and M&E 

activities 
       

Sudan 70,146 140,291 187,054 70,145 

Somalia 88,484 176,969 235,958 88,485 

Project management costs   
     

Sudan 65,591 131,183 174,910 65,591 

Somalia 45,937 91,875 122,500 45,938 

Total base costs         

Sudan 1,309,875 2,619,751 3,492,999 1,309,875 

Somalia 929,565 1,859,133 2,478,842 929,566 

Physical contingencies   
     

Sudan 57,579 162,461 232,382 57,579 

Somalia 123,803 200,303 255,840 123,803 

Price contingencies   
     

Sudan 82,340 164,681 219,574 82,340 

Somalia 56,295 112,591 150,120 56,295 

Total project costs   
     

Sudan 1,449,794 2,946,893 3,944,955 1,449,794 

Somalia 1,109,663 2,172,027 2,884,802 1,109,664 

Total 2,559,457 5,118,920 6,829,757 2,559,458 

 

2.4 Project’s target area and population 

 
2.4.1 The project will cover two countries of the HoA, namely Sudan and Somalia, targeting rural pastoral 

and agro-pastoral communities highly vulnerable to climate change and affected by factors such as domestic 

and regional migration (transhumance practices, displacements due to conflicts or food insecurity) – all of 

which are drivers and consequences of environmental fragility. 

 

2.4.2 In Sudan, the project will be implemented in the project will be implemented in three States, 

respectively the White Nile State, the Gedaref State and the Kassala State. Targeted areas in the States are 

respectively: (i) White Nile State, Dueim Locality, Al Baja Reserve Pasture Area, (ii) Gedaref State, 

Gadambalia Locality, (iii) Kassala State, Aroma Locality, Togaly villages and Um Safari village. 

 

2.4.3 In Somalia, the project will intervene in localities selected in South Central Somalia, Somaliland and 

Puntland States. The targeted localities are: (i) South Central Somalia: Hiiraan and Galguduud States, 



 

8 
 

Localities of Beledweyn and Guriceel, (ii) Somaliland: Awdal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and Salawley-

Cheikh Hared, (iii) Puntland: Bari and Nugaal regions,  

 

2.4.4 More details on the targeted area and communities are provided in the annexed specific countries’ 

reports. 

 

2.4.5 The RLACC II program is expected to increase targeted communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate change through capacity building and the introduction of adaptation 

technologies, improved access to natural resources (especially water), and diversification of livelihoods. 

 

2.5 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

 

2.5.1 The RLACC II program is intended to address the adaptation of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to Climate Change (CC) and to reduce their vulnerabilities to CC induced hazards. During the 

project formulation, discussions and surveys were conducted with key stakeholders and beneficiaries, 

revealing the numerous constraints communities have faced, and their very diverse nature. Most of them are 

directly linked with CC and its various effects. Overseeing these various effects, CC hazards constitutes the 

common challenge for the HoA, as its devastating impacts on agriculture, livestock production, reduced terms 

of trade, household incomes, economic stability and governance. The many conflicts of political nature or over 

natural resources characterizing the regions were also identified as a driver of fragility. Specific country 

participatory processes conducted during project identification are provided in the countries’ PARs. The 

engagement of Community Based Organizations, Civil Society and other forms of collective initiatives are big 

success factors the implementation of the project. Sensitization and training sessions will be extensively 

conducted to make sure that the beneficiaries and their organizations are very well aware of their essential role 

as recipients and as participants of/in the project activities. Sensitization will target crucial topics such as 

management of pasture and water resources in a conflict free environment. In Sudan, a validation workshop 

with the stakeholders was organized to discuss the content of the project and to secure buy-in. I Somalia, due 

to the political Situation in the country, consultations were done in Hargeisa (Somaliland) and remotely with 

Puntland and Mogadishu. In addition, draft project documentation was also shared with the Governments of 

the two countries for their final review and comments. More consultations with relevant stakeholders will be 

conducted to confirm and prioritize activities prior to the onset of implementation.   

 

2.6 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

 
2.6.1 The Bank’s long standing experience in the design and implementation of Climate Change (especially 

drought resilience and water infrastructure development) was capitalized and mainstreamed in the design of 

this project. The Bank experience lies on previous similar multinational project addressing specific climate 

change issues in the HoA, such as the DRSLP program, and collaboration with other institutions and regional 

initiatives (IGAD, COMESA, NEPAD, CAADP, etc.)  

 

2.6.2 The Bank’s strategy on ending fragility and building resilience stresses the importance of better design 

of projects in countries facing fragility, to build resilience, through more inclusive growth and development. 

To this end, the Bank now requires a fragility lens application in each project, which has been undertaken in 

annex 5 attached. 

 

2.6.3 While the experience of the Bank in the area of Drought Resilience is not a long one, the team was 

able to tap into whatever the available information in terms of implementation challenges and ways to address 

them. The RLACC II is building on the achievements, successes and lessons of former and current initiatives 

such as the DRSLP. The aim is to enhance the effectiveness of RLAC II by resorting to swifter and closer to 



 

9 
 

the ground operational units in comparison to IGAD implementation model with a Fund Management Unit 

hosted in IGAD Secretariat in the case of DRSLP.  The DRSLP has established mechanisms to enhance the 

availability of infrastructure for natural resources management (water and pastures) at the regional level (given 

the mobility of pastoralists across borders) and ensuring stability of the environment as well as the harmonious 

sharing of the resources in a sustainable manner. The current project was inspired by the first countries 

benefiting from the project such as Djibouti and Kenya. The key activities included developing water storage 

and other related infrastructures, development of market infrastructure and communication and information 

systems in pastoral rural areas; optimizing potential value chains and strengthen regional trade and; enhancing 

community participation in the management of water, pasture and livestock marketing. The project will also 

build on existing initiatives and policies to develop better collaboration and information exchange, rather than 

creating new costly systems. A brief description of the ongoing portfolio in Somalia and Sudan is given 

respectively in annexe 3 and annexe 4 at the end of this report.   

2.7 Key performance indicators 
 

2.7.1 The project aims at enhancing pastoralists, livelihoods through climate change resilient infrastructures. 

The progress toward achieving this objective will be measured through different key performance indicators 

at the impact, outcomes and output levels. At the impact level, the indicators used will be based on the increase 

of agricultural production in the target areas, resulting in the reduction of food insecurity, measured by national 

surveys and reports. 

 

2.7.2 For the outcome, the measure will be made through: (i) the development/use of methods, policies and 

frameworks mainstreaming Climate Change issues, (ii) number of communities adopting the adaptive 

measures (iii) the percentage of women participating in specific activities. In terms of outputs, the indicators 

will include: (i) number of people trained, (ii) the number of study tours and workshops, (iii) the number of 

knowledge products and the degree of execution of the project.  

 

2.7.3 While national data collection will be under the responsibility of the countries projects, a monitoring 

and evaluation expert at IGAD, working in close collaboration with the country level PIUs and other key 

partners, will be responsible for feeding the data provided to him into the existing Drought Resilience platform 

at the secretariat. The M&E specialist at IGAD will work with the country level M&E specialists to harmonize 

the data collection format. The information generated will be disseminated to other projects’ communities and 

potential users in the region.  

 

 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.  Economic and financial performance 

 
FIRR (base case) 17% NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 million 

EIRR (base case) 23% NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 million 

 

3.1.1 Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase of DRSLP II. The implementation of these 

projects will first enable a better carbon sequestration. The improving of water resource mobilization, through 

the building of boreholes, haffirs and other water infrastructures, and the introduction of new climate resilient 

practices, such as drought resilient seeds, will benefit communities in having better crop productivity, and thus, 

boost their economic growth. This process will enable a reduction of conflicts, especially about resources 

availability. Moreover, the introduction of sustainable land management with activities of reseeding and re-

plantation will also have an important impact on reducing natural resources scarcity and poverty, lessening 

soil erosion and increasing soil fertility. Providing veterinary services and training for communities about new 



 

10 
 

climate resilient practices will improve food security and benefit for the whole regions in reducing conflicts 

and migrations. 

 

3.1.2 The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of the project is calculated at 21%, the net present value 

(VPV) is estimated at USD 1.71 million. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated 

at 25% and the net present value (NPV) at 12% opportunity cost of capital is estimated at USD 2.19 million. 

 

3.1.3 The project will have both direct and indirect benefits. Improved livelihoods for the agro-pastoral 

communities will be the main direct benefit. The emphasis on a multi-level, integrated approach to pastoral 

development through support and funding for a range of initiatives will help pastoralist communities and 

households undertake livestock and non-livestock related income generating activities, accompanied by 

awareness raising, information and capacity building.  

 

3.1.4 A parallel dynamic of social inclusion and economic growth will help reintegrate the most vulnerable 

and marginalized population categories into the local economy and combat the social and economic 

marginalization in which many pastoral groups are trapped. For instance, the creation of new boreholes and 

water supply networks in villages will reduce periods of unemployment/inactivity due to lack of irrigation 

boosting economic growth at the village level and improving villagers’ livelihoods. Farmers’ income is 

expected to increase from better crop productivity as a result of sustainable irrigation schemes and the 

introduction of new adaptive practices and appropriate technological package into crop production. 

 

3.1.5 Additional programme benefits include an increased value of livestock through the setting up of 

veterinarian services, thus further improving food security, and reducing vulnerability to external shocks such 

as animal disease outbreaks. The efforts of the project to provide micro financing will benefit to pastoralists 

and agro-pastoralists to diversify their sources of livelihoods.   

 

3.1.6 National economies and regional integration will also benefit from the program. Effective cooperation 

in the management of water resources and improved rangeland management would reduce conflicts and 

promote social stability and strengthen regional integration. The development of market infrastructures and 

the improvement of the delivery of animal health related services, mainly the prevention and control of TADs 

will contribute to an increase of intra- and extra-regional safe trade in livestock products. 

 

3.1.7 The methodology used to estimate these project benefits is based on a costs benefits analysis. Indeed, 

assessing the costs and benefits of a program is of essential importance to meaningfully quantify its impacts. 

Following the GEF approach, a baseline model is required, in this case the DRSLP II and III project. The 

global environmental benefits and the incremental costs, and besides, the project impacts, are compared to the 

baseline project without the support of the GEF. This implies in concrete terms an analysis of the situation 

with and without the additional GEF funded project. This analysis was conducted for each country, Somalia 

and Sudan, in order to assess the economic and financial performances of the country projects. 

 
  



 

11 
 

3.2 Environmental and social aspects 

Environmental aspects 

 
3.2.1 The project focuses on building capacity on a country (ies) – wide adaptation intervention to climate 

change aimed at improving the resilience of communities and agro-pastoral communities, their livelihoods and 

their production systems. The project will have major positive impacts on the environment: (i) improved 

management of natural resources (water and land) at local, State, national and regional level, (ii) improved 

resilience of the ecosystems with the introduction of drought-resistant plants for shelterbelt around villages or 

for agriculture and (iii) rehabilitation of rangelands. In light of these benefits, the project is proposed for 

category 3. 

 

3.2.2 An environmental and social review has been made, based on the potential environmental and social 

effects of the project, and prior to the undertaking of any formal, activity-related and/or site-specific 

Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs). As the project will be funded by the GEF through the 

AfDB, all works must comply with the due environmental and social assessment process, when required either 

by regulation or AfDB, as well as with the recommendations of the upcoming ESIAs (in case further 

environmental and social studies are performed), including compliance with the appropriate avoidance, 

management and mitigation measures. The extent of activity- and site-specific ESIAs will be assessed by the 

AfDB and key national institutions/institutional partners when site location as well as activity parameters (size 

of infrastructures, characteristics of each resilient culture, etc.) are formalized. The review identifies minor 

risks to environment and social issues (referred to as “effects”) from activities in their general form and outlines 

strategies for managing those risks and minimizing undesirable environmental and social impacts. National 

institutions will be ultimately responsible for the supervision of the environmental and social matters, with the 

AfDB providing updates on the adequacy and respect of measures. The supervising entities and/or experts will 

ensure timely remedial actions are taken by the contractor where necessary. 

 

Climate change aspects 

 
3.2.3 As an adaptation programme, it will reduce pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ vulnerability to 

CC induced hazards through campaigns, workshops and trainings aiming at raising stakeholders’ awareness 

on this issue. In addition, the project’s support to the diversification of the sources of income will provide the 

beneficiary communities with the necessary cushion for the shocks stemming from the CC. The 

implementation of diverse infrastructures solutions and the adoption of new techniques should also have a 

positive impact, increasing communities’ resilience. Furthermore, since the Bank’s Climate Change Action 

Plan is to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa, the funding 

for this project is totally in accordance with climate adaptation finance. 

Social aspects 

 
3.2.4 The RLACC II program will have a major positive impact on social aspect at community, regional and 

national level. Indeed, the program will (i) reduce the scarcity of natural resources and its related pretension 

to conflicts; (ii) the diversification of livelihoods – mostly at women’s benefit – will contribute to increase 

households’ incomes and wealth, (iv) the improvement of the population health, (v) the improvement of market 

access will strengthen inter-communities linkages and reduce conflict or distrust issues.  

 

Gender aspects 

 
3.2.5 The proposed project has an important focus on women and gender equality. Indeed, many activities 

focus on women empowerment and capacity-building, from awareness raising activities, to the introduction of 

adaptive techniques and training. The implementation of adaptive techniques (output 2.1.1.) is not gender-



 

12 
 

specific, but the objective is clearly to improve the climate resilience for communities for specific economic 

sectors (mainly agriculture and livestock husbandry), as climate change has a significant impact on 

communities, mostly women and children. Also, adaptive technologies will contribute to reducing workload 

experienced by women and children, who are often the groups charged with water collection for households 

and livestock.  

 

3.2.6 In addition, the output 2.1.2 is designed to train communities and targeted groups to the use of 

techniques and technologies introduced with output 2.1.1. Women are clearly the main focus of this output, as 

most of its activities are targeting women. In order to achieve target number of women, it is advised that women 

organizations in pastoral communities are targeted. Finally, the outcome 2.2 seeks to diversify income-

generating activities, which is expected to have a strong impact on women empowerment. Indeed, the activities 

suggested should reduce rural women’s domestic workload through labour-saving technologies. By reducing 

women’s workload, the project will empower the women beneficiaries in achieving a more equitable balance 

in workload and in the sharing of economic and social benefits.   

 

3.2.7 Furthermore, additional indicators not mentioned in the logical framework, such as the number of 

management committees, access to education for girls, access to land and credit opportunities, access to smart 

seeds and crops and access to equipment could be added or at least considered. 

 

Involuntary resettlement 

 
3.2.8 The implementation of this project does not imply any involuntary resettlement or limiting access to 

natural resources.  

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 

4.1.1 For Somalia, all fiduciary responsibilities will be handled by IGAD’s Fund Management Unit (FMU) 

that is implementing the DRSLP II in coordination with the Bank. To this end, a tri-partite Protocol of 

agreement will be signed between the Bank, IGAD and the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to describe 

in detail the implementing arrangements. IGAD’s capacity has been strengthened through the establishment 

of the FMU to implement the DRSLP II in Somalia and Sudan. The FMU is composed of a Coordinator, an 

Accountant, a Procurement Expert, and an Administrative assistant. The FMU has gained experience and 

knowledge through the management of the on-going DRSLP II and the coordination of the several 

interventions in the country. However, in order to match the anticipated additional workload (given that FMU 

is handling the DRLSP II – Somalia and Sudan projects and the recently approved STRERP) and also improve 

the quality of reporting within the FMU, a dedicated Project Technical Team (PTT) will be recruited 

competitively from the region composed of a Team Leader with expertise in Climate Change Adaptation and 

project management and four Experts (an expert in Adaptation to Climate Change, an expert in M&E and  

Community Mobilization, an Accountant and a procurement specialist). The PTT will be responsible for the 

day to day supervision of project activities in Somalia and will report to the FMU. On the ground activities 

will be implemented through focal points in the line Ministries (Ministry of Environment and Ministry of 

Agriculture / Livestock in South Central Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland). The IGAD will be responsible 

for the recruitment process of RLACC II PTT. The choice of the FMU-IGAD as a partner in managing the 

RLACC II, came from the fact that the IGAD through the FMU is coordinating the DRSLP in Somalia and for 

which RLACC II is a supplementary funding and therefore overall coordination and synergy will be ensured 

with the involvement of the FMU. The RLACC II will make the provisions needed for the key operating 

expenses at the IGAD Secretariat. Considering the multinational dimension of RLACC II, the FMU-IGAD 

will assist the implementation units in the sense of mobilizing and disseminate the M&E data through the 

regional platform already set up by the IGAD to make it accessible to the RLACC I and II participating 

countries, the Horn of Africa region and the Drought Resilience Knowledge Community at large. In each State, 

National Project Steering Committee will provide strategic direction (policy guidance and review of project 

progress) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. It will also examine the various project 

activities, through inputs provided by the FMU/PTT. It is chaired by the Ministry of Environment, and consists 

of representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia and of the established autonomous States’ 



 

13 
 

Governments (including representatives from other ministries, etc.), the civil society and other relevant 

stakeholders. 

 

4.1.2 In Sudan, the Executing Agency is the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment. In order to guarantee a successful implementation of the project, a 

Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for RLCC II should be established with key experts (an Expert in 

Adaptation to Climate Change – National Coordinator, an Expert in M&E, an Expert in mobilization for 

Community-based Adaptation, a procurement specialist and an accountant). These experts will be nationals 

recruited competitively creating a light PIU to be housed in the Higher Council for Environment and Natural 

Resources (HCENR) - Ministry of Environment that will be responsible for the day-to-day implementation of 

the project activities, including fiduciary affairs. Three State Coordinators will need to be seconded by State 

Governments from ministries relevant to environment to facilitate implementation at State levels. For 

coordination purposes RLACC II PIU should work in harmony with the DRSLP coordination unit at federal 

and state levels. A National Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic direction 

(policy guidance and review of project progresses) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. 

The PSC will be chaired by the Ministry of Environment at federal level, and consists of representatives of 

ministries of Finance, Electricity and Water (represented by Drinking Water and Sanitation Unit), Animal 

Wealth, Agriculture and Forestry and representative of the three States government (White Nile, Gedaref and 

Kassala). The Project Coordinator will serve as the rapporteur for the PSC, which will examine the various 

project activities and represent the organ of key project decisions. As part of regional coordination 

responsibility in the drought resilience projects and initiatives, RLACC II PIU should grant the flow of M&E 

information to IGAD Secretariat (through the FMU) to enable coordination of the overall tracking of the agreed 

performance indicators in the region.  

 

4.2 Procurement arrangements 
 

All procurement of goods and works and acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank will 

be in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations dated October 2015 

as revised from time to time, using the relevant Bank Standard Bidding and Request for Proposals Documents. 

The summary procurement arrangements for the two countries is provided the table below. The detailed 

procurement arrangements for each country are given in their respective PARs. 

 

 

 

  



 

14 
 

 

Table 5: Procurement Arrangements (USD million) 

 

Item Description 

Amount (USD million) 

NCB Shortlist Other * NBF Total 

A. GOODS  

Vehicles   0.33  0.33 

Equipment   0.94  0.94 

Total Goods   1.27  1.27 

B. WORKS      

Pilot Farms 0.70    0.70 

Hafirs and boreholes 2.29  0.45 0.002407 2.74 

Veterinary and health services 1.21  0.25  1.46 

Nurseries for seeds 0.25  0.10  0.35 

Total Works 4.45  0.80 0.002407 5.25 

C. SERVICES  

Training   2,66  2,66 

Technical Assistance  0.42   0.42 

Studies  0,27 0,06  0,33 

Audit  0,42   0,42 

Surveys  0,23   0,23 

Consultancy (Individual)  0,36 0,13  0,49 

Consultancy (Firm)  0,11 0,10  0,21 

Total Services  1.81 2.95  4.76 

D. OPERATIONAL COSTS   2.13 1.51 3.64 

Contingencies 0.75 0.39 0.70 0.30 2.14 

Total  5.20 2.20 7.85 1.81 17.06 

      

 * Includes Shopping, recruitment of individual consultant and use of approved Government procedures 
 

4.3 Financial Management Arrangements and Disbursement 

 

4.3.1 The financial management (FM) operations of the Sudan component of the Project will be 

carried out under the overall direction of the Accounting Officer of the Ministry of Environment, the 

Executing Agency (EA). The financial transactions of the project will be initiated, processed, 

recorded and reported in accordance with the country’s Financial and Accounting Act (2007), and the 

Financial and Accounting Regulations (2011) as well as the Bank’s FM Guidelines. To facilitate FM 

in the project, a local professional Accountant with relevant qualifications and level of experience 

acceptable to the Bank including proficiency in English, will be competitively recruited by the EA 

and will be part of the PIU that will be established prior to grant effectiveness. 
 

4.3.2 In regard to the Somalia Component, the FM system (including budgeting, accounting, funds 

flow, internal controls, financial reporting and audit arrangements) that is being followed under 

DRLSP II will apply to the Project. The IGAD Secretariat, through the existing Fund Management 

Unit (FMU) will be responsible for the FM and will be carried out in accordance with the recently 

developed DRLSP FM Manual and the Bank’s FM Guidelines. The FM capacity within the FMU 

will benefit from the recruitment of a project dedicated accountant in the RLACC II PTT, with 

qualifications and experience acceptable to the Bank.  

 

4.3.3 The PIU (for the Sudan) and the FMU (for the Somalia component) will be responsible for 

accounting, reporting, funds flow, banking arrangements, internal controls and audit arrangements 

and reporting for the activities carried out at both the federal and state levels. The PIU and FMU will 

be required to produce quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) for the project, which will be 

submitted to the Bank no later than forty-five days after the end of each quarter. Annual Project 

specific financial statements (PFSs) will be prepared in accordance with the Generally Accepted 



 

15 
 

Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the Sudan and the IFRS (for the Somalia component) which will 

be submitted to the auditors within three (3) months following the closure of every financial year. 

The project audits for the Sudan component will be conducted by the National Audit Chamber (NAC), 

or a competitively recruited private audit firm to be appointed by NAC based on the Bank’s Standard 

Audit Terms of Reference. In the case of the Somalia component, the audits will be carried out by 

private audit firm to be appointed by IGAD, based on the Bank’s Standard Audit Terms of Reference. 

The audit reports, complete with a Management Letters, will be submitted to the Bank not later than 

six months after the end of the financial year.  The cost of the audits will be paid from the respective 

grants, if carried out by private audit firms. 

 

4.3.4 In regard to disbursements under the Somalia Grant, resources will be disbursed through the 

Intergovernmental Authority on Development Secretariat (IGAD).  To this end, IGAD will be 

responsible for preparing and submitting disbursement requests to the Bank for payment.  Transfer 

of funds the FGS and the participating States will follow the fund transfer system already in place 

under the DRLSP II and IGAD will retain the fiduciary responsibility for such transfer.  On the other 

hand, the disbursements under the Grant to the Republic of Sudan will be under the responsibility of 

the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR), the Executing Agency. The 

project will use mainly the direct payment and the Special Account methods for disbursements. The 

Bank’s Disbursement Letter for each Grant shall be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures 

and practices. With regard to the SA method of disbursement, Government of Sudan and IGAD (as 

the Implementing Agency for Somalia) will each open a Project Special Account at the Central Bank 

(for the Sudan) or a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank (for IGAD) to receive funds. The 

opening of the Project Special Accounts will be a condition for the first disbursement of the Grants 

to the respective Recipients. 

 

4.4 Governance 

 
4.4.1 Somalia and Sudan, and at a wider level the HoA, have been affected by a chronic cycle of poverty, 

instability and conflict over natural resources. Challenges commonly faced by all the countries of the region 

are weak governance, conflict prevention, nomadic pastoralists, food security and resource sharing.  

 

4.4.2 IGAD has become a central part of the political and security architecture of the HoA. It focuses 

particularly on regional governance and integration, through the promotion of responsible leadership at local, 

national and regional levels, and the introduction of anti-corruption measures; also on the efficient management 

of the natural resources, food security, border control and non-proliferation of small arms. The project 

integrates specific measures to mitigate governance risk to ensure that resources are used judiciously and for 

the purposes for which they are intended. In this regard, the project will provide assistance in procurement and 

financial management to the various executing agencies and Implementing Units. The project will coordinate 

its efforts with Bank and non-Bank ongoing interventions in the region dealing with capacity building of public 

institutions, CBOs, NGOs and IGAD, as well as recipient communities on which the project implementation 

depends. Indeed, the recipient communities’ appropriation of the project are essential to its implementation 

and its dynamic in time. It is also considered that the project will evolve throughout time by being in contact 

with communities. Their solicitation, mobilization and engagement is therefore essential right from the start 

of the project. 

 

4.5 Sustainability 

 
4.5.1 During the project preparatory stages, the choice of rangeland rehabilitation, veterinary, and water 

infrastructures and capacity building were the results of a consensus over technical discussions held during the 

project identification, preparation and appraisal stages. The project activities are community-driven and 

government facilitated. The beneficiaries, men and women, have been consulted all along the design process 



 

16 
 

of the project. Their continued involvement at implementation and monitoring of project progress and 

achievements will increase the sense of ownership and responsibility, and will lead to the sustainability of the 

investments. Cost sharing and cost recovery mechanisms will be taught to the target communities and used 

whenever possible to further promote investment sustainability. Communities will also be responsible for the 

management and maintenance of the constructed/rehabilitated infrastructure. To this end, communities’ 

sensitization and mobilization campaigns will be conducted from the onset of the project implementation.

  

4.5.2 The investments made by the Program in the area of trade, value addition of existing activities and 

diversification of income will promote the linkage between production and the market and facilitates access to 

production inputs and related services while improving the livelihoods of men and women headed households. 

This will be a major contribution to enhancing the interest and commitment of the different actors and 

stakeholders of the project. 

 

4.5.3 The LDCF program will be complementary to the DRSLP by mainstreaming climate change 

adaptation into its capacity-building component. In order to achieve this, the LDCF program will mobilize 

communities and strengthen their capacity to ensure sustainable implementation and management of 

infrastructure. This complementarity between the DRSLP and the LDCF programs where the former will focus 

on primary infrastructure and the latter on its sustainable operation and management with a focus on integrating 

climate change will ensure the sustainability of the overall intervention. 

 

4.5.4  Lastly, as the project’s implementation is based on numerous preparatory stages and lessons learned 

from other programs or projects done in both countries, the project deliverables should outlive the initial phase 

due to the engaged mobilization efforts at grass root level (communities) and the sustained commitment of the 

trained policy makers to project objectives and approaches. Given, the limited opportunities for work in the 

country, it is expected that the trained personnel and staff in the government will remain even after the project 

is completed. This provides an additional comfort to the sustainability concerns.  

 

4.6 Risk Management 

 
Table 6: Project Risks and Mitigation Measures 

 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Sectoral development policies and programs 

promote the settlement of migratory pastoralist, 

affecting negatively pastoralist adaptation 

strategies 

Training and policy development will have an 

integrated approach, highlighting the interaction of 

multiple dimensions, and emphasizing the migratory 

issue. Diversification of livelihoods of pastoralist and 

agro-pastoralists communities must be promoted as a 

coping measure.  

The cost of livestock-related infrastructure 

investment may become very high in relation to 

the very low sedentary livestock inventory due to 

high seasonal mobility of pastoral groups. 

The siting of infrastructure will be planned along the 

corridors so that it also caters for the needs of the 

transhumant pastoralists.  

 

Investments will have long-term positive impacts on 

sedentary and transhumant pastoralists. Both groups 

will be sensitized to share the maintenance load of 

infrastructure as they also share their benefits.  

 

The design of the infrastructure will be made simple so 

that the maintenance cost will be kept at a reasonable 

level.  

Poor coordination and cooperation among key 

national institutions dealing with pastoralists and 

agro-pastoralists issues 

Training and coordination of stakeholders on this issue 

in order to foster coordination and cooperation  



 

17 
 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Conflict between pastoralists and sedentary 

farmers as well as among different pastoral 

groups 

Promotion of dialogue and conflict resolution 

mechanisms with a community, regional or national-

level approach, in order to broaden perspective and 

visions. 

Inadequate acknowledgement of the role of the 

civil society and CBOs by national and local 

governments 

Training and sensitization of officials on the importance 

of civil society and CBOs during the resilience-building 

process. 

 

 

4.7. Knowledge building 

 
Working with the Executing Agencies and the Implementation Units, IGAD will be in charge of mobilizing 

and sharing knowledge product elaborated across countries to foster efficiency and improve implementation. 

The Project Implementation Unit, which carries out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s activities, 

will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information provided through the IGAD and providing 

the coordination agency with knowledge products. At the wider level, this should result in dynamic and 

structured flows of information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC program in the Horn 

of Africa. 

 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments  

 

The legal instruments governing this Project will be: (a) a Tripartite Protocol of Agreement between 

the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the 

Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator of the GEF; and a Protocol of Agreement 

between the Republic of The Sudan and the Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator 

of the GEF. 

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the Fund and the Bank’s Intervention  

 

5.2.1 Entry into Force: Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Grant: The respective 

Protocols of Agreement shall enter into force on the date of their signature.  

 

5.2.2 Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank and Fund to make the first disbursement of the 

Grants to the respective Recipients shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the 

respective Protocols of Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Undertakings: The Recipients of the Grants shall undertake to respectively open a Special 
Account denominated in foreign currency and a local currency account at a bank acceptable 

to the Fund and Bank to receive the respective Grants. 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 
This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 



 

18 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the implementation, of the proposed 

GEF supplementary grant financing of USD 7,082,407 to the Republic of Sudan and USD 9,985,185 to the 

Federal Republic of Somalia for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 
 

 

 



 

I 
 

 

Annex 1: CEO Endorsement Letter of the full size project Somalia 

 

 

  



 

II 
 

 
Annex 2: CEO Endorsement Letter of the full size project Sudan 

 

 



 

III 
 

Annex 3: Ongoing Bank portfolio in Somalia at June 2017 

Project Title Approval Effectiveness Closing Age 

(yrs) 

Amount (UA) Disb. 

Ratio 

Economic and Financial 

Governance Institutional 

Support Project 

Dec-13 Apr-14 Jun-18 3.8 2,500,000 84.4 

Water Resources 

Management and Investment 

Plan 

Oct-14 Oct-15 Mar-18 3.0 2,498,917 17.2 

Somalia-DRSLP II Nov-14 Jul-15 Dec-20 2.8 15,000,000 7.2 

Institutional Support to 

Financial Governance in 

Somalia 

Jun-15 Jul-15 Dec-18 2.3 1,225,275 18.2 

Socio-Economic Re-

Integration of Youth at Risk 

Jan-16 May-16 Dec-17 1.6 3,000,000 39.9 

Water Infrastructure 

Development for Resilience 

in Somaliland 

Jun-16 Oct-16 Mar-20 1.2 5,498,917 11.5 

Somalia National Statistical 

Capacity Building Project 

Oct-16 Feb-2017 Dec-20 0.9 1,200,000 - 

Improving Access to Water 

and Sanitation in Rural 

Somalia 

Nov-16 Feb-17 Dec-20 0.8 7,589,000 19.1 

Strengthening Institutions 

for Public Works 

Nov-16 Mar-17 Dec-19 0.8 5,500,000 19 

Say No to Famine: Short 

Term Regional Emergency 

Response Project 

Jul-17 - Dec-19 0.2 25,000,000 - 

Total  69,012,109   

 
Comments  
 

The Bank’s current active portfolio (approved and ongoing operations), as shown in the table above, comprises 

10 projects of which 8 are national and 2 are regional, for a total commitment of UA 69.01m. In terms of 

sectoral distribution, the agriculture sector has the largest allocation, amounting to UA 40m (58%), followed 

by the water and sanitation sector at UA 15.6m (23%), social sector at UA 8.5m (12%), and multisector at UA 

4.9m (7%). The portfolio’s average age is about 1 year, with an average disbursement rate of 24%.  

 

Major portfolio implementation challenges in Somalia include: (i) Political instability and frequent Cabinet 

reshuffles; (ii) Weak capacity at national level to implement projects and lack of knowledge of the Bank’s 

rules, procedures and regulations; (iii) Insecurity that makes it difficult for regular supervision missions and 

limits access to clients; and (iv) Continued concerns (by the Bank and development partners) with the 

transparency, ability and legitimacy of Public Financial Management (PFM) systems in the Federal 

Government of Somalia, which has created delays in the start-up and implementation of projects. 

 

In order to improve project implementation, the Bank is progressively introducing the following remedial 

measures: continual training of Somali Government counterparts on Bank operating rules and procedures (e.g. 

launching workshop for the Public Works project including a day of training on disbursement requests, and 

project financial management and reporting); using third parties to implement and monitor projects, especially 

in areas where Bank staff have limited access; and conducting regular project supervision missions. 

  



 

IV 
 

Annex 4: Ongoing Bank portfolio in Sudan at June 2017 

Project Name Window 

 
Approval 

Date 

Disburs. 

Deadline 

Amount 

Approved 

(UA) 

Amount 

Disbursed 

(UA) 

Disburs

. Rate 

(%) 

Out-standing Issues 

Darfur Water 

Project for Peace 

& Conflict 

Resolution 

African 

Water 

Facility 

(ADF-

AWF) 

24.5.12 31.12.16 3,000,000 2,760,000 92.0% The project has disbursed 92%.  The PCU 

has submitted a request for last tranche of 

disbursement.  The investment plan has 

been finalized and its dissemination is 

planned for in Q3 of 2017. 

Technical 

Assistance to Full 

Poverty Reduction 

Strategy Paper 

Transition 

Support 

Facility 

16.06.13 30.06.15 1,973,285 1,973,285 100% Project is 100% disbursed.  The Project 

experienced initial problems due to delays 

in receiving funds from the Bank due to the 

US sanction in Sudan. Progress is being 

made to finalize the full PRSP through 

consultations and donor coordination 

activities.   

University of 

Nyala Livestock 

Project.  

Korean 

Technical 

Cooperati

on Trust 

Fund 

21.05.13 21.05.16 331,333.33 331,333.33 100% Project is 100% disbursed and the PCU is 

currently undertaking project completion 

activities. 

Technical 

Capacity Building 

for Public Finance 

and 

Macroeconomic 

Management 

Project 

Transition 

Support 

Facility  

Pillar 1 

Resources 

06.12.13 05.12.18 22,190,000 976,360 7.7% The project is currently 7.7% disbursed. 

The pace of implementation has accelerated 

and several procurement activities have 

been done. Progress made to overcome 

difficulties encountered in obtaining IT 

software and equipment due to US 

sanctions on Sudan. Procurement has been 

slow due to the size and technical nature of 

the goods and services sought that require 

careful scrutiny. 

African Legal 

Support Facility 

(ALSF) 

ALSF 09.03.14 30.12.17 651,856.49 100,000 15.36 The Project has now disbursed 15.4% 

through direct payment to the legal firm 

engaged to support the Government in 

litigation cases pending against it.  

Drought 

Resilience and 

Sustainable 

Livelihood 

Programme Phase 

II 

TSF/RO 14.11.14 31.12.20 20,000,000 1,940,000 9.70 Project is 9.7% disbursed. The PCU is on 

board and implementation activities have 

started.  

Building Capacity 

for Inclusive 

Service Delivery 

50% of 

PBA 

02.03.15 30.06.20 27,990,000 163,385.18 3.89 The Project is 1% disbursed and progress 

made in engaging the Internal Labour 

Organization (ILO) to support the national 

health insurance activity. Plans are 

underway to undertake detailed assessment 

of rehabilitation needs by site, developing 

work plans, preparing bill of quantities, and 

bidding documents. 

Drought 

Resilience and 

Sustainable 

Livelihood 

Programme Phase 

III 

TSF/RO 14.11.15 31.12.20 10,000,000 520,000 5.20 The project has now disbursed 5.2% and 

procurement activities has been revamped 

by addition of more procurement staff to the 

project by the government. Also the 

rehabilitation of hafirs and hand dug wells 

has started in the three states. 

Capacity Building 

for Improved 

Quality of 

Education and 

TSF 

Pillar 1 

14.05.15 30.05.20 15,000,000 570,000 3.80% The project is 3.8% disbursed.  The PCU is 

on board and implementation activities 

initiated. Supervision mission undertaken in 

Q2 of 2017. 



 

V 
 

 

Comments  
 

During the second quarter of 2017, the Bank had twelve ongoing operations with a total commitment of about UA 141 

million. This comprises agriculture and drought resilience (36%), technical assistance and capacity building in the social 

sectors (33%), financial and economic governance (18%) and targeted operations in water and sanitation (13%). The 

portfolio is concentrated in economic governance, and capacity building and targeted operations in the social sectors 

(64%), which conform to core priorities of the Transition Support Facility (TSF), the main source of financing Bank 

operations in Sudan. In 2016, the portfolio performance was assessed as satisfactory, with an overall rating of 3 on a 

scale of 1-4. The Country Portfolio Performance Report (CPPR) was presented to CODE on March 2017 as a combined 

document with the Completion Report of the CB 2014-2016.  

Skills 

Development 

Water Sector 

Reform Project 

TSF 

Pillar 1 

10.07.15 30.07.20 15,000,000 480,000 3.2% The project has disbursed 3.2%. The PCU is 

already on board. The procurement process 

has been initiated for consultancy services 

to prepare sector assessment and also for 

consultancy services to supervise works. 

Capacity Building 

for Enhanced 

Gender 

Participation in 

Peace Building 

and Economic 

Activities 

TSF 

Pillar III 

02.02.16 30.02.21 3,200,000.00 1,280,000 40.00 The project has disbursed 40% and most 

procurement activities are being finalized. 

The PPP workshop was conducted in May 

2017 and a consulting firm has been 

selected to train women in agriculture in 

farmer field schools located in Darfur, Blue 

Nile and South Kordofan states. 

Enable Youth 

Program 

TSF 

Pillar 1 

28.11.16 28.11.21 20,960,000 1,330,000 6.34 The project has disbursed 6.34% and 

progress has been made in conducting 

assessment of the incubation centers by 

IITA. Most of the procurement activities are 

at advanced stage.  
Total    140,866,479.8 12,424,363.5 8.82%  



 

VI 
 

Annex 5: Fragility assessment 

 
The Horn of Africa Region is highly arid and has experienced substantial degradation from man-made 

activities. Many of these areas are geographically remote and lack of adequate infrastructure and often do not 

have sufficient social service provision such as extension services.  This, combined with climatic changes, 

induces cyclical droughts and even famines as well as chronic food insecurity. Loss of harvests and livestock, 

severely affect livelihoods, and further entrench the economic marginalization of vulnerable groups. The 

effects are often massive displacements, or conflicts at intercommunal levels over natural resources including 

water and pasture, during periods of severe crisis. The project being implemented in Sudan and Somalia 

responds to these fragility risks as outlined in the matrix below. 

 

Project Design Responsiveness to Fragility Risks 

 

Key areas of the Project linked to Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience 

Fragility Risk Downside risks Proposed Project interventions to address 

fragility and Resilience 

High levels of land 

degradation, 

exacerbated by rising 

populations, land 

overuse, removal of 

forest cover, and 

climate variability 

arising from changing 

global climatic 

conditions.  

High levels of degradation may 

lead to higher competition over 

resources, reducing social 

cohesion, generating conflict 

and community displacements.  

Component 1: Improving pastoral and agro-

pastoral communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate change 

in targeted areas. 

Droughts leading to 

crop failure and 

livestock depletion.  

High levels of degradation may 

lead to higher competition over 

resources, reducing social 

cohesion, generating conflict 

and community displacements. 

Component 2. Improve the sustainability of 

pastoral and agro-pastoral communities through 

adaptation practices developed and 

implemented to respond to specific climate-

change induced stress in the livestock sector in 

ASALs ecosystems.  

 

Reducing vulnerabilities to climate change 

hazards for targeted pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities 

 

Diversification of income-generating adaptive 

activities in order to lessen targeted pastoral and 

agro-pastoral communities’ vulnerabilities 



 

VII 
 

Key areas of the Project linked to Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience 

Fragility Risk Downside risks Proposed Project interventions to address 

fragility and Resilience 

Unexpected 

displacement/ 

migrations and 

refugee flows to 

project 

implementation areas 

Disruption of livelihoods in 

displaced groups as well as the 

receiving communities. 

 

Component 3: Knowledge and M&E activities : 

Coordination with other agencies especially 

with those in the humanitarian sector to identify 

risks to communities and implementation in 

advance and in order to respond quickly and in 

a flexible manner 

Worsen 

intercommunal 

conflict particularly 

between herding and 

farming communities. 

Disruption of livelihoods in 

among both the farming and 

herding communities. 

 

Component 2.  Diversification of income-

generating adaptive activities in order to lessen 

targeted pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ vulnerabilities and competition 

over resources 

 

 




















































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
MULTINATIONAL 

 

 

 

 

 

TECHNOLOGIES FOR AFRICAN AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION: 

FRAMEWORK PROGRAM IN SUPPORT OF “FEED AFRICA” 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AHAI 

 

November 2017 

P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  
  
  

  
  

P
u

b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

  
 

     A
u

th
o

ri
e

zd
 A

u
th

o
ri

ze
d

 

 



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS ............................................................................................................................................................. i 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................................................................................. ii 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................................................. iii 

Program Overview ............................................................................................................................................................................... iii 

Results Based Logical Framework ...................................................................................................................................................... vii 

1. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 Africa’s Agricultural Sector is Underperforming .................................................................................................................... 1 

1.2 Asia’s Green Revolution was the result of Technological and Institutional  Innovations ....................................................... 1 

1.3 Why technologies have not moved to scale before in Africa .................................................................................................. 2 

1.4 Feed Africa: AfDB’s Initiative to Drive Africa’s Green Revolution ....................................................................................... 3 

1.5 Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) ............................................................................................ 3 

1.6 TAAT will carry out positive gender discrimination in favor of women ................................................................................ 5 

1.7 Expected Impact of TAAT ...................................................................................................................................................... 6 

1.8 TAAT is a Regional Program Producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs) .............................................................................. 6 

1.9 TAAT will benefit from the lessons learned from previous Bank interventions ..................................................................... 7 

1.10 The Value-Added of TAAT .................................................................................................................................................... 7 

2 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ....................................................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1 Objectives of TAAT ................................................................................................................................................................ 8 

2.2 Strategy of TAAT ................................................................................................................................................................... 8 

2.3 TAAT Activities ................................................................................................................................................................... 10 

2.4 Expected Output and Outcomes ............................................................................................................................................ 11 

2.5 Costs and Financing Arrangements ....................................................................................................................................... 12 

2.6 Program financing arrangements ........................................................................................................................................... 13 

2.7 Key Performance Indicators .................................................................................................................................................. 15 

3 FEASIBILITY OF TAAT ......................................................................................................................................................... 15 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance ....................................................................................................................................... 15 

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts and Gender ......................................................................................................................... 16 

4 IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................................................................................................... 17 
4.1 Implementation Arrangements .............................................................................................................................................. 17 

4.2 Regional Public Goods (RPG) and Access to RPG Window of ADF 14: ............................................................................. 22 

4.3 Cost-sharing exemption ........................................................................................................................................................ 24 

4.4 Linking centrally managed programs to country programs ................................................................................................... 24 

4.5 Private Sector Participation ................................................................................................................................................... 24 

4.6 Procurement Arrangements ................................................................................................................................................... 24 

4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ............................................................................................................................ 24 

4.8 Sustainability ......................................................................................................................................................................... 25 

4.9 Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures .............................................................................................................................. 25 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY ........................................................................................................................ 25 
5.1 Legal instrument ................................................................................................................................................................... 25 

5.2 Undertakings ......................................................................................................................................................................... 25 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies ............................................................................................................................................ 26 

6 RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................................................................................................... 26 

 

APPENDIX……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….I 

 



 

i 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 

 

 

As of September 2017  
 

1 UA  = USD 1.38 

1 UA  = EURO 1.23 

 

 

 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
 

1 metric ton   = 2,204 pounds (lbs) 

1 kilogram (kg)     = 2.200 lbs 

1 meter (m)        = 3.28 feet (ft.) 

1 millimeter (mm)  = 0.03937 inch 

1 kilometer (km)  = 0.62 miles 

1 hectare (ha)   = 2.471 acres 



 

ii 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ADF  African Development Fund 

APSA  Agriculture Productivity Program for Southern Africa 

ATA  Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

ATPS  Agricultural Technology Policy Studies 

AWARD African Women in Agriculture Research & Development 

BMGF  Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 

CAADP  Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program 

CTDC  Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

CGIAR  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 

CIAT  Centro Internacional Agricultura Tropicale 

CIMMYT International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center 

CSA  Climate Smart Agriculture 

CSP  Country Strategy Papers 

DFID  Department for International Development, U.K. 

EAAPP  East African Agriculture Productivity Program 

ENABLE Empowering Novel Agribusiness-Led Employment 

FARA  Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa 

GAPs  Good Agricultural Practices 

GES  Growth Enhancement Support 

IARC  International Agricultural Research Centers 

ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas 

ICRAF  International Council for Research in Agro-Forestry (World Agroforestry Centre) 

ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics 

IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFDC  International Fertilizer Development Cooperation 

IITA  International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 

ILRI  International Livestock Research Institute 

IPDM  Integrated Pest & Disease Management 

IWMI  International Water Management Institute 

JICA  Japan International Cooperation Agency 

LATA  Liberia Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

NARES  National Agricultural Research & Extension Systems 

OCP  Office Cherifien de Phosphate 

PIAs  Priority Intervention Areas 

RBLF  Results-Based Logical Framework 

RTDI  Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

RMC  Regional Member Country 

RF  Rockefeller Foundation 

RPG  Regional Public Good 

SARD-SC Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa 

SROs  Sub-Regional Organizations 

SSV  Swollen Shoot Virus 

TAAT  Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation 

WAAPP  West African Agriculture Productivity Program 

WB  World Bank 

WEMA  Water Efficient Maize for Africa 



 

iii 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Program Overview 

1.1 More than 160 million Africans (about one in four Africans) are food insecure and 

malnourished, making Africa the most food-insecure region in the world. More than 32 million African 

children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 million are severely underweight, and 14.3 

million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is 

allowed to continue.  Low agricultural productivity and value addition are at the heart of the 

malnutrition, employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector accounts for 

between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25% of Africa’s Gross 

Domestic Product (GDP). 

1.2  Asia was in a similar position in the 1960s but 20th century scientific advances in agriculture 

developed by a number of International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) in Latin America and 

Asia were applied, leading to the Asian “green revolution”. These centers became the Consultative 

Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and together with countries in Asia they 

catalyzed one of the greatest increases in food production and improved nutritional well-being such as 

the world has ever known. Today, the technologies exist to feed Africa, if widely deployed. They include 

high yielding crop varieties and livestock breeds, bio-fortified crops such as pro-vitamin A rich cassava, 

high iron and zinc rice, and high zinc sorghum, which if scaled up can help address the problems of 

malnutrition and stunting of African bodies and minds. Africa has more food production technologies 

available today than Asia had at the time of its green revolution. What is missing is taking these 

technologies to farmers at scale. Also missing has been a well-coordinated food production technology 

delivery platform to help address all of the related issues of extension (training), policy, market, 

institutional, R&D, and regulatory issues hindering the widespread use of technologies. 

1.3  The Bank seeks to focus the technically excellent but hitherto uncoordinated efforts of CGIAR 

and their work with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), in particular as 

represented by their continental umbrella, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) and 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs). The result will be a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

(RTDI), with emphasis on agro-ecological zones and their priority commodities that will reach 40-50% 

of all African farmers with the most relevant food production technologies by 2025. The overall goal of 

TAAT is to radically improve agriculture as a business across Africa by deploying agricultural 

productivity-increasing technologies within eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs): i) Self-sufficiency 

in Rice Production, ii) Cassava Intensification, iii) Food and Nutrition Security in the Sahel, iv) 

Transforming African Savannahs into Breadbaskets, v) Revitalizing Tree Plantations, vi) Expanding 

Horticulture, vii) Increasing Africa’s Wheat Production, and viii) Achieving Self-sufficiency in Inland 

Fish Production. Within these PIAs, nine (9) agricultural commodities are prioritized. TAAT is designed 

as a Framework Program that allows partners (the World Bank, AGRA, BMGF, IFAD, etc.) to 

contribute resources and to expand country coverage over time. The Bank’s PY1 funding will be UA 

29 MILLION (US$ 40 MILLION) in grants to finance the centrally managed activities (for ADF-only 

countries while partner resources will initially target ADB countries). Similar amounts will be sought 

for PY2 and PY3. Further, the Bank is expected to provide close to US$350 million through its normal 

country lending programs, beyond the central activities, towards areas that will support development of 

agricultural value chains, market and infrastructure and access to finance, all of which will bolster the 

success of agricultural transformations at the country level. 

1.4 And while TAAT is a key platform for driving the Feed Africa strategy of the Bank, the 

resources needed to achieve the objectives of Feed Africa are huge and well beyond what could be 

achieved alone. So the Bank is developing strategic alliances and partnerships to help mobilize resources 

to achieve the objectives. TAAT is planned as a multi-donor financing platform to help take proven 

agricultural technologies to scale across Africa. The fundamental guiding principles of TAAT are: 

technology matters; scale matters; the policy and regulatory environment matters; and partnerships 

matter. 



 

iv 

1.5 A successful green revolution in Africa must be inclusive and based on a recognition that 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked.  Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture. The agricultural sector in Africa is the largest employer of women; 62% of 

economically active women are working in the sector, while in countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and 

Burkina Faso, over 90% of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities. Yet 

depending on the country, the rural wage gap between men and women in Africa is estimated at between 

15-60%.  Research also indicates that women farmers are just as efficient as male farmers when granted 

equal access to inputs and skills.  TAATwill systematically incorporate consideration for gender 

equality and ensure women’s equal access to agricultural technologies..  For TAAT will prioritize the 

needs of women to level the playing field and increase agricultural productivity to achieve impact.  

1.6 TAAT is a strategic alliance with the goal of mobilizing $1 billion towards its goal of scaling 

up agricultural technologies. The Bank and the World Bank have been working actively together on 

conceptualizing TAAT for the past close to two years. The World Bank initially planned to put US$500 

million towards TAAT partnership in countries, an amount it announced would be increased to $700 

million during the multi donor discussion on the planned initiative during the World Food Prize events 

in Des Moines, Iowa in October 2017. The other members of the TAAT alliance will include the Bill 

and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in 

Africa (AGRA), all of whom have committed significant resources. Indeed, the Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation has already approved its financing support to the TAAT central coordinating platform 

housed at IITA, which will be described below. 

1.7 Other institutions have been actively participating in TAAT's conceptualization, including the 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development, Agence Française de Development, DFID, USAID and other bilateral institutions and 

the private sector. Several of these institutions expect to collaborate on TAAT and also to co-finance 

national level interventions through parallel financing. It is worth noting that at the World Food Prize 

events in Iowa, which brought together the world's leading agriculture experts, TAAT was seen as 

potentially the "most significant effort to pull resources together to deliver technologies at scale across 

agroecological zones to farmers in Africa".  

1.8 TAAT aligns with the twin objectives of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS), inclusive growth 

and transition to green growth, with agriculture as one of the three areas of special emphasis. It also 

resonates with four of the Bank’s five corporate priorities (Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate 

Africa and Improve the quality of lives of Africans), encapsulated in the High 5s. In addition, TAAT is 

strongly anchored on the Feed Africa agenda, endorsed by African leaders at the High-Level Conference 

held in Dakar in October 2015, which itself was anchored on the African Union’s Malabo Declaration, 

as well as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 and 2 of eradicating extreme poverty and ending 

hunger and malnutrition. Given the agro-ecological perspective of the PIAs, TAAT contributes to the 

Regional Integration Policy and strategy (2014-2023) and is aligned with the transition states strategy 

in applicable RMCs of the Bank. TAAT is also anchored around previous projects supported by the 

Bank, namely: i) the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa” 

(SARD-SC), which funded research on four of the six strategic crops of the African Union (Cassava, 

Maize, Rice and Wheat), following a value chain approach; ii) the project to deploy the New Rice for 

Africa (NERICA) in seven African countries – a project that won the U.S. Treasury award in 2014; iii) 

the project on the Promotion of Science and Technology for Agricultural Development in Africa 

(PSTAD) implemented in 34 RMCs; and iv) various research-for-development projects (in Cameroon, 

Tanzania, and other countries) that contributed some of the proven agricultural development 

technologies selected for deployment in TAAT. 

1.9 Knowledge gained from implementation of prior agricultural research operations and other 

regional projects, particularly on the need to build country capacity for project implementation and 

delivery, has been taken into consideration in the design of TAAT. Similarly, the knowledge generated 



 

v 

from TAAT will be used to design, manage, and implement similar Bank-financed projects in the future. 

Through M&E, knowledge related data will be collected throughout implementation. Data will be 

analyzed and the results used to improve project implementation in real time. 

1.10 All African countries are eligible to participate in TAAT based upon a commitment to enact 

policies that facilitate the uptake of food production technologies, strengthen National Agriculture 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), and participate in activities agreed upon with the CGIAR 

consortiums and Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) under TAAT. They will be supported through 

centrally managed technology deployment compacts or country programs in which the Bank 

collaborates with partners (e.g., WB, AGRA, BMGF, and IFAD) to incorporate TAAT components into 

agricultural value chain development programs. The TAAT program consists of four major components 

namely: i) the creation of an enabling environment for deployment and adoption of food production 

technology by famers, in particular vibrant seed systems or artificial insemination programs, technology 

release and registration policies that are regionally harmonized, and regional programs to combat pest 

and disease threats; ii) a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—a consortium of CGIAR 

centers, NARES, and SROs. These form the TAAT platform, which is able to provide and deploy 

needed food production technologies and any additional adaptive research required; iii) deployment of 

appropriate food production technologies, through crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs; and iv) project 

management. 

1.11 Operationally, TAAT will function as follows: The Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI) made up of CGIAR centers and other technology providers, will develop a menu 

of proven food production technologies in nine priority commodities. These include seed systems or 

artificial insemination programs for best bet crop varieties/livestock breeds for large scale deployment; 

protocols for disease control on a regional basis; farmer education in improved crop/animal production 

methods; aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will work with the CGIAR centers to 

prepare proposals, based on the menu of food production technologies, for outreach campaigns;  the 

proposals will be submitted to the decision-making body of the RTDI, the Clearinghouse (details in 

Appendix 1).  Once proposals are approved, funds will be released for execution but the Clearing house 

will continue to provide oversight during execution. TAAT is not a research program but takes food 

production technologies that exist—the result of decades of research efforts—to millions of farmers via 

crop/livestock outreach campaigns and the creation of an enabling environment working with the 

researchers themselves. 

1.12 The food production technologies to be deployed under TAAT have the features of Regional 

Public Goods (RPGs) namely: (i) non-rivalry, (ii) non-exclusivity, (iii) broad public interest and benefit, 

(iv) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and continental and regional objectives; (v) 

catalytic and upstream role, and (vi) higher developmental impact through cooperation. Food production 

technologies being deployed will be available to all stakeholders in the target agro-ecological zones or 

commodity belts for free. No country will be excluded. Key related lessons learned will include the 

stronger working relationships between the CGIAR centers and NARES, and the experience in working 

across multiple countries with similar agro-ecological zones, among others. 

1.13 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede speedy transfer of technologies across borders..  

1.14 By going to scale on the Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs), TAAT’s key benefits include (i) 

increased agricultural productivity and diversification, leading to improved food and nutrition security, 

(ii) job creation through expanded commercialization and industrialization, (iii) improved 

socioeconomic status of farmers including women and youth due to higher incomes, (iv) reduced 

vulnerabilities to market price fluctuations due to reliable supply leading to better organized markets, 



 

vi 

(v) improved soil, land and water management practices due to Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), 

and (vi) increased resilience to climate variability and stress through the deployment of Climate Smart 

Agriculture (CSA) technologies and innovations. TAAT will make a significant contribution to Feed 

Africa’s key agricultural development objectives, which are 1) eliminating extreme poverty, 2) ending 

hunger and malnutrition, and 3) achieving food self-sufficiency and turning Africa into a net food 

exporter. 

1.15 Projections based upon overall project design and assumptions developed for the larger Feed 

Africa strategy, as well as World Bank and AGRA programs, suggest that TAAT, by scaling up food 

production technologies, will result in 120 million tons of additional raw food production per year, will 

assist about 40 million beneficiaries (11.7 million households), and lead to increased food production 

valued at $1.7 to $2.8 billion resulting from an $850 million investment by the end of the program.. 

Investments in TAAT will be greatly compounded by larger loans/grants awarded to RMCs through 

Feed Africa.  

1.16 Management hereby seeks Board approval for the first year resources (PY1) from the Regional 

Public Good (RPG) window and will return in subsequent years (PY2 and PY3) with further requests and 
also for specific country programs.



 

vii 
 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Country and program name: Multinational – Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

 

Purpose: To "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are women, in low-income RMCs to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, 
assure food security and raise rural incomes, and provide regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across similar agro-ecological zones 

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline (2017) Target (2020) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced food and nutrition 

security, reduced poverty and 

improved livelihoods 

1. Population are more food secure 
(of which women will be 50%) 

2. Prevalence of stunting among 
children under 5 (disaggregated 

by gender) 

1. 20% of 
Africans are 

food insecure  

2. 31.2% for 
African region 

(ranges 31.7% 

to 42.6%  

1. 40% reduction  
2. 30% reduction 

1. Annual 
country food 

security status 

report. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Increased income (inclusively) 

 

 

Increased agriculture 

commodity productivity 

 Household income 
 

 

 Crop productivity 

 Livestock productivity 

 US$1,650 
 

  

 As in Appendix 
2 

 50% increase 
 

 

 30% - 50% increase  

1. Annual 

National Bureau 

of Statistics 

Reports. 

2. Annual Report 

of Ministry of 

Agriculture  

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc.) 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted  advocacy 

Risk: Lack of commitments of stakeholders in 

implementation 

Mitigation: Active engagement of all 

stakeholders, with clear roles 

Increased employment 

(inclusively) 
 No. of jobs created (of which 

women & youth)  disaggregated 

by food commodity 

 0  450,000 (50% 
women) 

 

Increased food production 

 

Increased food and nutrition 

security 

 

Direct TAAT beneficiaries 

 

 

Value addition of TAAT 

 Tons of food (additional) 
disaggregated by food commodity 

 Household dietary diversity 
 

 

 No. of beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by age and sex) 

 

 Value of additional production 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 0 
 

 

 US$3.29 billion 

 17 Million MT 
 

 

 3 new food/hh 
 

 10.34 million hhs 
(2027) (50% women 

& 25% youth) 

 US$4.99 billion 

 

 Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)     

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1.1: Policies for 

deployment and adoption of food 

production technology policies 

harmonized across  a region 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring 

Reports. 

2. Annual CG 

Center Reports. 

3. Annual NARES 

Reports 

4. Qtrly Market 

Reports 

Risk: Lack of commitment & logistical support 

to enable training. 

Mitigation: Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Policy inconsistency on the part of 

governments & long process in changing 

policies 

Mitigation: Dialogue using fact-based 

rationale for losses due to policies status quo 

Output 1.2: Capacity of national  

seed systems built  
 No. of weak systems strengthened  0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.3: Improved crop 

varieties and livestock breeds 

released in one country widely r 

 No. of improved crop varieties & 
livestock breeds widely applied in 

agro-ecological zones 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 



 

viii 
 

available for adoption in other 

countries within a region 

Risk: Lack of commitment by the youth 

involved in technology promotion 

Mitigation: Proper orientation on mindset 

change 

Risk: Lack of cooperation by government 

agencies 

Mitigation: Dialogue for buy-in 

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc. 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted advocacy 

Risk:  Lack of commitment & logistical 

support to enable training 

Mitigation:  Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Lack of availability of off-taker markets 

Mitigation: Facilitate linkages between 

producer groups and off-takers through 

commodity marketing agreements. 

Output 1.4: Constraints to 

technology adoption addressed 
 No. of technology adoption 

constraints removed 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 

Output 1.5: policies for release 

and registration of food 

production technologies 

harmonized 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.6: Technology 

promotional activities carried out 
 No. of promotional activities with a 

focus on technologies for safe and 

nutritious foods 

 0  3000  
 

  

Output 1.7: Activities carried out 

to promote the consumption of 

safe and nutritious foods 

 No. of promotional activities  0  40 

Output 1.8: Input & output 

markets accessed 
 No. of communities with better 

access to input & output markets 

 0  2,350  

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) 

Output 2.1: Menu of Best-bet 

food production technologies 

generated 

 No of best-bet technologies scaled 
out. 

 0  21 (3/commodity)   

Output 2.2: Campaigns for 

transnational control of pests & 

diseases designed/implemented 

 No. of campaigns implemented   0  14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 

Output 2.3: Crop/Livestock 

technology delivery compacts 

convened 

 No. of delivery platforms convened  0  14 (2/commodity)  

 

Output 2.4: Young class of 

‘Agripreneurs’ supported 

 

Output 2.5: M&E of the platform 

carried out 

 

 No. of Agripreneurs supported 
 

 No. of M&Es of the platform 
carried out 

 

 0 
 

 

 0 

 

 5000 
 

 

 7 (1/platform) 

  

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT) 

Output 3.1: Trans-national 

control of pest/diseases facilitated 

Output 3.2: Appropriate 

technologies identified and 

deployed 

Output 3.3: crop and livestock 

outreach campaigns 

 

Output 3.4: Wide-scale farmer 

 No. of trans-national pest & 
diseases facilitated 

 

 No. of technologies identified and 
deployed 

 

 No. of successful crop/livestock 
outreach campaigns 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 

 

 0 

 7 (1/commodity) 
 

 

 14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

  



 

ix 
 

extension and innovative models 

designed and implemented  
 No. of wide-scale farmer 

extension models implemented 

 

 

 0 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

Component 4: Project Management 

Output 4.1: Functional TAAT 

Program Management 
 No. of fiduciary activities handled 

effectively and efficiently under the 

TAAT program 

 0  20 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring. 

Risk: Lack of cooperation among Compacts 

Mitigation: Effective team building from the 

onset. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS INPUTS 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)           UA 12.28 Million 

1.1: Harmonize and streamline technology release systems and registration as well as seed system policies across countries 

and regions (to ensure spillover effects) 

1:2: Capacity development of weak seed systems 

1:3: Ensure that improved crop varieties and livestock breeds for specific agro-ecological zones are widely applied and 

used 

1:4: Identify and remove constraints to agricultural technology adoption in Africa through appropriate policy audits 

TOTAL PROJECT COST: UA 40.00 MILLION 

 

ADF Grant:                             UA 29.00 million          (72.50%) 

AGRA:                                     UA 7.25 million            (18.10%) 

BMGF:                                     UA 0.85 million             (2.10%) 

Government of RMCs          UA 2.90 million             (7.30%) 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                                                       UA 9.82 Million 

2.1: Identification & selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs 

2:2: Design & develop appropriate campaigns for transnational control of pests and diseases and its implementation 

2:3: Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each of nine priority commodities 

2.4  Engage the CGIARs and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the 

nine priority commodities 

2:5: Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, training and financing in 

coordination with ENABLE Youth 

2.6: Carry out M&E of the platform 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)Program   UA 16.01 Million 

3.1: Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases through awareness raising campaigns (that pest and diseases 

do not respect political boundaries) and development of appropriate protocols  

3:2: Deployment of appropriate technologies through crop/livestock outreach campaigns in RMCs 
3.3 Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension and innovative models to organize and aggregate farmers 

 Component 4: Project Management (PM)                UA 1.89 Million 

 4.1: Management of TAAT fiduciary issues (Procurement, Disbursement, Financial Management)  



 

x 
 

Program timeframe 

Table 1: TAAT Program Timeframe  
Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                 

Internal Processing of Appraisal                 

Loan Negotiations                 

Board approval                 

Grant protocol signature                 

Recruitment of Program Staff (Clearinghouse, etc.)/Nomination of Program Steering Committee members                 

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness & first disbursement                 

Program launching/training of program teams in FM & Procurement                 

Preparation and validation of procedures manuals                 

Preparation & signing of MoUs with various implementing partners                 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)                 

Design and monitoring of supporting policies                 

Technology survey and assessment                 

Assessment of Seed Systems and livestock breeds dissemination systems                 

Proposals on crop/livestock campaigns of proven agricultural technologies                 

National technology deployment and promotion                 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                 

Farmers and input dealers registration                 

Design and implementation of trans-national campaigns for pests & disease control                 

Crop/Livestock technology delivery compact activities                 

Support to development of young class of ‘Agripreneurs’ & Promotion of technologies thru demonstration activities                 

Develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the nine priority commodities                 

Trainers training of others on the use of technologies & GAPs                 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)                 

Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases (through awareness raising, etc.)                 

Development of strategies for deployment of proven technologies                 

Design and implement wide-scale farmer and innovative extension models                 

Component 4: Program Management (PM)                 

Preparation, approval and floating of bidding docs & contract awards for goods, works & services                 

Contracts execution for goods, works and services                 

Quarterly reports submission                 

Annual reports submission                 

Program Work plans and Budgets                 

Steering committee meetings                 

Bank’s supervision missions                 

Audit                 

Mid-term review                 

Program Completion Report                 



 

1 

1. INTRODUCTION 

1.1 Africa’s Agricultural Sector is Underperforming 

1.1.1 The African continent has enormous potential for agricultural production. Yet more than 160 

million Africans are food insecure and malnourished. This is about one in four Africans, making Africa 

the most food-insecure region in the world. Every day over 100 million children in Africa go to bed 

hungry with devastating long-term consequences on their physical and mental development, hobbling 

their productivity as adults. Indeed, this has led to 58 million stunted African children—short in height 

for their age—representing an increase of 23% since 1990, despite worldwide declines of 37% over the 

same period. More than 32 million African children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 

million are severely underweight, and 14.3 million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Simply 

put, more than a third of African children under five are either moderately or severely underweight. 

Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is allowed to continue. 

1.1.2 Related to health and nutrition concerns, low agricultural productivity and value addition are 

very much at the heart of employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector 

accounts for between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25%, of 

Africa’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Consequently, many people work in agriculture for their 

livelihoods and yet produce and earn very little for it. Furthermore, less than 30% of harvests are 

processed into value added products compared to 98% in developed countries. Only $40 of value is 

added to one ton of processed products in Africa compared to $180 in rich countries. These are missed 

opportunities to create wealth and employment, especially for women who predominate in the 

population of African farmers today (70–80% of African farmers are women). This places women and 

their families in precarious situations, exacerbating the health and nutrition challenges already 

described. To escape this negative feedback loop, increasing agricultural productivity and value addition 

is key. The interventions described here address productivity issues while other measures being rolled 

out within the Bank’s Feed Africa strategy work on improving value addition.   

1.1.3  Why is productivity so low in Africa? For a variety of reasons including poor soils and limited 

access by smallholder farmers to improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, fertilizer, soil 

correctives, and appropriate crop production packages. African staple crop yields have barely grown in 

the last 25 years, and remain the lowest of any region in the world. The productivity of five staple 

crops—rice, wheat, maize, potato, and cassava—is just over half of the international average. Annual 

growth of cereal yields was only 1.3% from 1990 to 2014, compared with 4.1% in Brazil during the 

same period. Strikingly, between 2001 and 2008, agricultural GDP in Africa grew at just 3.4% while 

overall GDP grew nearly twice as fast, at 6% annually.   

1.1.4  In sum, the underperformance of the African agriculture sector leads to low incomes and 

expensive and often poor quality food, which has a direct bearing on hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and 

human capital and which hinders economic opportunities in the farm and non-farm sectors alike.   

1.2 Asia’s Green Revolution was the result of Technological and Institutional  Innovations 

1.2.1 Asia’s experience illustrates how rapidly things can turn around with the right actions at a 

critical time. In the mid-1960s in Asia, rising populations, an underperforming agricultural sector, and 

consecutive droughts led to significant food shortages, widespread hunger, and malnutrition. However, 

through spectacular scientific advances in wheat and rice breeding and agronomy, the food crisis was 

rolled back and India became food secure within four years, by 1970; Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines 

and Bangladesh followed soon after. The Asian agricultural phenomenon is estimated to have saved a 

billion lives and is now known as the ‘Green Revolution’. 

 



 

2 

1.2.2  The Asian experience was inspired by earlier successes in Latin America. The 20th century 

scientific advances in agriculture that were so successfully applied in Asia had been developed by the 

Mexican Agricultural Cooperation Program for wheat, established by the Rockefeller Foundation in 

Mexico City in the 1950s, and by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) for rice, created by 

the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations in Los Banos, Philippines, in the 1960s. This was south-south 

learning at its best. 

1.2.3  And indeed this south-south learning was deliberately supported by global development 

partners at the time. The World Bank, from the late sixties to the early eighties, provided institutional 

innovations to deploy and adapt the wheat and rice agricultural technologies to millions of hectares of 

farmlands in Asia. The World Bank also facilitated the establishment of public institutions at global, 

regional and country levels combined with policy advice and support to Asian countries, to implement 

a far-sighted strategy of reaching resource-limited farmers with the best of modern agricultural 

technology. One of these is the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a 

global network of agricultural R&D institutions, established in 1972. The CGIAR centers were set up 

to be international centers of excellence in agricultural innovation, where cutting edge crop and 

livestock technologies were developed by the world’s best scientists and tested and adapted to individual 

country conditions, in collaboration with the National Agricultural Research and Extensions Systems 

(NARES). NARES are made up of national agricultural research institutes, universities, public and 

private extension (training) agencies, farmer organizations, etc., representing the national voices and 

approaches to agricultural technology development and deployment. It is safe to say that the Asian 

Green Revolution would not have happened without heavy investments by the World Bank, the 

Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, and Asian governments in agricultural research and development, 

credit, input distribution, extension, and rural infrastructure. On average, Asian governments doubled 

their own spending on agriculture between 1972 and 1985. 

1.2.4  The Rockefeller and Ford Foundations expanded International Agricultural Research Centers 

(IARCs) to Africa in the late 1960s—with the first center being the International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA), established in Ibadan, Nigeria in 1967 to tackle technological barriers to raising 

food production. In the 1980s, two other centers were established in Kenya: the International Livestock 

Research Institute (ILRI) and the International Center Agroforestry Research (ICRAF, presently 

referred to as “World Agroforestry Center”); as well as a fourth center, the Africa Rice Center in Cote 

d’Ivoire. Of the 15 centers, four are based on the African continent. Centers in Asia and Latin America 

also opened research stations in Africa in the 1980s, including the Wheat and Maize Research Center 

in Mexico (CIMMYT) and the Tropical Crops Center (CIAT), demonstrating the increasing interest of 

international donors to bring the research and the technology for a green revolution to Africa.  

1.3 Why technologies have not moved to scale before in Africa 

1.3.1  But Africa missed the first green revolution for several reasons. Technologies have not moved 

to scale before in Africa due to: i) weak agricultural extension systems, ii) poor linkages between 

research and extension, iii) long technology verification and release systems, iv) a focus on national 

boundaries instead of across agro-ecological zones, v) insufficient attention to private sector value 

chains, vi) poor market linkages, vii) weak policy and regulatory environments, and viii) the absence  

of a regionally coordinated effort to deliver technologies across similar Agro-ecological zones 

(technologies without borders). 

1.3.2  Africa’s internal borders pose a serious challenge to the spread of technology on the continent. 

New agricultural technologies spread slowly across Africa’s agro-ecological zones because they are 

partitioned into multiple countries with differing governments, languages, phytosanitary controls and 

seed-certification processes. At the same time, pests and diseases do not respect arbitrarily drawn 

political borders and easily spread across them. This creates a deadly mismatch between prevailing 

dangers and the ability to roll out technologies to stop them in their tracks. The Fall Armyworm is a 

good example of such a pest that travels quickly and wreaks destruction on entire crops in its path. The 



 

3 

Armyworm was spotted for the first time in northern Nigeria in 2016 and has already managed to spread 

to at least 40 African countries (see Appendix 3 for a description of the Fall Army Worm Problem and 

mitigation plan led by the Bank). Tragically this is a crisis with known scientific solutions in the US 

and Brazil to stop the pests in their path, but without mechanisms to rapidly deliver them to African 

fields. And this is but one example. 

1.3.3  Low public sector investment in agriculture, poor seed systems, weak public extension, and 

lack of a harmonized regional legal framework for registration of crop varieties, and animal breeders’ 

rights (intellectual property), have meant that even existing improved varieties and breeds do not get 

into the hands of most farmers within a country or across a region. The share of acreage planted using 

improved crop varieties is only 30% in Africa compared with more than 50% in Latin America and 

more than 80% in Asia. Improved livestock breeds are even less prevalent.  

1.3.4  Investment by governments in the agriculture sector has also been a key driver of Green 

Revolutions in other regions. Mindful of this, African governments came together in 2003 to agree on 

the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), which, among other things, 

called for African countries to spend 10% of their budgets on agriculture. Yet, to date, only a handful 

of countries have managed to meet this target, hindering the resources available to support the transfer 

of new agricultural technologies into and within Africa. 

1.4 Feed Africa: AfDB’s Initiative to Drive Africa’s Green Revolution 

Feed Africa is the Bank’s bold initiative to end hunger, malnutrition, extreme poverty, and food 

imports—currently estimated at US$35 billion and projected to rise to US$110 billion by 2025, if 

nothing is done. This is a massive challenge as well as a massive opportunity. Feed Africa takes a 

commodity value chain approach to developing agriculture in Africa. A guiding principle of the Feed 

Africa Initiative is treating agriculture as a business, rather than as a way of life, and ensuring the 

inclusivity of women and young people. The goal is to produce thriving small-, medium-, and large-

scale agribusinesses in every segment of commodity value chains on the continent. Therefore, for Feed 

Africa to succeed, it must do two things. First, it must significantly raise agricultural productivity. 

Second, it must move African production much higher on the value chain, with agribusinesses 

producing and selling processed goods, not simply basic commodities, while providing markets for 

African farmers. The TAAT initiative aims to achieve the first goal, while a number of other initiatives, 

notably the development of agropoles and well-functioning markets, focus on the second. TAAT is 

therefore the bedrock of Feed Africa.  

1.5 Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

1.5.1  Similar to Asia, enhancing Africa’s productivity requires significantly increased investment 

from African governments, businesses and development institutions to deploy  proven 21st century food 

production technologies to tens of millions of African farmers where they will have the most impact. 

These food production technologies already exist and include new high yield crop and livestock 

varieties,  micro-nutrient dense crops – for example, pro-vitamin A rich orange-fleshed sweet potato 

and high iron beans, drought tolerant maize varieties, integrated pest and disease management (IPDM), 

and simple storage and post-harvest technologies to reduce crop losses.   

1.5.2  The potential of these food production  technologies to provide food and nutrition security has 

been demonstrated and needs to be taken to scale.  For example, DroughtTEGO® is a trademark for a 

high yielding drought-tolerant maize variety developed by the Water Efficient Maize for Africa 

(WEMA) Project to mitigate against drought stress. Experts predict that with global changes Sub Sharan 

Africa will be disproportionately affected by drought and suffer a 30% decrease in yields.  Kenyan 

farmers who grew the WEMA varieties during the drought of 2016 obtained 3.6MT/Ha of maize 

compared to 1.5MT/Ha in fields of farmers who grew other commercial hybrids. In addition, it has been 

demonstrated that 125g of orange fleshed sweet potatoes (OFSP) can provide the daily provitamin A 



 

4 

needs of a preschooler. Vitamin A Deficiency (VAD) is a significant health concern in Africa 

contributing to high rates of blindness, disease and premature death in children and pregnant women.  

An estimated 43 million children under 5 years are Vitamin A deficient and  between 50,000 and 

125,000 of those vitamin A-deficient children go blind every year, half of them dying within 12 months 

of losing their sight.   

1.5.3  A major target of TAAT is the control of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW), a recent pest problem 

on the continent that currently puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 

billion in the 2017/2018 season.  This assessment is from research funded by the Department for 

International Development (DFID) at the Center for Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI) 

that assessed current and potential damage of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW).    Based on the 

aforementioned research findings, DFID requested the leadership of the African Development Bank to 

contain the serious problem of Fall Army Worm (FAW). Following, the Bank hosted a meeting of 

experts at the recent World Food Prize symposium in Des Moines, Iowa; in attendance were Center for 

Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI), USAID, the International Center for Improvement of 

Wheat and Maize (CIMMYT, the Spanish acronym), the International Center for Insect Physiology and 

Ecology (ICIPE), and the private sector.   The meeting recommended a regional approach,  awareness 

raising campaigns, scouting and early detection, 1Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM), and 

search for resistance in preferred varieties.  TAAT will tackle Fall Army Worm (FAW) based on these 

recommendations working with CABI, ICIPIE, CIMMYT, National Agriculture Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) of RMCs, regional and Sub-Regional Organizations, and R&D Centers.  

1.5.4  Simple storage and post-harvest technologies being to reduce crop losses and help farmers 

manage the increased harvest under TAAT include: hermetic grain storage (Purdue Improved Crops 

Storage system) that prevent pest and mycotoxins infection of stored grains.  Other post-harvest 

technologies include affordable and efficient grain drying, and low cost extruders for production of 

simple processed food by small and medium scale agribusinesses.    

1.5.5  Crop campaigns to reach farmers with agricultural technologies of inputs and extension have 

occurred in Africa with significant success in the past.  Over a four-year period, 2011-2015, Nigeria, 

working closely with Africa Rice, the rice CGIAR center in Africa, combined innovative (ICT-based) 

ways to deploy improved rice production technology of seeds and fertilizer, a value chain approach, and 

supportive public policies to reach 6 million rice farmers. Average yields in the country doubled from 

2MT/Ha to over 4MT/Ha and national paddy rice production rose by an additional 7 million MT. 

1.5.6  Similarly, in Malawi, delivery of subsidized seeds of improved maize varieties and fertilizer to 

millions of farmers in 2004 made the country self-sufficient in maize production and a net exporter of 

maize in a single season. Ethiopia’s national extension system also deployed new crop technologies to 

over 4.4 million smallholder farmers from 2010 to 2015 on nearly 2.2 million hectares of land. Since 

then, Ethiopia’s agriculture sector has enjoyed an average growth rate of over 7% per year, which has 

contributed in no small way to the double digit annual growth rate of the economy overall. 

1.5.7  The approach to scaling technologies has been based on national boundaries, instead of agro-

ecological zones across multiple countries. The releases of crop varieties often go through four years of 

testing in national contexts, which has to be replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological 

zone in which the same technology can make a difference. Thus, a technology that is good fit for a given 

agro-ecological zone of ten countries could take 40 years to reach farmers if deployment from country 

to country spreads one after the other. What is needed is a new approach that will cut back on these 

unnecessary regulatory bottlenecks and fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-

ecological zones in one go. This is what TAAT will do. This will help open up the regional seed industry 

and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

                                                           
1 1  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) optiones  include resistant germplasm, pesticides, biopesticides, botanicals, pheromones, 

biocontrol via natural enemies, etc. 



 

5 

1.5.8. TAAT will engage  Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) - of CGIAR centers 

and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) 

and the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), the umbrella body of NARES in Africa. 

Based on the menu of proven food production technologies, RMCs, as represented by NARES, will 

work with the CGIAR centers to prepare proposals for food technology outreach campaigns across 

similar agro-ecological zones that cut across multiple countries to the decision making body of the 

RTDI, the Clearinghouse (see details in Appendix 1). There are eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) 

of TAAT that are agro-ecology based and cover 18 priority commodities (see Appendix 2).  But for this 

phase, nine food production technologies have been prioritized because of potential impact to increase 

food security, combat malnutrition, reduce food imports, and improve livelihoods.  They include: Water 

Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), high yielding rice varieties adapted to Africa (the NERICA 

varieties), high-yielding and high-starch cassava varieties, high yielding sorghum and millet for the 

Sahel, orange fleshed sweet potatoes, high iron beans, small livestock (goat and sheep), aquaculture, 

and new wheat varieties.  Control of pests and diseases, for example the Fall Army Worm (FAW), is a 

cross cutting intervention across all nine technologies.  

1.5.9  While TAAT is not a research program to develop new technologies—for the most part the 

needed technologies already exist and in some cases are already in use—but rather a crop and livestock 

outreach campaign to disseminate best-bet crop varieties/livestock breeds and practices to the farmers, 

it requires a close partnership with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

and International R&D Centers to provide solutions that tend to arise as research is deployed over a 

wide range of similar but diverse agro-ecologies with unique micro-ecosystems. 

1.6 TAAT will carry out positive gender discrimination in favor of women 

1.6.1 A successful green revolution must be inclusive and based on a recognition that Africa’s 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked. Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture with the World Bank cautioning that “failure to recognise the different roles of 

men and women in agriculture is costly, resulting in misguided projects and programmes, forgone 

agricultural output and incomes, and food and nutrition insecurity”.  Indeed incorporating consideration 

for gender issues systematically in agricultural research, development, and extension systems will 

contribute significantly to meeting the food needs of Africa’s growing population and ensure that 

productivity gains in food systems translate to improved welfare of the poor. 

1.6.2 Women are important to Africa’s agriculture and agriculture is important to African women’s 

lives. The agricultural sector is the largest employer of African women, with 62% of economically 

active women working in the sector.  In countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and Burkina Faso, over 90% 

of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities.  Despite being heavily engaged in 

agriculture, African women earn less than men from the sector with the rural wage gap between men 

and women estimated at between 15-60%. In the case of Ivorian cocoa and Ethiopian coffee, for 

example, women provide 68% and 75% of the labour, respectively, but earn only earn 21% and 34% of 

the income generated. 

1.6.3 Research indicates that, when granted equal access to inputs and skills, women farmers are just 

as efficient as male farmers. Hence the privileging of male farmers, for example in Ivorian rice projects, 

is based on erroneous assumptions not supported by data. As such, gender responsiveness in agricultural 

research and development is not about ‘fixing the women farmers’, but rather addressing the 

institutional structures and technological impediments that hamper their productivity. Ultimately, the 

empowerment of women farmers requires institutional transformation, with research institutions 

becoming more gender responsive and paying close attention and genuinely responding to the needs of 

women farmers 



 

6 

1.6.4 In partnership with African Women in Agricultural Research and Development (AWARD), 

the Bank will systematically incorporate consideration for gender equality and ensure women’s equal 

access to agricultural technologies. In this regard, AWARD will support TAAT by: (i) Convening and 

coordinating a network of technical gender experts that would be available to members of the TAAT 

consortium to address issues of gender in the selected value chains which will maximize the impact of 

TAAT by providing consolidated gender expertise and opportunity for shared learning; (ii) Identifying 

and prequalifying bankable and scalable agricultural research and development innovations that address 

the gender gap in African agriculture and build relationships with private sector and other uptakers of 

gender responsive agricultural technologies.  Expected outcomes will be demonstrated change in in 

gender awareness, attitudes and/or behaviours of TAAT partners, a measurable increase in TAAT 

partner institutions with gender responsive agricultural innovation policies and strategies, and TAAT 

outputs that are gender responsive across value chains. 

1.7 Expected Impact of TAAT 

1.7.1. TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity and increase food production over the 

next 8-10 years (Table 2). TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food 

production valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  

Table 2: Impact on Productivity, Production, and Livelihood of TAAT 

Commodity Productivity 

baseline  (2016) (MT/Ha) 

Productivity 2025 

(MT/Ha) (mean) 
Production (MT) 

Maize  2 4 30 million 

Lowland Rice 2 4 15 million 

Wheat 1.5 3 25 million 

Sorghum 1 2 10 million 

Millet 1 2 5 million 

Cassava 12 20 20 million 

Small livestock (live 

weight at 12 months) 

25 Kg 50 Kg 10 million 

Fish (live weight at 6 

months) 

3 Kg 5 Kg 5 million 

 

1.7.2  TAAT will benefit, through improved food security and income, an estimated 11.7 million 

households (representing on average 40 million people) over ten years, reducing by as many as a third 

the total number of hungry people on the continent. The increased food production is also expected to 

have an effect on food prices, reducing the amount of food households spend on food, and further 

increasing access to more food. It is estimated that TAAT, including its Bank-financed Country 

programs, combined with the affiliated programs of the World Bank and AGRA, will contribute to 

lifting about 40 million people out of poverty. 

1.7.3  TAAT will help to create huge regional spill-over effects and Regional Public Goods (RPGs). 

Of particular importance are RPGs that target imminent “regional public threats” of destructive pests 

and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political borders and easily spread across them.  A 

good example is the recent invasion into Africa of the Fall Armyworm described above, which currently 

puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 billion in the 2017/2018 season.   

1.8 TAAT is a Regional Program Producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs) 

1.8.1  TAAT resources are targeted at facilitating effective functioning of the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI), made up of International Agriculture Research Centers of the 

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), National Agricultural Research 

and Extension Systems (NARES), African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF), Sub-Regional 

Organizations, all  non-governmental organizations, that will ensure that proven agricultural 

development technologies are rapidly deployed to RMCs. 



 

7 

1.8.2  TAAT aims at producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs), including: i) harmonized regional 

and Transnational border protocols for introduction and release of improved varieties/breed and other 

agricultural technologies, ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with 

liberalization of foundation seed production (to include private sector seed companies), iii) combatting 

“regional public threats” of destructive pests and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political 

borders and easily spread across them.   

1.8.3  The requested grant from the RPG window of ADF 14 will support CGIAR and low-income 

RMCs to drive delivery of food productions technologies into hands of at least 60% of all farmers after 

eight to ten years. Twenty two of these RMCs, namely: Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo 

DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 

Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia have written to the Bank to 

express interest in participating. Six of them (Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, 

and Sudan) are in fragile situations as defined by the eligibility for the Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

support under ADF-14. However, it should be noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public Goods 

(RPGs) of public interest; no RMC can be excluded from it or from their spillover benefits, given their 

public goods characteristics (see section 4.2 and Appendix 4). TAAT is therefore not exclusive to low-

income ADF RMCs. Non-ADF countries interested in TAAT such as Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia 

(ADB countries that have written to express interest in TAAT) are welcome to participate via  the ADB 

funding window of the Bank or other eligible partner funds (e.g., funds from BMGF and World Bank). 

Participation will simply depend on the ability of RMCs to meet requirements for technology 

deployment. For the 25 countries (22 ADF and 3 ADB) that have expressed interest in participating in 

TAAT, the country programs in the pipeline that are aligned to inserting a TAAT component are listed 

in Appendix 5. TAAT is therefore open to all RMCs, via their NARES, to make their best technologies 

accessible to farmers within countries working in close collaboration with regional and continental 

organizations. The new crop varieties and livestock breeds, cross-boundary crop and livestock diseases 

control (e.g., Fall Armyworm), crop management practices, knowledge and other products from the 

CGIAR’s research work are indeed RPGs made widely available to individuals and organizations 

working for sustainable agricultural development around the world. TAAT will be held to high 

standards of deployment and must meet clear key performance indicators or funding will be 

discontinued to erring institutions. 

1.9 TAAT will benefit from the lessons learned from previous Bank interventions  

1.9.1  The Bank’s earlier experience with the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of 

Strategic Crops in Africa” (SARD-SC) program – which funded research on four of the six strategic 

crops of the African Union (Cassava, Maize, Rice and Wheat) – provides crucial lessons that TAAT 

will build upon.  They include: i) experience on how to work regionally with international centers of 

excellence (the CGIAR) to rapidly introduce and test technologies across a region for optimal yields 

and eventual deployment to farmers; ii) The SARD-SC program revealed the importance of going to 

scale to ramp up food production and reduce imports.  TheSARD-SC program led to a doubling of 

yields for wheat, rice, maize, cassava on experimental fields and in on-farm trials; if average wheat 

yields increases from 1.5 to 3MT/Ha and higher tons per hectare could be replicated across 9.8 million 

hectares grown in Africa, the continent could be on the path to self-sufficiency in wheat production; iii) 

SARD-SC also demonstrated the advantages of working across multiple countries with similar 

agriculture-ecological zones, simultaneously introducing, testing and releasing new crop varieties in 

several countries at the same time. Other lessons are have been learned from the development of the 

NERICA (New Rice for Africa) rice varieties by AfricaRice in the 1990s (Appendix 6). 

1.10 The Value-Added of TAAT 

1.10.1  The value-added of TAAT is that it can leverage crop and livestock technologies that have 

been developed and validated in one or a few countries across entire agro-ecological zones covering 

many countries. For example, maize yields can be doubled across East and Southern Africa via an 



 

8 

introduction, registration, and deployment of already available drought tolerant Water Efficient Maize 

for Africa (WEMA) varieties. And perhaps the best demonstration of the value added of TAAT is in 

tackling pests and diseases such as Fall Armyworm accross an entire region.   

1.10.2 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede the speedy transfer of technologies across borders. 

2 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of TAAT 

The development objective of TAAT is to "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, majority 

women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, assure food security 

and raise rural incomes, and deliver regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across 

similar agro-ecological zones". Overall TAAT has three main objectives:  

i) Creating an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers via policies for 
deployment and adoption of food production technologies that are regionally 

harmonized, food and nutrition conscious, and environmentally sustainable; 

ii) Facilitate effective delivery of technologies to farmers by working with existing Regional 
Technology Delivery Infrastructure in a compact with RMCs, represented by NARES, 

private sector actors, and an independent technology Clearinghouse; 

iii) Raising agricultural production and productivity through the identification and 
deployment of appropriate technologies, including nutrient dense crop varieties, and 

vigorous crop outreach campaigns, extension, and market linkage campaigns, in RMCs. 

2.2 Strategy of TAAT 

2.2.1  Feed Africa takes a value chain approach to raising crop/livestock productivity in Africa. 

Figure 1 shows where TAAT will intervene in the commodity value chains. A commodity value chain 

is described as a series of goods and services required for a commodity to be produced and then to move 

from the place of its primary production to the ultimate end-user (Figure 1). 

 



 

9 

Figure 1: Positioning of TAAT within agricultural commodity value chains  

 

2.2.2  Agricultural growth that has occurred in Africa reveals that productivity enhancement and 

market access development are prevalent factors. Productivity unaccompanied by strong growth in 

markets leads to a glut from over-production, while markets without increased productivity gives rise 

to food imports due to insufficient supply. Feed Africa will work to reinforce these productivity aspects 

of the value chain and agriculture markets through its various initiatives such as TAAT, Agropoles, 

post-harvest losses and agro processing. The role of TAAT in particular is to improve outcomes at the 

beginning of this chain by increasing productivity, as well as resilience to weather and disease-related 

risks, providing a much more solid basis from which to build strong production systems and markets 

that make African agribusinesses successful. TAAT will work in concert with the other initiatives to 

foster the deployment of commercially viable technologies with improved access to input and output 

markets, and other enablers such as innovative finance and soft/hard infrastructure.  

2.2.3 It is important for TAAT to generate ‘quick wins’ to create credibility and attract both 

additional public and private sector financing. An initial set of priority agricultural commodities are: 

i) Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), 

ii) Import-quality rice for the west African lowlands, 

iii) Cassava for industrial use, 

iv) Small livestock (goats and sheep), 

v) Sorghum/millet for the Sahel, 

vi) Aquaculture 

vii) High yielding wheat varieties 

viii) Orange fleshed Vitamin A rich sweet potato varieties 

ix) High iron beans varieties for Africa 



 

10 

Management of pests and disease is a cross cutting theme across all the nine technologies 

2.2.4 Clear metrics of target productivity, production, beneficiaries, agro-ecologies, and countries have 

been pre-determined for these nine priority food production technologies (See Appendix 7) 

2.3 TAAT Activities 

2.3.1  The TAAT program consists of four major components namely: 

i) Component #1: Creation of an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers 
via a seed system, technology release and registration policies that are regionally 

harmonized 

ii) Component #2: A Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT 
platform—that is able to provide and deploy needed food production technologies and any 
additional adaptive research required 

iii) Component #3: Deployment of appropriate food production technologies, through 
crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs 

iv) Component #4: Project Management. 

2.3.2  Harmonization of technology release and registration, and seed system, policies 

 across regions 

The approach to scaling technologies based on national boundaries needs to be replaced by an approach 

that involves agro-ecological zones that spread across multiple countries. Policies and protocols for 

release and registration of crop varieties and animal breeds needs to be streamlined so that 

varieties/breeds released in one country can be utilized in other countries of the same region, same with 

seed system protocols that can replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological zone. TAAT, 

working with Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) and CGIAR center responsible for policy work, 

IFPRI (and its key partners such as the Africa Technology Policy Studies ATPS Network), will review 

national and regional policies on variety release, registration, and the seed system with an aim of 

harmonizing them to fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. This 

will help open up the regional seed industry and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

2.3.3. The Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT platform 

RTDI is a consortium of CGIAR centers, FARA, Africa Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) and 

SROs working on regional approaches to deployment of new crop and livestock technologies, and 

combatting pest and disease threats through a fair and transparent method in prioritizing technologies 

and allocating resources. The RTDI will develop a menu of food production technologies and work with 

RMCs, as represented by NARES and the private sector, to develop a proposal to take these technologies 

to scale.  Figure 2 schematically describes the RTDI processes. The RTDI is made up of four units, 

namely: 

1. A Project Steering Committee (PSC): the highest decision-making body composed of 
representatives of participating RMCs, the private sector, CGIAR centers. The 

committee provides oversight to Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  

2. Clearinghouse: the body of the consortium that decides on which technologies should 
be used. The Clearinghouse will be independent of the Project Management Unit (PMU);  

3. Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC): is at the core of TAAT and it is 
an agreement among the entire ecosystem of actors needed to deliver improved 



 

11 

technologies at scale for a specific crop or livestock value chain, for each of the priority 

commodities. They will be hosted the CGIAR center or institution with the particular 

mandate for each specific crop; 

4. A Project Management Unit: oversees day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary 
and administrative activities;  

2.3.4  Identification and deployment of appropriate technologies, through crop/livestock 

campaigns in RMCs 

TAAT will engage CGIAR and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production 

technologies, namely: seed system or artificial insemination guidelines (technical manuals) for large 

scale deployment of improved varieties/breeds, disease control, improved crop/animal production 

methods, aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will prepare a proposed food technology 

outreach campaign covering one or more of the menu items, with support from the respective CTDC 

for submission to the Clearinghouse of the RTDI. The proposals will clearly state the target 

beneficiaries, location, development impact, and timelines within the RMCs. The Clearinghouse will 

review the proposals according to a set of agreed criteria and recommendations for funding. Oversight 

will also be provided for implementation by the Clearing house. 

 

Figure 2: Process of origination, review, decision making, and funding in the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure 

2.4 Expected Output and Outcomes 

2.4.1 Expected Outputs 

TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity of target commodity up to 100% over the next 

8-10 years (Table 2). Other outputs include reduction of Vitamin A deficiency in children under five 

and pregnant women by 30% and reduction in post-harvest losses by 50% in target locations of TAAT 

over the next 8-10 years. 



 

12 

2.4.2 Provision of Regional Public Goods (RPG)  

Regional public goods will be provided via a number of vehicles including: 

i) Harmonization of regional and transnational border protocols for introduction and 
release of improved varieties/breed and other agricultural technologies 

ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with production of 
foundation seeds (inclusion of private sector seed companies) 

iii) Disease control – monitoring and IPDM methods 

iv) Extensive adaptation trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient dense 
varieties 

2.4.3 Crop Outreach Campaigns to reach millions of African Farmers 

i) Toolkits for the different priority commodities provided to the RMCs 

ii) Feedback on performance of technologies via the RTDIs 

iii) A doubling of acreage under improved crops and breeds, from the current 30% to 60%, 
by 2025 

iv) Availability of cheap and nutritious food 

2.4.4 Expected Outcomes 

TAAT will benefit via increased food security and income, raising farmer’s household incomes by an 

average of US$600 per annum, reaching an estimated 11.7 million households, representing on average 

40 million people, over ten years, and reducing by as much as a third the total number of hungry people 

on the continent. TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food production 

valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  The increased food production will also have an effect 

on food prices, reducing the amount households spend on food, and further increasing access to more 

food, in a positive feedback loop. TAAT is expected to add 3.15 million direct farm jobs over eight 

years. 

2.5 Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.5.1 Program Cost  

TAAT is divided into centrally managed activities, designed to produce regional public goods, and 

funded by grants from the Bank and partners, and country program activities to be financed through 

sovereign loans from the Bank and partners. The UA 29 million from the ADF XIV Regional Public 

Goods (RPGs) window will solely finance regional public goods described in the TAAT Program 

Framework Document. BMGF has already approved $1.14 million and AGRA is processing a $10 

million grant for centrally managed activities of TAAT. The country programs will be financed via 

AfDB sovereign loans to RMCs, as well as World Bank loans to RMCs to the tune of USD 700 million. 

The Bank’s financing of the central programs will be for nine priority commodities using 

resources from ADF XIV RPG window. This first set of commodities will be implemented over three 

(3) years (2018 to 2020). Only activities of the first nine commodities have been described in more 

detail in the present report, with the costing information below.  

 



 

13 

2.5.2  The total cost of first phase of TAAT is estimated at UA 40.00 million (USD 56.532 

million) net of taxes and based on 2016 prices comprising UA 15.27 million or 38% in local costs 

and UA 24.73 million or 62% in foreign costs. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 3% and 5%, respectively. The physical contingencies are 

estimated from 0% (emolument) to 5% (works) based on common practices. The price contingencies 

were estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local inflation rates of about 2% per annum 

and foreign inflation rates. 

2.5.3  The summary of the first phase of nine commodities costs by component and by category 

of expenditure are presented respectively in Tables 3-4. 

Table 3: Summary of Program Cost by Components 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 

1. CREATION OF ENABLING 

ENVIRON. FOR TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

6 049.38 9 800.52 15 849.90 4 280.32 6 934.49 11 214.82 62 30 

 

2. REGIONAL TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

4 900.26 8 043.82 12 944.09 3 467.25 5 691.52 9 158.77 62 25 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 
7 528.70 13 604.50 21 133.20 5 327.04 9 626.05 14 953.09 64 40 

 4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 1 771.93 777.78 2 549.70 1 253.75 550.33 1 804.08 31 5 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250.27 32 226.62 52 476.89 14 328.36 22 802.39 37 130.75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954.01 1 608.79 2 562.79 675.02 1 138.32 1 813.34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379.90 1 112.42 1 492.32 268.80 787.11 1 055.91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584.17 34 947.83 56 532.00 15 272.18 24 727.82 40 000.00 62  
 

Table 4: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

EXPENDITURES CATEGORIES 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 I. Investment Costs 18 834,77 32 027,12 50 861,89 13 326,80 22 661,23 35 988,03 63 97 

 A. GOODS 25,25 84,75 110,00 17,87 59,97 77,83 77 - 

  Vehicles 9,00 36,00 45,00 6,37 25,47 31,84 80 - 

  Equipment & Inputs 16,25 48,75 65,00 11,50 34,49 45,99 75 - 

 B. SERVICES 17 211,32 30 634,75 47 846,07 12 178,11 21 676,04 33 854,15 64 91 

  Training 5 138,97 6 280,96 11 419,93 3 636,15 4 444,18 8 080,33 55 22 

  Studies 1 861,58 5 584,74 7 446,32 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 75 14 

  Contractual Services 9 905,52 18 395,97 28 301,49 7 008,79 13 016,32 20 025,11 65 54 

  Audit 305,25 373,08 678,33 215,98 263,98 479,96 55 1 

 C. MISCELLANEOUS 1 598,20 1 307,62 2 905,82 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 45 6 

II. Recurrent Costs 1 415,50 199,50 1 615,00 1 001,56 141,16 1 142,72 12 3 

 A. PERSONEL 1 155,00 - 1 155,00 817,24 - 817,24 - 2 

 

B.DAILY SUBS. ALLOWANCES 

(DSA) 120,00 - 120,00 84,91 - 84,91 - - 

 

C. OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE 100,00 150,00 250,00 70,76 106,13 176,89 60 - 

  Vehicles 60,00 90,00 150,00 42,45 63,68 106,13 60 - 

  Equipment 40,00 60,00 100,00 28,30 42,45 70,76 60 - 

 

D. GENERAL OPERATING 

CHARGES 40,50 49,50 90,00 28,66 35,02 63,68 55 - 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250,27 32 226,62 52 476,89 14 328,36 22 802,39 37 130,75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954,01 1 608,79 2 562,79 675,02 1 138,32 1 813,34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379,90 1 112,42 1 492,32 268,80 787,11 1 055,91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 62  
 

2.6 Program financing arrangements  

2.6.1  Of the total first phase Project cost of UA 40 million (USD 56.532 million), Bank Financing 

will be UA 29 million or USD 40 million (72.5%)  (See Tables 5 and 6). This will finance 100% of 

Goods; 100% of services for the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC); 100% funding 



 

14 

for Enable Youth in TAAT (ENABLE-TAAT) and 100% operating costs. Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation (BMGF) will provide UA 0.83 million ((USD 1.138 million) or 2.1 %) to assist the 

establishment of the Clearing house. The funding from BMGF will cover recruitment of key staff and 

other operating expenses. The Clearinghouse will play a major role in the TAAT implementation. The 

Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) will provide UA 7.25 million (or USD 10 million) 

to finance 100% services (across Components 1, 2, and 3). The participating RMCs will contribute 

UA2.90 million (7.3%) in local currency, 100% in-kind, by provision of farm land for extension training 

facilities, demonstration activities, and other critical RPGs-promoting activities. Project beneficiaries 

include a variety of stakeholders: agripreneurs, farmer based organizations and cooperatives, 

commodity processors, private sector operators, registered SMEs, seeds producers, agro-input dealers, 

service providers, millers, aggregator and market operators, and young graduates.   

2.6.2  While table 5 below indicates the financing arrangements by local and foreign currency 

distribution, table 6 indicates financing by year. Grants’ allocations by source and expenditure 

categories is presented in Appendix 8a and by components in Appendix 8b 

Table 5: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

FINANCING 

SOURCES 

Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

% Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

 ADF Grant 12 894,72 28 090,97 40 985,70 9 123,84 19 876,16 29 000,00 72,5 

 AGRA 4 058,45 6 187,97 10 246,43 2 871,61 4 378,39 7 250,00 18,1 

 BMGF 532,43 668,88 1 201,30 376,73 473,27 850,00 2,1 

 Government 4 098,57 0,00 4 098,57 2 900,00 0,00 2 900,00 7,3 

Total Financing 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 100,0 

NB: Government contribution is 7.3% and in-kind (national staff salaries, part of the operating cost, rental value of the office space offered, laboratory 

infrastructure and experimental land and the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and custom duty exemption of different project procurement). It is less than 

10% required because six (6) of the target 22 low-income RMCs are countries are in fragile situations and conflict-affected (see related Annex in Vol. II 
of the Report, Technical Annex).. 

Table 6: Financing arrangements by Year 

FINANCING SOURCES 
Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

  ADF Grant 25 862,19 10 008,30 5 115,21 40 985,70 18 299,15 7 081,51 3 619,34 29 000,00 

  AGRA 5 059,20 3 435,51 1 751,71 10 246,43 3 579,71 2 430,84 1 239,45 7 250,00 

  BMGF - 593,01 608,29 1 201,30 - 419,59 430,41 850,00 

  Government 2 727,48 676,36 694,73 4 098,57 1 929,87 478,57 491,57 2 900,00 

Total Financing 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 

 

2.6.3 During the implementation period for each component, expenditures will be carried out 

according to the schedule in Table 7. The nine priority commodity value chain activities will be 

implemented during the first two years through a comprehensive deployment of new technologies in 

RMCs. Year 3 will be dedicated to the consolidation of the results through mainstreaming of the value 

chain development activities on a commercial basis 

  



 

15 

Table 7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD and UA Million)  

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

 

1. CREATION OF AN 

ENABLING 

ENVIRONMENT FOR 

TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

4 498,30 6 346,72 6 515,11 17 360,14 3 182,83 4 490,71 4 609,86 12 283,41 

 

2. REGIONAL 

TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

10 679,31 2 313,01 889,80 13 882,13 7 556,30 1 636,60 629,59 9 822,49 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF 

APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 

17 430,36 5 194,06 - 22 624,42 12 333,09 3 675,13 - 16 008,22 

 

4. PROGRAM 

MANAGEMENT 
1 040,90 859,38 765,03 2 665,31 736,51 608,07 541,31 1 885,88 

Total PROJECT COSTS 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 
 

2.7 Key Performance Indicators 

The TAAT first phase commodities performance indicators are outlined in the Results Based Logical 

Framework at three levels: Impact, Outcome and Output. 

 The impact indicators relate to more food secure population and dealing with the 
prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years. 

 The outcome indicators are household income, agricultural productivity, job creation, 
tons of additional food commodity, household dietary diversity, value of additional foods 

produced, and number of beneficiaries. 

 The output indicators include: technology policies harmonized across regions/countries, 
weak systems strengthened, improved crop varieties and livestock breeds widely applied, 

technology adoption constraints removed, promotional activities with a focus on 

technologies for safe and nutritious foods, and communities with better access to inputs 

and output markets. Others are best-bet technologies scaled out, campaigns implemented, 

delivery platforms convened, agripreneurs supported, M&Es of platforms carried out, 

trans-national pests and diseases facilitated, technologies identified and deployed, menus 

of proven food production technologies developed, and wide-scale farm extension 

models implemented.  

 See the RBLF for complete list. 

3 FEASIBILITY OF TAAT 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 It is anticipated that the Bank’s intervention will result in positive economic and financial 

impacts in RMCs from the nine priority technologies, especially given the public goods nature of the 

interventions. Economic and financial analyses were carried out using the economic surplus approach 

for the nine selected commodities. Improvements taken into account were streamlined and harmonized 

release of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, strengthening of seed systems, use of improved 

varieties of crops across the applicable agro-ecological zones, design and implementation of appropriate 

campaigns for trans-national control of pest and diseases, good agricultural practices (GAPs), capacity 

building and outreach, policy support and advisory services, as well as demonstration and promotional 

activities. The benefits were measured based on increase in food supply as a result of improved access 

to proven technologies and other farm inputs. The annual flows of gross economic benefits from 



 

16 

increased crop and livestock productivity, production and value chains were estimated and aggregated. 

The aggregate benefits and costs (per commodity value chain) were then discounted to derive the 

estimated present value (in 2017 values) of total net benefits from the intervention. The benefits and 

costs were later aggregated across the nine priority commodities to calculate the aggregate financial and 

economic impacts.  

3.1.2 The consolidated Net Present Value (NPV) of the Financial Net Benefits was US$ 431.5 

million with an internal rate of return (FIRR) of 27%. Using World Prices (to correct for domestic 

distortions, taxes, and subsidies), the NPV of net economic benefits was calculated at US$ 280 million 

with an internal rate of return of 23%.  The result is quite robust and includes changes in productivity 

(crop and livestock), levels of adoption of proven agricultural technologies, and discount rates. For 

instance, a scenario of adoption by 10% of farmers, 10% productivity increase, and 10% discount rate 

across the nine priority commodities still gave an aggregate NPV of US$ 296 million with an internal 

rate of return of 18%. This supports the potential economic impact of the TAAT approach.  

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts and Gender 

3.2.1 TAAT has been classified as Category 2 operation, indicating that the program activities are 

expected to have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) for the mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of the 

program was posted on the Bank’s website on 4 July 2017. It provides the processes and methodologies 

to be implemented by the Clearinghouse/PMU to screen and manage potential environmental and social 

impacts and risks likely to result from the proposed agriculture technologies and demonstration 

activities. Because TAAT will be executed at RMCs, the ESMF draws on applicable national and 

regional regulatory frameworks as well as international good practice guiding environmental and social 

management.  

3.2.2  Women’s large overrepresentation in agricultural tasks in Africa, combined with the existence 

of a gender gap in agricultural productivity and the need to boost Africa’s agricultural output calls for 

increased attention to raising female agricultural productivity. The technologies it invests in must 

respond to the needs and priorities of women as well as men in order to level the playing field and 

increase agricultural productivity. Implementing partners must emphasize the deployment of gender-

responsive technologies. There is a strong case within TAAT for carrying out positive gender 

discrimination, since women form the majority of farmers as well as food processors in Africa. Studies 

have shown that women are as efficient as men, given access to same technologies. A World Bank 

publication (2008) clearly documents gender based differences in African agriculture and in terms of 

technology, land, extension, finance, time, mobility and education and training. 

3.2.3  TAAT will ensure the gender responsiveness of the technologies. Evidence shows that 

introducing new agricultural technologies can exacerbate already existing gender disparities and make 

life tougher for smallholder farmers, especially women and girls. However, with proper attention, 

agricultural technologies have the potential to bridge the gender gap and lead to inclusive, agriculture-

driven prosperity for all Africans. The African Women in Agricultural Research and Development 

(AWARD) will be one of the partners for the TAAT program to not only build the capacity of key Bank 

staff and TAAT implementers to be more gender responsive, it will help mitigate potential negative 

gender impacts while upscaling those technologies that bridge Africa’s gender gap in agriculture. The 

TAAT program recognizes that gender equality in agribusinesses is a priority. The mechanisms to 

ensure social inclusion and gender equality in this project include appropriate outreach strategy and 

gender sensitive training on good agricultural practises, as well as adequate provisions for both genders 

to access affordable and quality agricultural technologies and input and output markets. In addition, this 

project will prioritize the adoption of gender friendly technologies and support policies in the target 

countries. 

 



 

17 

4 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Structure and Activities of the RTDI (TAAT Platform) 

The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) consists of the Project 

Steering Committee (PSC), the Clearing House, the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), and the Project Management Unit (PMU).  These component are described in more details 

below. 

4.1.2  Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

The Project Steering Committee is the highest decision-making body composed of representatives of 

AfDB, African Ministers of Agriculture of participating RMCs, the various CG Centers, the Private 

sector, NARES and regional farmer organizations. The committee provides oversight functions to 

Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  All annual work programs will be cleared by the 

PSC prior to funding.  Membership of the Program Steering Committee (PSC) will be approved by the 

Bank.  

4.1.3 Clearinghouse 

The Clearinghouse is the main decision making body of the RDTI when it comes to selecting which 

technologies to disseminate and scale up. It will be substantially autonomous; its work plan and budget 

will be approved by the Program Steering Committee (PSC). The objective of the Clearinghouse is to 

decide which proven agricultural technologies proposed by each Crop/Livestock compact group can be 

rolled out and taken to scale. The activities of the Clearinghouse are indicated in Appendix 1. 

The activities of the Clearinghouse include:  

i) Evaluating requests from the compacts for technologies to be rolled out and scaled up. 
This will be akin to a peer review mechanism of the proposed technologies; 

ii) Validating the design and plan with stakeholders for a buy-in and commitment; 

iii) Identifying the optimal mix of partners that will accompany the implementation, 
backstopping and monitoring of the proposed plan;  

iv) In collaboration with the RMCs, conduct monitoring and assessment of milestones and 
Performance Indicators;  

v) In collaboration with the Bank, advising Governments and private actors on investment 
opportunities and financing mechanisms for going to scale. 

4.1.3.1. Although the Clearinghouse will be based at the IITA sub-station in Cotonou it will be fully 

independent of the IITA management. It is not a part of the PMU and will operate as an independent 

unit with its own competitively recruited Director, supported by technical and support staff.  The key 

skills assets required in the Clearinghouse include: i) technology transfer specialist; ii) an outreach 

expert; iii) a communication expert;  iv) a gender development specialist, and v) M&E Specialist in 

addition to other general services staff.  

4.1.4 Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery Compacts 

At the heart of TAAT’s technology deployment effort is the Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery 

Compact (CTDC).  CTDC is an agreement between the CGIAR center with mandate for the commodity 



 

18 

value chain, NARES, the RMCs and the entire ecosystem of value chain actors—from input supplier, 

processors, aggregators, equipment manufacturers, extension agencies, etc.  The CTDC drives the 

implementation of TAAT activities for each of the nine priority commodities. RMCs who indicate 

interest in accessing and deploying at scale technologies for the commodity in question, can become a 

part of the compact. Request from the CTDCs for deployment of a list of technologies and resources 

required will be submitted to the RTDI, specifically the Program Steering Committee (PSC), who will 

work in tandem with the clearing house to review and approve the appropriate technologies. Figure 4 

shows the structure of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compacts (CTDC). 

4.1.5  The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) can be observed in 

figure 4 and 5. 

The activities of the RTDI or TAAT platform include: 

i) Identification and selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs involved in 
crop/livestock compacts; the RMCs will be front and center of the compacts to ensure 

ownership and sustainability with attention to specific value chains); 

ii) Improvement of seed systems. Specific tasks are: evaluation of existing seed systems 
to identify strengths and weaknesses, identification of policy and capacity development 

needs to address the weaknesses and take advantage of the strengths, implementation of 

the identified policy and capacity development needs to strengthen the seed systems; 

iii) Harmonization of regional variety release systems to ensure regional spillover effects 
of technologies. Specific tasks are: identification of constraints to variety release and 

access to improved varieties of crops in Africa and why varieties suitable for specific 

agro-ecologies cannot be applied to the wider ecological reach because of country 

boundaries, identification of policy and capacity-building options to address this issue, 

implementation of the identified policy and capacity building options on the ground, 

monitoring the effects); 

iv) Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases.  Specific tasks are: 
awareness raising that pest and diseases do not respect political boundaries with clear 

examples, design and development of appropriate campaigns for trans-national control 

of pest and diseases, implementation of the agreed on campaigns for trans-national 

control of pest and diseases; 

v) Support RMCs with policy audits and reviews to remove constraints to technology 
adoption and use; 

vi) Engage the Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on harmonization of agricultural 
technology release and synchronization of foundation seed protocols, disease control, 

monitoring and Integrated Pest Disease Management (IPDM) methods2, and adaptation 

trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient rich varieties; 

vii) Design and execute a comprehensive communication strategy to effectively 
communicate the goals, activities, and benefits of the Agricultural Transformation 

Agenda; 

 

                                                           
2  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) is combining different methods of pest and disease control ranging from varietal resistance and 

tolerance, chemical control (pesticides, fungicides, bactericides, etc.), biocontrol (using natural enemies of the pests), cultural practices (crop rotation, 
mixed cropping, planting dates,, etc.), and  



 

19 

viii) Fiduciary responsibility for the centralized activities of TAAT. 

Figure 3:  Schematic of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 4:  Schematic representation of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

20 

4.1.6  Two of such Compacts, CIPRISSA (for Rice) and TASI (for the African Savannahs) have 

already been set up by the Bank to coordinate activities for scaling up technologies to achieve self-

sufficiency in rice production and for transformation of the African Savannah into bread baskets. The 

CTDC will also engage Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Development Partners, namely 

the World Bank, JICA, IFAD, BMGF, Rockefeller Foundation, African Agriculture Fund (AAF), 

Agriculture Fast-Track Fund, Fund for African Private Sector Assistance (FAPA), Making Finance 

Work for Africa Partnership (MFW4A), Africa Climate Change Fund, Clim-Dev Fund, and Climate 

Investment Funds (CIF), and many others to secure co-financing for TAAT.   

4.1.6.1 The activities of the CTDC include: 

i) Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each 
of nine priority commodities (e.g., rice, wheat, aquaculture, water efficient maize for 

Africa, cassava, sorghum/millet, livestock, orange fleshed sweet potato, and high iron 

beans).  Specific tasks are to consult, discuss, and prepare an agreement (the compact) of 

technologies, activities, and focus of the platform. The compact will discuss and agree 

on the technologies to be delivered, packaging, targets and timeline to cost-effectively 

deliver the technologies in a timely fashion; 

ii) Agree with NARES and Extension agencies on approaches to deploy technologies 
Specific tasks are to meet with key stakeholders (NARES, Extension agencies, NGOs, 

private sector, etc.) in RMCs to discuss best approaches to deploy technologies; prioritize 

the approaches in terms of effectiveness; deploy the preferred approaches with the 

country’s agencies leading; monitor progress, learn lessons and make immediate use of 

the lessons in improving delivery; 

iii) Define the target areas.  Specific tasks are to consult with the RMCs about which 
geographic areas to focus on during the different phases of technology deployment; 

discuss and agree with the RMCs on material and human resources required to cover the 

target area and how to sources these; implement the technology; 

iv) Mobilize all actors across the value chain. Specific tasks are to identify and register all 
the key actors across each target commodity’s value chain; call a meeting of the different 

actors across each target commodity value chain to ascertain constraints and how best to 

solve these; assign roles on technology delivery to different actors across the value chain; 

ensure that different actors across the value chain perform the assigned functions; 

monitor, learn lessons and make immediate use of the lessons in improving technology 

delivery; 

v) Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension models and innovative models to 
organize and aggregate farmers; 

vi) Work with FARA and others to build capacity in the NARES and public sector for 
program design, execution, and monitoring, and in the private sector for value chain 

organization and governance; 

vii) Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, 
training and financing in coordination with ENABLE youth; 

viii) Promote climate-smart practices among farmers through funding and demonstration 
of the value of sustainable agriculture approaches;  

ix) Set targets and KPIs; monitor the achievement of the KPIs; distil lessons for 
improvements in future; .  Specific tasks are to discuss and identify key target areas; 



 

21 

formulate the targets that are achievable; mobilize those needed to achieve the targets; 

identify appropriate key performance indicators (KPIs) for different targets set 

x) M&E of the platform, using the outcome to improve the performance of the platform. 
Specific tasks are to design appropriate M&E data collection and analysis for the 

platform; discuss and ensure the leadership of RMCs in the M&E; implement the M&E. 

4.1.7. Project Management Unit (PMU) 

The Project Management Unit will: i) oversee day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary and 

administrative activities; ii) organize the transfer of project resources to the institutions leading the 

commodity value chains; iii) coordinate the compilation and review of reports from value chains and 

enablers for submission to the Bank; and iv) elaborate/implement administrative and financial 

management guidelines/template to be used across. 

4.1.8  The decision to pursue TAAT through a consortium of CGIAR Centers, the National 

Agricultural Research Systems (NARES), and their Umbrella body, FARA, donors, and development 

centers was decided at the High Level Conference on Feed Africa held in Dakar, Senegal, October 21-

23, 2015. At that meeting, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), being the oldest 

CGIAR center in Africa and the center with the most geographical spread – 20 sub-stations across the 

continent, was selected to coordinate the TAAT platform or the Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI).  IITA is therefore the Executing Agency (EA). IITA will set up a small Program 

Management Unit (PMU), headed by a competitively recruited Project Coordinator, to undertake 

fiduciary functions (procurement, disbursement, financial administration, reporting, audits, etc.). 

Specific MoUs and implementation agreements will be signed with each of the lead institutions of the 

target commodities and the other key Implementing Agencies (IAs). 

4.1.9  The day-to-day management of the CTDCs is left to the various Lead Centers. Each Lead 

Center, or expert CGIAR center, shall prepare an annual work plan and budget that will be submitted 

for the review and approval by the Clearinghouse based on clearly defined deliverables. African 

Agriculture Technology Foundation (AATF), IITA, and CIMMYT will lead the Water Efficient Maize 

Production; AfricaRice and IWMI shall lead the activities within the Rice Self-sufficiency; IITA leads 

Cassava Intensification; ICRISAT lead in Sahel Food Security; ILRI will lead on livestock; World Fish 

will lead on fish initiative; ICARDA and CIMMYT are responsible for Wheat Self-sufficiency. 

4.1.10  Policy support: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) will support the various 

institutions on policy issues that enhance successful program implementation and the attainment of the 

expected widespread and transformational impact. IFPRI will also work with other institutions that 

contribute to agricultural development policy work, including ‘The African Seed Access Index 

(TASAI)’, and African Technology Policy Study Network Program (ATPS). It will undertake its 

activities in consultation with each IA, reporting to clearinghouse. 

4.1.11. Capacity development: Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) shall undertake 

capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and within the Priority Intervention Areas 

(PIAs) and their value chains. They shall also sign a MoU with Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI), with indications of their expected role and terms of delivery as well as expected 

budget for the various activities. FARA will ensure that the thematic content of capacity development 

activities and modules are designed and administered in consultation with appropriate and qualified 

entities, including relevant and participating CGIAR Centers. FARA will also undertake its activities in 

consultation with each program initiative team and report to the Clearinghouse. An Activity Plan for 

each initiative will provide detailed work plans. 

 



 

22 

4.1.12  The National Agricultural Research and Extension Services (NARES) will be the primary 

delivery agent for the deployment of the selected technologies, in close consultation with the 

Government Ministries of Agriculture to ensure country buy-in. This will be supported by private sector 

entities and relevant donor/partner programs in the respective countries. These delivery channels include 

the AGRA supported input dealer network, the World Bank supported West African Agricultural 

Productivity Program (WAAPP) and similar programs in other regions. Support from CGIAR Centers 

Value Chain Leaders will be transactional, value for money and demonstrable benefits, supporting 

national institutions to roll out validated and branded technologies. 

4.1.13  Mechanisms for timely startup include the early appointment of the Head of the Clearinghouse 

and Program Coordination team, and execution of implementing MoUs between IITA (the EA) and the 

implementing partners. This team will oversee the project inception workshop to elucidate all the plans 

for a smooth program take-off.  

4.1.14  In the target RMCs, numerous donors are supporting overall agricultural development. Donor 

coordination occurs in different ways including through Thematic Working Groups, Sector Wide 

Approaches (SWAps), and Integrated Sector Approaches. For TAAT, the key donors that have indicated 

commitment so far include AfDB, World Bank, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rockefeller 

Foundation, and AGRA. These donors have been coordinating efforts through joint design workshops 

aimed at steering the development of TAAT for success and the achievement of the intended impact on 

the ground, and at ensuring that ongoing experiences are taken into account, and not duplicated (e.g., 

World Bank’s WAAPP, EAAPP, and APSA; AGRA’s work on input dealership; and BMGF’s work on 

technology development; etc.). Several of such meetings were attended by representatives of other 

prospective donors such as USAID. This coordination is also critical for effective monitoring of the 

program, and will continue during program implementation.   

4.1.15 Specific roles of each CGIAR center can be found in Table 8. 

4.2 Regional Public Goods (RPG) and Access to RPG Window of ADF 14:  

4.2.1  TAAT meets all features (Stages I and II) of RPGs, namely: (i) non-rival benefits (i.e., one 

country’s consumption does not subtract from the amount available to other countries), (ii) non-

excludable (no country in the region can be excluded from benefiting, except at a prohibitive cost), (iii) 

broad public interest and benefit (as demonstrated by letters of expression of interest from 22 low-

income ADF RMCs and three ADB RMCs and involvement of numerous NARES, FARA, SROs, and 

RECs in the formulation of TAAT); (iv) regional dimension or multi-country involvement (22 low-

income RMCs are targeted; Three ADB countries have expressed interest; TAAT adopts a regional, 

agro-ecological and commodity belt focus; TAAT will renew the drive to transform Agriculture in 

Africa by scaling up regional cooperation in combatting crop and livestock diseases, and accelerating 

delivery and development impact); (v) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and 

continental and regional objectives (TAAT is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy and four of 

the five high priority goals - the “High 5s”- namely; Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate Africa, 

and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa; TAAT is one of the flagship initiatives identified 

in the Bank’s recently approved Feed Africa: Strategy for agriculture transformation in Africa: 2016–

2025); (vi) catalytic and upstream role (TAAT’s interventions will remove bottlenecks and 

disincentives that have forestalled uptake of agricultural technologies in Africa and upstream segments 

of commodity value chains, making it catalytic and upstream; Given that the commodities of focus in 

TAAT are strategic to the Bank’s RMCs, as underscored by CAADP, TAAT will clearly play a catalytic 

role to engender strong support for these commodities, and (vii) higher developmental impact in 

cooperating (given that crop and livestock diseases travel freely across national boundaries, making it 

impossible for individual countries to achieve anything better than in cooperation). The different 

products from the CGIAR’s research work (earlier indicated) are indeed RPGs made widely available 

to individuals and organizations working for sustainable agricultural development in the world. It is for 

these reasons of public interest, non-rivalry in partaking in the benefits from TAAT, multi-country 



 

23 

involvement, and non-excludability that TAAT was selected among programs seeking support under 

the RPGs window as part of the 2017 RO prioritization exercise of the ADF-14 (see 2017 Regional 

Operations Prioritization and Selection Report, Ref. MJ/ADC/07/17/02 dated 28 July, 2017). Details 

are presented in Appendix 4.  

Table 8: The roles of CGIAR and other R&D Centers, and key stakeholders in TAAT 

CGIAR Center/Collaborator Role in TAAT 

International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA) 

Global yam and cowpea R&D center; African center for maize and cassava.  Will lead the work on 

cassava industrialization working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) and collaborate with African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) on Water 

Efficient Maize of Africa (WEMA).  Coordinating Agency for TAAT. 

International Food Policy Research 

Institute (IFPRI) 

Global food policy R&D center.  Will leads work on Policy Support Services, working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and Alliance for Green 

Revolution in Africa (AGRA) 

Africa Rice African rice R&D center.  Will lead work on rice working with National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) and International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)  

International Center for Tropical 

Agriculture (CIAT, its Spanish acronym) 

Global beans, cassava, and tropical forages R&D center.  Will lead the high iron beans effort 

working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

International Center for Agricultural 

Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) 

Regional R&D center for dry areas. Will lead work on wheat working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Livestock Research Institute 

(ILRI) 

Global livestock R&D center.  Will lead work on small ruminants working with National 

Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

WorldFish Global fish R&D center.  Will lead work on aquaculture working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) 

African center for the acquisition and licensing of agricultural technology from around the world.  

Will lead the Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) effort working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) 

and International Center for Wheat and Maize Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Center for Insect 

Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) 

African R&D center for pest control.  Will work with the Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), 

Global R&D center for agriculture and biosciences.  Will work with the International Center for 

Insect Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish 

acronym) 

Global R&D center for wheat and maize.  Will collaborate with African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) on Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA)   

International Potato Center (CIP, its 

Spanish acronym) 

Global potato R&D center; will lead the work on orange fleshed sweet potato working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

International Rice Research Institute 

(IRRI) 

Global rice R&D center; will work with AfricaRice and the NARES on rice production and post-

harvest technologies. 

International Water Management Institute 

(IWMI) 

Global water management R&D center. Will work on irrigation with AfricaRice on rice and with 

International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) on wheat 

Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa 

(AGRA) 

AGRA will provide parallel financing, lead downstream delivery of TAAT technologies, help 

strengthen policy dialogue with national governments and the private sector to shape and ensure a 

shared commitment to improving delivery systems, working with IFPRI. AGRA will also be 

involved in Capacity Development and Outreach work led by FARA. 

Regional Member Countries (RMCs) RMCs via National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will work with the 

lead CGIAR centers, Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on agricultural commodity value chains 

carrying out policy reforms, crop outreach campaigns, regional disease and pest control initiative. 

RMCs will also organize producers into farmer organizations and link to existing market and 

financial support programs. RMCs will also leverage country investment programs to execute 

TAAT. 

National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will be involved in deploying the 

selected technologies at country level, among other things.  

Forum for Agricultural Research in 

Africa (FARA) 

FARA shall undertake capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and in the PIAs and 

their constituent value chains. 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) Sub-Regional Umbrella bodies of NARS; will lead regional policy effort 

African Women in Agricultural Research 

and Development (AWARD) 

AWARD will collaborate to ensure that women are given priority attention in all cases. 

World Bank Major partner in financing TAAT at Country level. Expected financing at level of USD 700 million 

 

  



 

24 

4.3 Cost-sharing exemption 

4.3.1  The centrally managed activities planned to be funded with RPG resources in Phase I of TAAT 

do not have revenue generating capacity.  They are designed to target 22 low-income RMCs and set the 

stage for upcoming phases, which will require cost-sharing by participating countries, and country 

programs (funded through loans), both of which will benefit and deepen the application of science and 

technology to sustainable agricultural development in Africa. In addition, given TAAT’s regional, agro-

ecological and commodity belt focus, six of the targeted 22 low-income RMCs (Chad, Congo DRC, 

Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are loan ineligible and in fragile states. TAAT therefore 

meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and qualifies for financing through grant resources 

outside the PBA allocation (i.e. exclusively from the RO envelope). In line with this policy, OpsCom 

has cleared the cost-sharing exemption for the initial phase of the program, and recommends that cost-

sharing should be explored in subsequent phases after the project is launched. Management considers 

that TAAT meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and therefore seeks Board approval for 

financing of TAAT through grant resources outside the PBA allocation. Details on TAAT’s eligibility 

for the grant funding and cost-sharing exemption are presented in Appendix 9.  

4.4 Linking centrally managed programs to country programs 

4.4.1 TAAT has two planks: the centrally managed operations and the subsequent country programs. 

The benefits that the former will deliver are catalytic and upstream to the main country investment 

programs which will further be financed by the Bank and its partners (the WB, IFAD, AGRA, BMGF, 

etc.). Without TAAT and the support of the Bank, investments by the World Bank and development 

partners may not achieve as great a development impact. A good example is in the control of regional 

pest and disease threats to increased productivity. 

4.5 Private Sector Participation 

4.5.1 TAAT is developing a unique approach to working with the private sector via the Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compacts.  Over 40 private sector organizations ready to partner with TAAT were 

identified during the course of project development. These businesses operate in the areas of input 

manufacture and distribution, commercial seed and propagule production, bio-fertilizers, irrigation 

equipment and supplies, greenhouse construction and food processing. TAAT will create business 

opportunities for the private sector by building seed systems in the rural areas, including agro-dealer 

networks, thereby expanding demand for seeds and services (crop insurance). The Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compact will ensure that the private sector is at the table as opportunities are 

being discussed. 

4.6 Procurement Arrangements 

4.6.1 Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank 

for the program, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for 

Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Donor partners (WB, AGRA, BMGF, etc.) may use their own procurement rules 

over the resources which they contribute and implement in a parallel arrangement. The Bank 

procurement rules will apply to Bank financed activities. Specifically, procurement and financial 

management would be carried out as described in Appendix 10 and Appendix 11.   

4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4.7.1 As part of the M&E System to be carried out by the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), advanced monitoring tools aligned with the Bank's Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

indicators will be used to ensure day-to-day effective performance measurement. This includes but is 

not limited to options available at IITA and across its CGIAR Centers including participatory field-level 



 

25 

assessments, remote sensing, GIS, Big Data operations that compile and analyze program and national 

statistics, and advanced statistical diagnoses. Monitoring functions will be accompanied by detailed 

training in the use of these tools; as such, reporting will stem from participatory monitoring methods 

and structured data collection instruments. The functions of Knowledge Management are central to the 

M&E Framework and will be designed as a continuous, dynamic, action-reflection-action process. An 

independent external review will be carried out for TAAT at the end of year 2 (2019). 

4.7.2  An inception report will be prepared by the implementing partners, including baseline status, 

detailed work plans and budgets, as well as communication and technology deployment plans. All 

implementing partners will provide quarterly updates and regular situation reports; a mid-term progress 

report by each IA; a midterm progress report by the Clearinghouse; annual audit reports by independent 

external auditors; regular supervision reports would be carried out jointly by AFDB Country Offices 

and the Clearinghouse for national level interventions. All reports would be shared among the partners 

in the TAAT Framework. 

4.8 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The sustainability of TAAT will be achieved through: i) stronger links between research and 

extension; ii) stronger linkages of farmers to markets; iii) focus on agricultural value chains to ensure 

that the demand and supply sides are integrated; iv) supportive policy and regulatory environments; and 

v) expected higher commitment of governments to agriculture in the focal countries.  

4.9 Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

4.9.1 Potential risks and measures to mitigate are shown in Table 9. 

Table 9:  Risks and Mitigation 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures 

Lack of enabling environment (policy, market, etc.). Provide fact-based & targeted advocacy. 

Weak value chain linkages especially to off-takers and processors Build capacity of outgrowers around established commercial 

companies and processors 

Lack of commitments of stakeholders in implementation  Active engagement of all stakeholders, with clear roles 

Lack of commitment & logistical support to enable training  Sensitization & identification of strategic training partners. 

Policy inconsistency (on part of governments) & long process in 

changing policies. 

Dialogue using fact-based rationale for losses due to policies 

status quo 

Lack of commitment by the youth involved in technology promotion 

and demonstration. 

Proper orientation on mindset change through participatory 

approaches and incubation centers. 

Lack of cooperation by government agencies Dialogue for buy-in. 

Weak NARES capacity and resource base Be focused on important specific interventions. Capacity of 

NARES strengthened. 

Retaining earlier promising technologies that become obsolete along 

the way 

The Clearinghouse will institute a mechanism for identifying 

and decommissioning obsolete technologies  
 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1 Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance the centralized activities of the TAAT Framework Program is 

an ADF grant (from the Regional Public Goods window) for the eight CGIAR centers who will be 

involved in management of core TAAT activities. A Protocol of Agreement shall be entered into 

between by IITA on behalf of the CGIAR Centers and the Fund.  Conditions for Fund intervention and 

disbursement can be found in Appendix 12. 

5.2 Undertakings 

5.2.1 The Recipient (IITA) shall undertake to: i) Execute an Implementation Agreement with each 

of the implementing agencies; ii) Submit legal opinion(s), issued to the Fund by legal counsel acceptable 

to the Fund, in respect of each of the Implementation Agreement(s) submitted to the Fund, confirming 



 

26 

that the Implementation Agreements(s) between IITA and the relevant implementing agency has been 

duly authorized, ratified and executed on behalf of IITA and the relevant implementing agency, and 

constitutes a legal, valid and binding agreement on both parties; and iii) Not apply for withdrawal of the 

relevant portion of the proceeds of the Grant in respect of any implementing agency that has not 

executed an Implementation Agreement with the Recipient.  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This program complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

6 RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Boards of Directors are hereby requested to: 

(i) Approve TAAT as a Framework Program to be implemented in three (3) phases; 

(ii) Approve a Grant of Twenty Nine Million Units of Account (UA 29,000,000) from the 
regional public goods envelope of ADF-14, to IITA, for the purpose of implementation 

of centrally managed activities (for ADF-only countries while partner resources will 

support ADB countries) of the first phase and deployment of the first set of nine priority 

food production technologies, subject to the terms and conditions stipulated in this report; 

(iii) Approve an exemption from cost-sharing for phase 1; 

(iv) Take note that Management will submit to the Board(s); (a) on an annual basis, a status 
report on the implementation of the TAAT Framework Program; (b) separate specific 
proposals for the financing of the second and third phases subject to satisfactory 

implementation of the first phase, for consideration and decision in accordance with 

applicable Bank Group policies; and c) the requests for country program funding as these 

originate from specific RMCs. 



 

I 

Appendix 1: The TAAT Clearinghouse (C-House) 

The purpose. Low productivity of African agriculture is a consequence of, among others, a lack of access to yield 

enhancing technologies or the resources to acquire them at scale. Successful crop/livestock campaigns to close yield 

gaps in several African countries (e.g., Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria, Kenya) are characterized by key elements, including: 

major political decision to reach millions of farmers with inputs, best fertilizer recommendations and best available 

seeds, development of agro-dealer networks and input supply chains. Other are market and infrastructure development, 

easy access by farmers to finance - often with no collateral based on risk guarantee schemes, crop insurance, smart 

policies and incentives, and media coverage of positive results, and mitigation of climate change. All these factors 

must feature in any plan to reach millions of farmers in a successful and sustainable way and the C-House ensures the 

success of TAAT campaigns given the above factors for success. 

The Clearinghouse is the main vehicle driving implementation. It should be substantially autonomous and its work 

plan and budget approved by the Program Steering Committee (PSC). The Clearinghouse, in association with each CG 

Center and the State institutions will manage the platform systems (earlier successfully applied under the SARD-SC 

project) described in an Annex in Vol. II of the Report. 

Objective. The objective of the C-House is to take proven agricultural technologies to scale in a commercially 

sustainable fashion through the establishment of a mechanism to facilitate partnerships and provide access to expertise 

required to design, implement, and monitor progress of crop, livestock, and aquaculture campaigns. 

Activities. The activities of the C-House include: i) Conduct an assessment/mapping exercise of target value chain and 

the surrounding ecosystem, and make technological and non-technological offer to address at scale the constraints; ii) 

Propose a multi-stakeholders agricultural technology deployment plan on how to go sustainably to scale; iii) In 

collaboration with the Bank advise the Governments and private actors on investment opportunities and financing 

mechanisms for going to scale; iv) Identify the optimal mix of partners - from CG and non-CG system, that will 

accompany the implementation backstopping and monitoring of the proposed plan; v) Validate the design and plan 

with stakeholders for a buy-in and commitment; vi) In collaboration with the RMCs implement the plan and monitor 

milestones and Performance Indicators; vii) Working with FARA and others, build capacity in the public sector for 

program design, execution, and monitoring, and in the private sectors for value chain organization and governance; 

and viii) Design and execution of a comprehensive communication strategy to effectively communicate the goals, 

activities, and benefits of the Agricultural Transformation Agenda. 

Structure. The structure of the C-House is organized along principal objectives of: i) Partner engagement; ii) Program 

design and monitoring; iii) Capacity building; iv) Communication; and v) Gender and youth employment as cross-

cutting issues. The C-House shall be independent of the IITA management and have its own advisory board. It cannot 

be located within the TAAT PMU but rather operate as an independent unit. The Clearinghouse will be based at the 

IITA sub-station in Cotonou with a Head supported by technical and support staff. 

Key skills required.  The key skills assets required in the C-House include: i) head of partner engagement; ii) 

technology transfer specialist; iii) an outreach expert; iv) a communication expert;  v) a gender development specialist, 

and vi) M&E Specialist in addition to other general services staff.(see Detailed Cost Tables). 

Infrastructure. The C-House will take advantage of existing infrastructure at IITA and will be located on one of IITA’s 

campuses in Cotonou, similar to the Business Incubation Platform (BIP) an entity for commercialization of research 

findings at IITA. 

Agricultural transformation incubation platform. As an agricultural transformation incubation platform, the C-

House aims at facilitating partnerships, program design/implementation to help reach millions of farmers with 

appropriate agricultural technologies, and reducing transaction costs.  



 

II 

Appendix 2: Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) of TAAT by agro-ecology and commodities 

 

Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) Agro-ecology Commodity Value Chain 

Self-sufficiency in rice Lowland  Milled and parboiled rice 

Cassava intensification Humid Forest & Sub-Humid 

Savannahs 

Cassava 

Transforming the Savanna Zone into 

Africa's breadbasket 

Sub-Humid Savannahs Maize, soybean, livestock 

Achieving Food Security in the Sahel Semi-Arid  Sorghum, millet, livestock 

Restoring Tree Plantations Humid Forest & Sub-Humid 

Savannahs 

Cocoa, cashew, oil palm, tea  

Expanding Horticulture in Africa Humid Forest, Humid Savannahs, & 

Semi-Arid 

Tomato, pulses, leafy 

vegetables, sweet potatoes 

Expanding wheat production in 

Africa 

Mediterranean and Semi-Arid 

irrigated 

Wheat 

Expanding fish production in Africa Humid Forest, and Humid 

Savannahs, Semi-Arid, and 

Mediterranean 

Aquaculture 

 

  



 

III 

Appendix 3: Combating the Fall Army Worm  

 

  

Combating the Fall Army Worm 

The Fall Armyworm (FAW), Spodoptera frugiperda, is a moth that is indigenous to the 

Americas. It is one of the most damaging crop pests in the Americas, feeding on over 80 

different crops, including maize, rice, sorghum and sugarcane.  The Armyworm was reported 

for the first time in Africa in 2016, discovered in Nigeria, and has already managed to spread 

to at least 40 African countries.  Without appropriate action, Fall Armyworm (FAW) could 

cause 21-53% maize yield losses in just 12 African countries. The value of these losses is 

estimated at between US$2.48 billion and US$6.187billion.  FAW should be expected to spread 

throughout suitable habitats in mainland sub-Saharan Africa within the next few cropping 

seasons. Northern Africa and Madagascar are also at risk.  

Meetings of technical experts from within and outside the African continent have been 

convened by USAID, FAO, and the Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement (CIMMYT, its 

Spanish acronym) to draw up a plan to control FAW.  The Department for International 

Development (DFID) of the UK also approached the African Development Bank (AfDB) to 

take the lead in the control of FAW.  AfDB hosted a side event on FAW at the World Food 

Prize Foundation’s Borlaug symposium in Des Moines, Iowa, to provide global awareness and 

invite other donors to participate in what may be the largest emergency response to a crop in 

Africa.  Participants from of USAID, CABI, ICIPE, CIMMYT, the Private sector (Monsanto 

and Dow Agro) attended the meeting.   

The consensus of the meeting was a regional approach that emphasizes Integrated Pest and 

Disease Management (IPDM) is required to contain FAW.  Immediate recommendations 

include (i) awareness raising campaigns on FAW symptoms, early detection and control, 

including beneficial agronomic practices; (ii) national preparation and communication of a list 

of recommended, regulated pesticides and biopesticides and their appropriate application 

methods. Work should also start immediately to (i) assess preferred crop varieties for resistance 

or tolerance to FAW; (ii) introduce classical biological control agents from the Americas. A 

conducive policy environment should promote lower risk control options through short term 

subsidies and rapid assessment and registration of biopesticides and biological control 

products.  Digital methods of scouting, turning millions of farmers with cell phones into scouts 

who can report back on incidence, was also recommended.  TAAT will tackle the regional 

threat of FAW along the recommended interventions via a regional effort involved RMCs, 

represented by NARES, IITA, CIMMYT, ICIPE, CABI, and Sub-Regional Organizations. 



 

IV 

Appendix 4: Check-list of criteria for financing RPGS 

Project Name MULTINATIONAL – TECHNOLOGIES FOR AFRICAN 

AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION (TAAT) 

Department AHAI 

Countries involved Overall, TAAT will be implemented in three phases in 22 low-income RMCs 

(Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, 

Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 

Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia) of 

the Bank that have written to express interest in participating. Six of these 

(Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are 

fragile and conflict-affected states. However, it should be noted that TAAT 

will produce Regional Public Goods (RPGs) of public interest; no one can be 

excluded from it and also from the spillover benefits, given their public goods 

characteristics (see below). Phase 1 of TAAT will focus on nine agricultural 

commodities: Cassava, Maize, Rice, Wheat, Sorghum/Millet, Small 

livestock (goats and sheep), Aquaculture, orange fleshed sweet potato, and 

high iron beans.   

Regions involved Central, West, East, Southern and others given the public goods 

characteristics of the proven agricultural technologies dissemination planned 

in TAAT (see below).  

CRITERION  SHORT EVALUATION (BULLET-POINTS) 

Stage I: 

Non-rivalry: Public goods are 

those whose benefits can be 

enjoyed by one party without (or 

hardly) reducing the availability 

of these benefits to others. The 

project will demonstrate that the 

object of assistance within the 

project is something whose 

benefits will be consumed by 

more than one party and that a 

provider cannot keep non 

contributors from consuming the 

benefit of that good. Some 

examples can be terms of trade, 

cross-boundary diseases (animal 

and human), shared water 

resources, cross-border roads. 

TAAT has a spectrum of benefits that all the target beneficiaries along the 

value chains of the target commodities can enjoy simultaneously. These are: 

(i) agricultural innovations such as gender-sensitive proven technologies 

(that reduce the workload and hardship, especially for women), (ii) climate 

proof crop germplasm, (iii) control of Fall Army Worms, (iv) food security, 

(v) import substitution for the Phase I target commodities (cassava, maize, 

rice, wheat, sorghum/millet, small livestock, and aquaculture) due to 

increased domestic production, (v) savings in foreign exchange (due to 

reduced food importation), (vi) new employment opportunities and increase 

in rural income of farmers and entrepreneurs, (vii) improvements in the 

national economy, (vii) capacity building, (viii) congenial policies and 

institutional frameworks (for profitable and sustainable value chains 

development), and (ix) integration of production with markets. Based on the 

principle of comparative advantage, TAAT will result in increases in 

production, processing and marketing of agricultural commodities that will 

simultaneously benefit all the target beneficiaries with substantial spillovers 

to others given the public goods nature of the planned deployment of 

technologies envisaged. This will be enhanced by innovative partnership 

among the national and international institutions, advanced research 

institutions, Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), and the 

Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), among numerous other 

partners as designed in TAAT. 

Besides, there is an important differential among RMCs in terms of 

knowledge and know-how related to the commodities targeted in Phase 1I. 

As a result, TAAT will aim at using complementarities across the countries 

to cause trans-boundaries and trans-national spillover effects on the 

development of the target value chains and achieve sizeable regional critical 

masses in terms of human and physical capacities. 



 

V 

Non-excludability: It is difficult 

or prohibitively expensive to 

exclude others 

(Countries / communities/ 

regions) from enjoying/ 

consuming the generated benefits. 

The project will demonstrate that 

there is 

no way that non-participating 

countries/ communities can be 

stopped from enjoying the 

generated benefits because of the 

nature of the object of the 

project’s assistance. 

Under the TAAT, the proven technologies dissemination activities of the 

implementing CGIAR institutions and partners (e.g., AGRA, FARA, AATF, 

icipe, AWARD, etc.) were designed to directly benefit individual farmers 

and consumers, agricultural commodity processors, farmers’ groups 

including youth and women, policy makers, private sector operators, 

marketers/traders, transporters, small-scale agricultural machinery 

manufacturers, and institutions (NARES, CGIAR, NGOs) from low income 

Bank’s RMCs are the project direct beneficiaries. However, it should be 

noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public Goods (RPGs) (proven 

agricultural technologies) of public interest; no one can be excluded from 

these. The proven new crop varieties, control of Fall Armyworm, crop 

management practices, knowledge and other products from the CGIAR’s 

research work and similar institutions are “international public goods” 

(IPGs), made widely available to individuals and organizations working on 

sustainable agricultural development world-wide. By design, the CGIAR 

centres, which have a long experience working in networking with NARES, 

will work in partnership with the NARES and advanced institutions (e.g., 

AGRA, FARA, icipe, TASAI, AWARD, etc.) in all aspects of project 

implementation, with the RMCs being front and centre. Besides, TAAT will 

support thematic networks, conferences and large outreach media to ensure 

easy and unrestricted project information flow among RMCs. 

Of Public Interest: The good is of 

broad 

public interest and benefit. 

Typically, a public/ governmental 

entity in each participating country 

is typically responsible for the 

regulatory/policy context for the 

good to be produced and takes part 

in its production. 

The project will demonstrate that 

there is either an inter-

governmental coordinating body 

in place or an existing REC to 

regulate and oversee the function 

and coordination of the object of 

support in a proposed project. As 

such, the project will demonstrate 

to what extent the 

intergovernmental body and/or 

REC has taken steps to ensure the 

maintenance of the object of 

support and to what level of 

success. 

Twenty two (22) low-income RMCs (Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, 

Chad, Congo DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, 

Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, 

Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia) of the Bank that have written to the 

Bank, through either their Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Agriculture, 

expressing interest to participate in TAAT. Six of these (Chad, Congo DRC, 

Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are fragile and conflict-

affected states. Although the executing agency and the lead implementing 

agencies for TAAT are mostly the CGIAR centers (AfricaRice, ICARDA, 

IFPRI, ILRI, IITA, WorldFish, IWMI, ICRISAT, etc.), the implementation 

on ground will be spearheaded by relevant NARES, AGRA, FARA, 

Universities, AWARD, and policy making institutions across the target low-

income countries, among others. At the regional level, the Regional 

Coordinator will interface with the relevant Regional Economic 

Communities (RECs) and ensure that regional integration elements are 

strong. The partnership between the NARES (including Universities), 

AGRA, FARA, and the CGIAR centers is fundamentally predicated on the 

three strategic objectives of the reformed CGIAR. These strategic objectives 

are: (i) Food for people (aims at creating and accelerating sustainable 

increases in the productivity and production of healthy food by and for the 

poor), (ii) Environment for people (aims at conserving, enhancing, and 

sustainably using natural resources and biodiversity to improve the 

livelihoods of the poor in response to climate change and other factors), and 

(iii) Policies for People (aims at promoting policy and institutional change 

that will stimulate agricultural growth and equity to benefit the poor, 

especially rural women and other disadvantaged groups). These strategic 

objectives perfectly coincide with the key aims and aspirations of the Bank’s 

RMCs, as encapsulated in their different development agenda. 

  



 

VI 

Stage II 

Multi-country involvement: The 

public good involves two or more 

countries and can only be 

effectively produced if every 

country involved participates and 

supports its production. 

The project will demonstrate that 

there are at least two countries 

involved with regards to the object 

of support (5%) and that the object 

of support in the Bank’s 

investment is something that is 

either of a global and/or regional 

development importance and this 

should be demonstrated through a 

regionally/globally validated 

document (for example the 

“Convergence Plan of 

COMEFAC” outlining the work in 

the Congo Basin, a UN document 

agreeing on steps to reduce 

climate change, SADC gender 

action plan, the ECOWAS 

memorandum on Food Crisis, etc.) 

confirming this importance (10%). 

TAAT is one of the flagship programs that arose out of the Pan-Africa Feed 

Africa Conference held in Dakar in October, 2015. Overall, it will be 

implemented in three phases in 22 low-income RMCs (Benin, Burkina-Faso, 

Cameroon, Chad, Congo DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, 

Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra 

Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia) of the Bank that have written 

to express interest in participating. Six of these (Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-

Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are fragile and conflict-affected 

states. However, it should be noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public 

Goods (RPGs) of public interest; no one can be excluded from it. Phase I will 

focus on nine (9) agricultural commodities: Cassava, Maize, Rice, Wheat, 

Sorghum/Millet, Small livestock, Aquaculture, orange fleshed sweet 

potato, and high iron beans. 

Through a value chain approach, TAAT is focused on contributing to poverty 

reduction and enhanced food security through proven technologies 

deployment for the commodities mentioned above. Most of these are among 

the strategic commodities retained by African Heads of State through 

NEPAD/CAADP intensive, widespread, and interactive consultations. This 

also fed into the consultations of the Global Forum on Agricultural Research 

(GFAR) through the Global Conference on Agricultural Research for 

Development (GCARDs) that greatly shaped the Consortium Research 

Programs (CRPs) of the reformed CGIAR. 

Strategic Alignment: The RPG is 

strongly aligned with the Bank’s 

strategic orientations and also to 

continental and regional 

objectives (i.e., RPGs identified as 

priority operations under NEPAD 

or REC regional integration 

plans). Harmonization and 

partnership will be encouraged by 

giving preference to co-financing 

arrangements that promote donor 

coordination and leverage the 

Bank’s own resources by 

mobilizing additional funds, 

including from sister institutions 

or the private sector. 

The project will demonstrate that 

the RPG is closely aligned with the 

continental and regional 

development agenda as well as the 

Bank Group’s own strategy, 

especially with regard to 

selectivity and sector focus, and 

harmonization and partnership. 

TAAT is one of the flagship initiatives identified in the Bank’s recently 

approved Feed Africa: Strategy for agriculture transformation in Africa: 

2016–2025. Through it, the Bank is contributing to the reformed CGIAR by 

supporting CRPs on: (i) maize, (ii) rice-based systems (GRiSP), (iii) roots 

and tubers, (iv) wheat, and (v) institutions and markets (includes value chain 

analysis), among others. 

 

TAAT aligns with CAADP’s pillar 3 (Promoting Agricultural Research and 

Technology Dissemination and Adoption) and pillar 4 (Increasing Food 

Production and Security). It also aligns with the ‘new’ CGIAR’s research 

result-oriented vision to reduce poverty and hunger through high quality 

international agricultural research, partnership and leadership. 

While coordinating with the CGIAR centers, the Bank is engaging with other 

donors for co-financing of the TAAT program. One of such co-financing 

meeting was held in Abidjan, on 1 Dec., 2016, at the instance of the Bill & 

Melinda Gates Foundation. USAID, AGRA, and IITA participated. The Dec. 

1, 2016 partners meeting and earlier ones (e.g., during the Forum of African 

CEOs, in Geneva in March 2017) involved the World Bank, the International 

Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the Rockefeller Foundation, and 

the Japan International Cooperation Agency, among others, resulted in 

currently available co-financing fund of US$ 700 million, US$ 230 million, 

and US$ 1.13 million from the World Bank, AGRA, and BMGF, 

respectively.  



 

VII 

Catalytic and Upstream Role: 

Bank financing targets the initial 

stages of the processes for 

generating the public good and the 

Bank’s support should aim at 

correcting disincentives that 

prevent the RPG from emerging or 

progressing toward the stage of 

production, such as lack of 

coordination, aversion to risk, 

free-rider problem. 

The project will demonstrate that 

the  Bank is supporting an initial 

investment to an object and that by 

doing so opens the way for further 

investments by partners/ RMCs in 

the regional or national context for 

specific development impact (to 

be specifically demonstrated). 

Under this criterion, the project 

will also demonstrate that without 

the Bank’s intervention, there is a 

risk of certain beneficiaries free-

riding and not being held 

accountable. The project will 

demonstrate that the Bank’s 

intervention will add value to 

strengthen coordination in the 

region generally and/or through 

the intergovernmental body or 

REC involved (if any). 

Given that the commodities of focus in TAAT are strategic to the Bank’s 

RMCs, as underscored by CAADP, the Bank has clearly been playing a 

catalytic role to engender strong support for the program. For instance, the 

Bank is coordinating with the CGIAR-supported centers, FARA, AGRA and 

other implementing partners to engage other donors for co-financing TAAT 

and bring about the required transformational and widespread impact. As 

indicated above, some of the donors (World Bank, BMGF, and AGRA) have 

positively responded. With the support of the Bank, the borrower, the CGIAR 

centers, is also involved in contacting donors for Co-financing.  

 

The sustainability of TAAT project is hinged on eleven factors: (i) Broad 

spectrum of the NARES involved; (ii) Implementation through existing local 

institutions/organizations; (iii) Linkage with relevant ongoing initiatives; (iv) 

Adoption of science-based value-chain approach; (v) Capacity building of all 

stakeholders along the value chain; (vi) Deployment of proven agricultural 

development technologies; (vii) New knowledge and technologies from 

CGIAR centers and partner technology-providing institutions are 

International Public Goods; (viii) Government support; ix) Well though-out 

partnerships; x) Robust private sector involvement; and xi) Appropriate and 

clear exit strategy. The value chain approach adopted by the program creates 

the necessary incentives for all the players from production, through 

processing and value addition, to market development to be profitably 

engaged. Supported by cross-cutting topics such as policy support services, 

capacity development and outreach, youth entrepreneurs, and the 

clearinghouse services that are tacitly part of TAAT, these are critically 

important to ensure sustainability of the outcome of the program, 

sustainability and continuity after the program ends, and ensuring that the 

program activities are adapted to fit local conditions. 

Higher Developmental Impact in 

Cooperating: The development 

impact to be achieved through 

countries’ cooperation is 

demonstrably superior to what 

each country could have achieved 

individually. 

The project will go on to 

demonstrate that the development 

impact (to be specified by the team 

e.g. poverty reduction, gender 

equity, human development, etc.) 

will be increased only if the object 

of support is addressed within a 

regional context with the 

participation of at least two 

countries (as opposed to national 

projects). 

In Africa, public investments in dissemination, deployment, and promotion 

of proven agricultural development technologies and innovations are so 

limited that no one country by itself can meet investment needed for such 

endeavors whose outcome could lead to widespread and transformational 

impact aimed at under the TAAT program. By creating regional networks of 

NARES, involving the RECs, and building functional collaboration with 

CGIAR centers, FARA, and AGRA, to mention a few, TAAT will generate 

a global output that surpasses the summation of individual countries’ efforts.  

 

For any given commodity, regional critical mass of human and material 

resources needed for the deployment of proven agricultural technologies and 

innovations will be mobilized to tackle county specific, cross border, and 

trans-national issues. The Clearinghouse, working closely with both the 

Regional Coordinators and the RECs will ensure that this happens and also 

bring about regional integration for a wider scale impact. 

 



 

VIII 

Appendix 5: Countries that have expressed interest in TAAT with projects in the pipeline 

S/No. Country Projects Aligned to inserting a 

TAAT component? 

(X = Yes) 

1 Gambia PROJET DE NUTRITION COMMUNAUTAIRE (PNC1) - 2018  

2 Benin PROJET ENTREPRENARAIT AGRICOLE JEUNE - 2018 X 

3 Ethiopia INTEGRATED AGRO INDUSTRIAL PARK DEVELOPMENT PROJECT - 

2018 

X 

4 Tanzania AGRICULTURAL VALUCHAIN PROJECT - 2018 X 

5 Uganda AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(INCLUDING IRRIGATION) – PROJECT 2 - 2020 

X 

6 Zambia ZAMBIA YOUTH IN AGRI-BUSINESS AND AGRICULTURE 

COMMODITY CORRIDORS PROGRAM - 2018 

X 

FARM BLOCKS IRRIGATION PROJECT (LUSWISHI FARM BLOCK 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT) - 2018 

X 

7 Morocco PROJET DE PROMOTION DES CHAINES DE VALEURS ET DE 

L’ENTREPRENARIAT AGRICOLE - 2018 

X 

PROGRAM D’APPUI AUX RÉFORMES POUR LE DÉVELOPPEMENT 

DES FILIÈRES AGRICOLES DURABLES - 2018 

X 

8 Sudan AGRICULTURE AND VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT X 

9 Tunisia PROJET DE DÉVELOPPEMENT DE LA CHAINE DE VALEUR DE 

L’HUILE D’OLIVES - 2018 

 

PROJET DE DÉVELOPPEMENT ET DE PROMOTION DES FILIÈRES 

AGRICOLES DE ZAGHOUAN - 2018 

X 

PROJETS DE DÉVELOPPEMENT ET DE PROMOTION DES FILIÈRES 

AGRICOLES DE KASSERINE ET DE MAHDIA - 2019 

X 

10 Senegal PROJET NATIONAL APPUI IRRIGATION LOCALE PNDIL X 

11 Nigeria AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION AGENDA SUPPORT PROGRAM - 

PROJECT II (ATASP-2) - 2018 

X 

FISHERIES SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT – BLUE ECONOMY 2019 X 

12 Ghana AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN PROJECT – 2017/2018 X 

13 Mauritania  AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN PROJECT - 2018 X 

14 Malawi SHIRLEY VALUE CHAIN PROJECT – 2017/2018 X 

15 Cameroun  LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN PROGRAM 2018 X 

16 DRC  BOKANGO-LONZO AGROINDUSTRIAL PARK 2017/2018 X 

17 Chad   

18 Egypt FARM LEVEL IRRIGATION IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 2018 X 

19 Guinea-

Bissau, INTEGRATED PROG FOR DVPT AND CLIM CHANGE ADAPTATION IN 

NIGER BASIN (ABNI 2017/2018 

X 

20 Mali. INTEGRATED PROG FOR DVPT AND CLIM CHANGE ADAPTATION IN 

NIGER BASIN (ABNI 2017/2018 

X 

21 Niger,  INTEGRATED PROG FOR DVPT AND CLIM CHANGE ADAPTATION IN 

NIGER BASIN (ABNI 2017/2018 

X 

22 Burkina INTEGRATED PROG FOR DVPT AND CLIM CHANGE ADAPTATION IN 

NIGER BASIN (ABNI 2017/2018 

X 

23 Rwanda,  PROJET DE DÉVELOPPEMENT DE LA CHAINE DE VALEUR 

ARBORICOLE 2018 

X 

24 Sierra 

Leone, ENABLE YOUTH / VALUE CHAIN PROGRAM 2018 

X 

25 Kenya GREEN ZONES PROJECT PHASE II: A VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 

APPROACH TOWARDS FOREST CONSERVATION & FOOD SECURITY 

X 

 



 

IX 

Appendix 6: Deployment of the New Rice for Africa 

The development of the NERICA (New Rice for Africa) rice varieties by AfricaRice in the 1990s is 

lauded as one of the most significant advances in crop improvement in Africa. Every year, Africa 

imports one third of the world’s rice, nearly 10 million MT; West Africa alone accounts for more than 

half of rice imports, 5.2 million tons. By 2020 an extra 17 million tons of milled rice will be required if 

domestic production continues to lag behind the ever-increasing demand.  In 2003 the Bank approved 

a 5-year $34 million project to finance NERICA rice deployment in seven West African countries: 

Nigeria, Mali, Sierra Leone, Benin, Ghana, Guinea and the Gambia.  

By the end of the project, NERICA rice farmers in each of the participating countries achieved 

significantly higher yields compared to their traditional rice varieties. Average yield in project areas 

was 2.80 MT/ha, with some farmers achieving up to 4.7 MT/ha; up from 1 MT/ha average yields on 

farmers’ fields before the project. At the closing of the project, a survey suggested that over half a 

million hectares of NERICA rice varieties were grown in the seven target countries alone.  NERICA 

won the U.S. Treasury’s annual Development Impact Honors (DIH) in 2014 as one of the six high-

impact and noteworthy projects that won out of a pool of 29 strong submissions. The DIH ceremony 

publicly recognizes outstanding projects undertaken by the multilateral development banks and 

showcases these effective success stories. 

  



 

X 

Appendix 7: Description of seven of the nine priority technologies of TAAT 

 

 

Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) 

Frequent droughts are a major element of climate change and persistent challenge to sub-Saharan 

African (SSA) agriculture, making farming risky for millions of smallholder farmers who rely on rain 

fed crop production such as maize, a major staple food crop for over 300 million people in SSA. The 

impact of drought resulting from climate change is threatening food security in most parts of Africa.  

Various approaches have been identified to mitigate the impact of climate change including developing 

crops—for example maize—with enhanced adaptation to drought-stress and pest-outbreak. The 

adoption at scale using value-chain approach of such climate-smart crops by smallholder farmers can 

stabilize yields in the midst of climate change; and encourage the use of best agronomic practices, thus 

contributing to the urgent need to transform SSA agriculture from subsistence to agri-business. 

TAAT will focus on one of the four different climate-smart technologies developed through the Water 

Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) partnership led by AATF in collaboration with other public and 

private sector organizations including CIMMYT, Monsanto Company, and the National Agricultural 

Research Systems of Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda.  

Results from on-farm demonstrations showed that some of the conventional climate-smart technologies 

are increasing farm productivity by up to 75%. An average yield of 4 tons per hectare has been reported 

from these on-farm demonstrations, with an impressive adoption rate of 26% within only three years of 

deployment. The projected future adoption rate was estimated at 89% with about 65% of adopters being 

new farmers. This will help Kenya produce 74,000 tons per year, enough to reduce maize import by 

15% annually. 

Further investments of USD 25 million will be catalyzed through TAAT to take the conventional 

DroughtTEGO™ hybrid technology to scale across six countries (Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda, Ethiopia, 

Tanzania, & Zambia) in SSA. It is estimated these technologies will benefit 6.2 million people from 

availability of 4,130 metric tons of certified seed targeted to be produced and sold within five years 

based on the experience described above.    

 



 

XI 

 

  

Self-Sufficiency in Rice Production 

Rice consumption in sub-Saharan Africa was approximately 26 million metric tons (MT) in 2014, with 

imports providing 13 MT, equivalent to about one-third of what is traded on the world market. African 

rice consumption is projected to reach 34.9 million tons by 2025, of which 12.6 million tons must be 

imported at a cost of about US$5.5 billion annually. African demand is growing as a result of African 

population growth, increased per capita consumption, and a shifting preference toward ‘premium’ rice 

linked to increased urbanization. The African rice sector has the potential to become an engine for 

economic growth across the continent. However, self-sufficiency in rice by 2025 requires the 

production of nearly 13 million additional tons or premium rice per year. This will improve the 

livelihood of at least 3 million producers and lead to economic gains of about US$5.5 billion per year 

among African countries. 

African rice self-sufficiency can be accomplished through holistic mechanisms including but not 

limited to widespread distribution and commercial adoption of high-yielding, climate-resilient rice 

varieties; and the expansion of the SMART-Valleys approach. Also, the following technologies offer 

the potential for significant impact:  

i) Information tools. Mapping tools are available to identify areas suitable to rice expansion and 
intensification including both flood and drought monitoring; 

ii) Improved varieties;  

iii) Accompanying technologies and innovations.  

AfricaRice leads this Intervention in close partnership with IWMI. AfricaRice is part of the Global Rice 

Science Partnership that includes experience from Asia and Latin America. AfricaRice and other 

partners operate Innovation Platforms (IPs), including membership of youth and women, which can be 

out-scaled to national and regional levels. It is critical for TAAT to engage with the Bank and the private 

sector to accelerate the mechanization of rice production and processing.  Partnering initiatives may 

include The Green Innovation Center, Grow Africa, WAAPP, and JICA-funded activities. Private 

sector participation is envisaged in quality rice seed production, marketing, and mechanization, 

fortification, packaging and branding. New higher value added products already include rice pasta and 

baby porridge. 



 

XII 

 

 

Cassava for Industrial Use 

 

Cassava grows very well in the Humid and Sub-Humid Zones, and also in dry semi-arid areas; it is the 

second most important source of calories in Africa after maize.  An average increase of 7.93MT/Ha (or 

70% increase) is required to fill the food demand gap for cassava by 2025. Many manufacturing 

industries are seeking to increase local content, thereby, creating a growing industrial demand for 

cassava.  However, yields are low, average of 10MT/Ha due to the predominance of local varieties, 

diseases, pests, insufficient use of appropriate fertilizers and insufficient markets for cassava-based 

industrial products. Working with the private sector, TAAT will adopt a market-led approach to deliver 

technologies that will improve both the productivity and use of cassava in the food and industrial sectors.  

Priority technologies to advance cassava revolution include:  

i) Rapid large-scale multiplication of improved disease-resistant varieties using efficient propagation 
techniques such as mini-cuttings, tissue culture combined with Semi Autotrophic Hydroponics, and 

community-based clean planting material production and distribution systems; 

ii) Improved fertilizer blends adjusted to local weather and soil conditions. Proven weed management 
and protocols for Integrated Soil Nutrient Management will be transferred to farmers, input and 

service supplier groups through training and technical backstopping;  

iii) Technologies for mechanization, such as planters, harvesters, stem cutters, loaders, peeling, drying, 
milling, etc. will be introduced to increase production efficiency, reduce production costs and 

provide opportunities for the engagement of an innovative new generation of farmers;  

iv) Value addition and processing innovations will be introduced to private sector entities comprised 
of at least 120 processor groups and 300 local entrepreneurs/processing site owners to process 

cassava into various products such as (a) high-quality cassava flour (HQCF) for wheat replacement 

in baked and confectionary products, for brewing and ethanol production, (b) chips and peels for 

formulating animal feed, (c) glucose syrup for use as a thickener, sweetener, candy and other 

products, and (d) starch for use in the pharmaceutical, food, textile, paper and packaging industries. 

The expected impact includes cassava yields rising from 10.5 to 16 t/ha on nearly 2 million ha in the 

humid and sub-humid zones. In addition, production costs are expected to be reduced by about 25%. 



 

XIII 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Self-Sufficiency in Wheat Production 

Wheat is grown on approximately 10 million hectares in Africa, producing around 24 million tons. 

Owing to its even stronger demand, wheat is an imported commodity in all African countries. Africa is 

the world’s largest wheat importer at more than 40 million tons in 2014, at a cost of approximately 

costing about US$15 billion, and representing a third of the continent’s total food import bill. Wheat 

demand is expected to increase by an additional 8.7 million tons per year by 2025, which means that 

without intervention wheat deficits will run to nearly 49 million tons per year. If nothing is done to stem 

this trend, 80% of all wheat consumed in Africa will be imported. A comprehensive management 

program designed by ICARDA, CIMMYT and its partners assists farmers to invest an additional $190 

per hectare in improved seed and soil and water management increases average yields by as much as 

4.4 tons per hectare. 

Through the use of improved varieties and management practices, average wheat yields could increase 

to 4 to 6 tons per hectare across 9.8 million hectares. This would be through improved seed delivery 

systems and agronomic packages; a more effective extension system, and improved policy support. 

Overall production would double over five years and over 1.7 million farmers could move into 

commercial wheat farming. 

A two-pronged approach for unleashing a wheat revolution in Africa would be carried out by first, 

bridging yield gaps in traditional growing areas of North Africa and African highlands through better 

varieties and soil and water management; and second by taking wheat "packages" to a new frontier in 

cool winter-irrigated environments, particularly in the Sahel.  

Numerous technologies are ready for the assembly of innovative wheat production packages that 

include:  

i) Popularization of ICARDA and CIMMYT’s heat tolerant, disease and pest-resistant varieties.  

ii) Practical and cost effective solutions such as raised-beds, supplementary irrigation, zero-tillage 

systems and the establishment of sustainable seed delivery systems.  

iii) Mechanization based on local, low-cost manufactured machines (North Africa is an example). 

 

NARES are critical partners in wheat expansion. Nigeria is particularly important to serve as a hub in 

bringing technology and skills to semi-arid wheat producers throughout West Africa. 

 

 



 

XIV 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Aquaculture 

The aquaculture component of TAAT will support the development of the sector in order to promote 

economic diversification, food and nutritional security and sustainable employment generation, all of 

which are central priorities of Africa Governments. The development goal is to produce a domestic 

aquaculture sector which serves as viable and inclusive business opportunity through enhanced 

production and productivity to improve the livelihoods of beneficiaries along the aquaculture value 

chain. The aquaculture sector in Africa needs to build the capacity to delivery high quality disease-free 

fingerlings, improve access and availability of cost effective feeds and seek alternative value-adding 

opportunities post-farm gate to enhance value chain profitability. 

The initial focus will be on Tilapia. The global Tilapia industry was valued at USD9.8B in 2015, with 

Tilapia estimated to be the second most farmed fish in the world. It is estimated that improvements 

from the WorldFish’s breeding program, which commenced in 2001, contributes to approximately 50% 

of those improved Tilapia.   As such, the TAAT aquaculture component will focus on three inter-related 

priority technologies, likely in Tilapia-based systems, to achieve this outcome:   

1. Improving the utilization and delivery high quality disease free fingerlings (seed) for small-

scale entrepreneurs to improve productivity and profitability. Breeding program have 

demonstrated a 6-10% productivity gain between generation, which when managed 

appropriately through ongoing breeding programs, hatcheries (which provide an alternative 

enterprise for small-scale producers) and grow out facilities deliver significant productivity 

gain at the production level. Importantly, disease management for the high quality fingerlings 

is critical.  

2. Feed inputs into aquaculture production systems can be between 60-80% of overall costs. A 

key to support the growth of the sector is improving access and availability of innovative, 

affordable and alternative feeds for small-scale entrepreneurs. The development of feed 

alternatives also opens opportunities for entrepreneurial enterprises as feed supplies.   

3. Seeking value adding options and food product development of fish-based products is a 

mechanism to improve overall value chain performance and provide entrepreneurial options 

and further employment. Importantly understanding market dynamics and consumer food 

preferences, and how these are changing are critical to the sustainable success of further value 

adding.  

Key beneficiaries will be through the value chain, from input supplies (seed and feed), producers, 

postharvest handlers and value adders, and importantly consumers with improved access and 

availability to high-quality nutritious fish.  

A current value chain analysis, supported by WorldFish, to be completed by December 2017, will 

provide additional insights to the impact of the priority technologies.  

 



 

XV 

 

 

Sorghum/millet for the Sahel 

Africa's Semi-arid Zone occupies 5.5 million km2 and supports a population of 239 million. Poverty is 

widespread with 53% falling below the poverty line of $1.25 per day.  The natural vegetation across 

the Sahel and Sudanese Savanna is shrubby grassland.  These lands are generally flat with over 16% 

converted to agriculture, but highly subject to severe drought, affecting both crops and livestock. 

Irrigated farming along major rivers is particularly important. Water harvesting and other climate-smart 

technologies have important application throughout this zone.  Non-cultivated lands are often subject 

to over-grazing making integrated crop-livestock operations especially important.  This zone is 

extremely fragile and subject to desertification and catastrophe, but at the same time its people are 

extremely resilient and prepared for innovative, labor intensive solutions in land management. The two 

agricultural value chains ready for scaling up in this zone are sorghum and millet.  

Sorghum and millet production.  Sorghum cultivation is extremely important in the Sahel owing to its 

greater drought tolerance than maize, occupying 15.8 million ha. Yields are low (0.8 ton per ha) owing 

to low planting density, widespread plant parasitism by striga, low adoption of fertilizers, even 

waterlogging following episodic heavy rains resulting in current annual production of 13.2 million tons 

per year.  IFPRI projects the demand for sorghum across all of SSA to increase by 9.1 million MT by 

2025. A comprehensive management program designed by ICRISAT that assists farmers to invest an 

additional $151 per ha in improved seed, water harvesting and Integrated Soil Fertility Management 

will increase average yields to 1.8 tons per ha and steadily reduce the infestation of striga, resulting in 

even greater mid-term gains.  Livestock are critical to these farming systems and crop residues carry 

livestock through the long dry season, improved feed and health systems are needed from ILRI. 

Millet farming is equally important to human welfare in the Sahel as it is the most important cereal 

grown in the drier portion of the Semi-arid zone, occupying 15.5 million ha of rotationally grazed lands.  

Yields remain low (0.7 ton per ha) owing to poor water management and weak adoption of ISFM, 

resulting in current annual production of 10.2 million tons per year.  A comprehensive management 

program designed by ICRISAT and IWMI that assists farmers to invest an additional $151 per ha in 

water harvesting, wind erosion control and Integrated Soil Fertility Management will increase average 

yields to 1.6 tons per ha.   

 



 

XVI 

 

 

 

Small Ruminant Technologies 

Small ruminants are particularly important in the dry regions of West Africa, the Horn of Africa, East 

and Southern Africa because of their ability to thrive in drier pastoral and agro-pastoral environments. 

With a growing demand for animal source foods, including small ruminant meat there is huge 

opportunity commercialize small ruminant production while creating employment for other value chain 

actors, especially young people. In these drier areas staple crops may provide food, but livestock like 

small ruminants provide income. Transforming small ruminant value chains requires introduction of 

improved genetics, health and feed technologies as well as the right enabling environment. Proven 

technologies for improved small ruminant production include: 

i) Thermostable vaccine for Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR). PPR is one of the most important 

transboundary diseases in small ruminants and can results in morbidity of up to 100% and 

mortality of 60-80%. Vaccines are available but need cold storage. The vaccine can be made 

thermostable so that it can be delivered without a cold chain. Mortality can be reduced by almost 

100% with an overall increase in productivity of at least 30%. The Laboratoire Central Vétérinaire 

in Mali has recently produced about 300,000 doses of thermostable vaccine with the potential to 

scale up. 

ii) Improved feeding by better use of crop residues through variety substitution and incorporation of 

nutrient value of crop residues in crop improvement programs. There are existing varieties of 

cereals (e.g. sorghum, millets, maize) and legumes (e.g. ground nut, cow pea) that can increase 

animal productivity by 20-30%.  

iii) Introduction of drought-tolerant forages. Forages, such as herbaceous and/or tree legumes and 

grasses, can dramatically enhance livestock as well as crop productivity, while at the same time 

enhancing the system’s resilience and reducing its environmental footprint. For example the 

introduction of new varieties of Brachiaria in Kenya, Rwanda and Mali have led to increases in 

productivity of 30-50%. 

iv) Improved small ruminant genetics though community breeding schemes. Community-based 

breeding schemes can be used effectively to identify superior males for breeding within 

communities without the need for large scale investment in national breeding programs.   

v) Business models for fattening enterprises and feed processers. Fattening of small ruminants can 

be highly profitable, especially when targeting high value markets (e.g. Easter, Eid). Packages 

are available that can be modified to different contexts to support these fattening enterprises. 

vi) Index-based livestock Insurance (IBLI). IBLI has been developed in Northern Kenya and Ethiopia 

to increase the resilience of pastoral communities against drought, including a Sharia-compliant 

version.  Studies show significant welfare benefits—insured households are 36% less likely to 

anticipate relying on distress sales of livestock and 25% less likely to foresee reducing meals to 

cope with drought.  

 



 

XVII 

Appendix 8 (a): Grants’ allocation by source and expenditure categories  
(‘000 UA) 

LIST OF GOODS & SERVICES 
ADF Grant AGRA BMGF GOV TOTAL 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

A. GOODS                

 1. VEHICLES 6,37 25,47 31,84 - - - - - - 0,00 - 0,00 6,37 25,47 31,84 

 2. EQUIPMENT                

  Standard Equipment 11,50 34,49 45,99 - - - - - - - - - 11,50 34,49 45,99 

  Specialized Equipment - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

 Subtotal 11,50 34,49 45,99 - - - - - - - - - 11,50 34,49 45,99 

Subtotal 17,87 59,97 77,83 - - - - - - 0,00 - 0,00 17,87 59,97 77,83 

B. SERVICES                

 Training 1 954,95 2 386,25 4 341,20 1 330,59 1 625,24 2 955,83 350,61 432,68 783,30 -0,00 - -0,00 3 636,15 4 444,18 8 080,33 

 Technical Assistance - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

 Studies 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 - - - - - - 0,00 - 0,00 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 

 Contractual Services 3 121,30 10 832,17 13 953,47 1 176,71 2 184,16 3 360,87 - - - 2 710,77 0,00 2 710,77 7 008,79 13 016,32 20 025,11 

 Audit 47,43 57,67 105,10 168,55 206,31 374,86 - - - 0,00 - 0,00 215,98 263,98 479,96 

Subtotal 6 440,87 17 227,65 23 668,52 2 675,85 4 015,71 6 691,56 350,61 432,68 783,30 2 710,77 0,00 2 710,77 12 178,11 21 676,04 33 854,15 

C. MISCELLANEOUS 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 - - - - - - - - - 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 

D. PERSONEL 817,24 - 817,24 - - - - - - - - - 817,24 - 817,24 

E. OPERATING COSTS 184,32 141,16 325,48 - - - - - - 0,00 - 0,00 184,32 141,16 325,48 

Unallocated 532,72 1 522,16 2 054,88 195,76 362,68 558,44 26,11 40,59 66,70 189,23 0,00 189,23 943,82 1 925,43 2 869,25 

Total 9 123,84  19 876,16  29 000,00 2 871,61  4 378,39  7 250,00 376,73  473,27  850,00 2 900,00  0,00  2 900,00 15 272,18  24 727,82  40 000,00 



 

XVIII 

Appendix 8(b): Expenditure Schedule by Components and by Sources of Financing 
(‘000 UA) 

PROJECT 

COMPONENTS 

ADF Grant AGRA BMGF Government Total 
For. Exch. Local 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

 

1. CREATION OF AN 

ENABLING 

ENVIRONMENT FOR 
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION 

6 871,86 55,9 3 591,41 29,2 850,00 6,9 970,13 7,9 12 283,41 30,7 7 655,03 4 628,38 

 

2. REGIONAL 

TECHNOLOGY DELIVERY 

INFRASTRUCTURE (RTDI) 

8 579,96 87,4 1 242,53 12,6 - - 0,00 - 9 822,49 24,6 6 133,37 3 689,13 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF 

APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 

11 662,30 72,9 2 416,06 15,1 - - 1 929,87 12,1 16 008,22 40,0 10 339,90 5 668,32 

 

4. PROGRAM 

MANAGEMENT 
1 885,88 100,0 - - - - 0,00 - 1 885,88 4,7 599,53 1 286,35 

Total PROJECT COSTS 29 000,00 72,5 7 250,00 18,1 850,00 2,1 2 900,00 7,3 40 000,00 100, 24 727,82 15 272,18 

 

  



 

XIX 

Appendix 9: Eligibility to grant funding and cost-sharing exemption 

Criteria Response in relation to TAAT 

5.1  The paper proposes that projects must meet all the stage 

I criteria. This is based on the justification that the project 

has demonstrated that it addresses an issue or a product 

which is a core activity for regional development and 

integration, and which provides an environment for 

complementary investments while at the same time will 

be demonstrating the free riding issue. Stage II criteria 
will, in turn, help to prioritize the pipeline of the ROs in 

that the higher the score, the higher it would be on the 

priority list and vice versa. 

TAAT meets all the Stage I criteria (Non-rivalry, Non-

excludability, and Of Public Interest) for financing 

RPGs. How TAAT meets all these stage I criteria has been 

elaborated in Appendix 12. As also elaborated in Appendix 

12, TAAT also meets all the Stage II criteria (Multi-

country involvement, Strategic Alignment, Catalytic 

and Upstream Role, and Higher Developmental Impact 

in Cooperating). 

5.2  While developing the ROs pipeline on a two-year basis, 

consideration will be given to regional and sectoral 

distribution of the RO investments and balance will be 

sought where possible. In the specific case of the RPGs, 

experience to date (August 2008) has shown that there is 

a high demand for such operations which fall within the 

priority areas of the Bank’s vision and strategic directive. 

Grant resources for RPGs will remain limited. 

Prioritization of grant based RPG projects in the ROs 

pipeline will also be done on the basis of their readiness. 

The TAAT operation clearly falls within the priority areas 

of the Bank’s vision and strategic directive. This has been 

well elaborated in paragraphs 1.4 and 1.5 of the TAAT 

Program Framework document, among others. 

5.3  Cost sharing exemption will be proposed only for those 

projects which demonstrate the best ranked eligibility to 

RPGs, as defined by the stage I and stage II criteria, 

including to Regional Economic Communities (RECs). 

Moreover, a specific component within a project may 

also be eligible for grant financing if that component can 

clearly demonstrate RPG eligibility. However, in the 

case of the latter, a component within a project may not 

be eligible for cost-sharing exemption if the 

implementation of that specific component falls in a loan 

eligible country, and/or is embedded as having revenue 

generating capacity. Financing in this case would be 

through the RO cost-sharing formula. 

The activities planned to be funded with RPG resources in 

TAAT do not have revenue generating capacity. Besides, 

many of the 22 low-income RMCs targeted in TAAT’s 

regional, agro-ecological and commodity belt focus are 

loan ineligible. Six (6) of them are fragile and conflict-

affected states. This provides another strong reason for 

cost-sharing exemption in this initial phase of TAAT. 

5.4  Remaining projects, even though qualified as Regional 

Public Goods would need to be financed according to the 

general principles laid out in the Regional Operations 

Framework, i.e. through cost sharing agreements with the 

recipient countries. 

Not applicable for TAAT, at least the centrally managed 

activities. 

5.5  Lower ranked operations to RECs or for which cost 

sharing agreements cannot be found would need to be 

taken out of the RO pipeline or postponed to the next 

ADF cycle. 

Noted. 

Grant resources outside the PBA allocation (i.e. exclusively 

from the RO envelope) will be considered for those projects 

which demonstrate superior developmental impact- with 

respect to economic and social advancement through amongst 

others, the following: employment generation, trade promotion, 

security improvement, gender equality and climate change and 

adaptation. 

The list of such projects will be determined by the ranking 

stemming from the rating assessed during the previous stage 

and endorsement by the Operations Committee. 

The TAAT program will promote deployment and use of 

gender sensitive proven agricultural development 

technologies. It will promote agricultural innovations that 

reduce workload and hardship for women, increase their 

productivity and income. Program activities such as: (i) 

harmonizing/streamlining technology release and seed 

system policies across countries and regions (for spillover 

effects), (ii) capacity-developing weak seed systems, (iii) 

ensuring that improved crop varieties and livestock breeds 

for specific agro-ecological zones are widely applied/used, 

(iv) identifying and removing constraints to agricultural 

technology adoption through policy audits, (v) 

identification and selection of best-bet technologies for 



 

XX 

uptake by RMCs, (vi) design & develop campaigns for 

trans-national control of pests and diseases (and related 

awareness raising that pest and diseases do not respect 

political boundaries), (vii) deployment of appropriate 

technologies through crop/livestock campaign in RMCs, 

and (ix) design and implement wide-scale farmer extension 

and innovative models to organize farmers will trigger 

greater efficiency and additional production, processing 

and marketing of the target commodities. At full program 

development, the estimated additional tons of food will be 

realized, with its multiplier effects.  

Providing climate-proof varieties of the target crop 

commodities and improved breeds for small livestock and 

aquaculture to millions of farmers in program in the target 

low-income RMCs and beyond will provide them and 

consumers with food and other benefits. Congenial policies 

and institutional frameworks for profitable and sustainable 

value chains development of the strategic commodities as 

well as enhanced national and regional capacity in 

agricultural policy and institutional development work are 

expected. 

Rural populations in the target low-income RMCs are the 

primary beneficiaries of TAAT, expected to directly or 

indirectly benefit individuals (e.g. male farmers, female 

farmers, professionals, etc.), groups (e.g. farmers’ groups, 

women, smallholder farm families, the youth, the private 

sector, policy makers, marketers/traders, transporters, and 

fabricators and small-scale agricultural machinery 

manufacturers, etc.), and institutions (e.g. NARES, 

CGIAR, FARA, AGRA, RECs, other players in 

agricultural development) in RMCs. The other 

beneficiaries are inhabitants in the target low-income 

RMCs, consumers of target commodities, scientists and 

agricultural extension workers involved in the project, 

and all participants in the target commodities. Other 

group beneficiaries include the RMCs through 

improvements in the national economy as a result of 

increased local production of target value chains. The 

program will thus contribute to enhanced food security in 

the target Bank’s low-income RMCs. It will contribute to 

build innovative partnership with CGIAR, FARA, AGRA, 

NARES, RECs, and other relevant key players to expand 

and accelerate the pace and efficiency of delivering 

improved innovations to reach millions of direct 

beneficiaries (farmers, women/private sector processors, 

policy makers, NARES, NGOs, marketers, traders, 

commission agents, fabricators and small-scale 

agricultural machinery manufacturers, transporters, and the 

private sector) across the value chains. 

 

Successful implementation of the project will positively 

affect all participants in the target value chains and will 

result in a sustained increase in the production of the 



 

XXI 

selected commodities. Given that many new enterprises 

will spring up along the value chain of the target 

commodities, this program is expected to create several 

new employment opportunities. This implies that the 

project will improve rural incomes while simultaneously 

promoting food security. For the farm households who will 

directly benefit from the intervention, about 50% extra 

income is estimated. Additional benefits will come from 

improved access to high yielding varieties (average yield 

increases of 20-50%) and improved agronomic, post-

harvest, and processing practices. Numerous other benefits 

are contained in the Results-Based Logical Framework. 

 

  



 

XXII 

Appendix 10: Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM) and Financial Management 

Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM) 

Bank standard PMPs for contracts that are either: (i) above the thresholds indicated in Annex B5, Para. 

B.5.3;2, or (ii) in case Borrower Procurement System (BPS) is not relied upon for a specific transaction 

or group of transactions; and (iii) in case BPM have been found to be the best fit-for-purpose for a 

specific transaction or group of transactions, and using (a) the relevant Bank Standard Solicitation 

Documents (SSDs), (b) relevant Borrower Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs), or (c) relevant 

Third Party Standard or Model Solicitation Documents (M/SSDs) that have been assessed as fit-for-

purpose. The use of the Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM) is justifiable considering 

that the participating institutions will be responsible for implementing components of the program rather 

than the countries within which they are located, the different procurement policies of the participating 

institutions which have not been assessed by the Bank, the substantial country risks due to the 

multinational nature of the intervention that involves countries with different jurisdictions and the highly 

prohibitive procurement practice risks identified. Going forward, the BPS might be progressively used 

after the Action Plan to address and remedy the identified risks has been implemented in a manner 

acceptable to the ADF. All contracts will be carried out using the Bank Procurement Methodology 

(BPM) in line with the Bank’s October 2015 edition of the Bank’s Procurement Policy framework, 

utilizing available Bank’s Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs). 

Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): The assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Program levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken for the program and the findings have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes 

(BPS, Bank or Third party) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under 

the program. The appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the procurement PRCA 

action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. A summary of planned procurements are presented in 

Appendix 8 for the Bank-financed activities. Overall responsibility for financial management including 

reporting and auditing, remains with IITA through the PMU and the Clearinghouse. 

Financial Management 

The Bank’s assessment of the executing agency was limited to a review of the capacity of IITA to handle 

the financial management requirements of the project. The assessment concluded that the overall risk 

rating is Substantial due to the fact that the TAAT Project is largely decentralized to a number of 

participating countries; involves a number of partners and beneficiaries who may have limited fiduciary 

capacity, and funds will flow directly to Priority Intervention Area (PIA) accounts and reach 

participating partners and other beneficiaries. The assessment recommended the following mitigation 

measures: (i) recruitment of qualified financial management staff at IITA and at any national level 

institution that would need fortifying in financial management; (ii) recruitment of an independent 

external auditor for the audit of the project annual financial statements; (iii) recruitment of an internal 

auditor to facilitate fiduciary risk reduction and improve overall control; (iv) implementation of a 

financial information management system capable of consolidating the dispersed disbursements; (v) 

preparation and adoption of an administrative and financial procedures manual as part of the Project 

Implementation Manual; (vi) opening of special accounts at Executing Agency and Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU) level to ensure ready availability of funds when  needed; (vii) technical audit 

for component 1 related to production, productivity and competitiveness. 

The PMU (at IITA) and all Lead Centers shall operate robust accounting software that is IFRS compliant 

and capable of generating the required financial reports including consolidated financial statements. In 

terms of reporting, quarterly interim unaudited financial reports must be produced separately by the 

PMU and each Lead Center and transmitted to Bank within 45 days after the end of a reporting quarter.  

 



 

XXIII 

Disbursement and funds flow arrangements: The Program will have access to all four disbursement 

methods (direct payment, special account/revolving fund, reimbursement and reimbursement 

guarantee) as in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. IITA as the EA for the program will open a USD 

denominated Special Account as well as a Naira denominated account in a commercial bank acceptable 

to the Bank, to receive proceeds of the Grant. Similarly, the 6 CGIAR Centers and 4 Enablers will each 

open a sub-level USD denominated segregated Special Account as well as segregated local currency 

accounts in commercial banks in their localities that are acceptable to the Bank, to receive project related 

transfers from the EA (IITA). All project related disbursements will follow the requirements of the 

Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. 

External audit: An independent external auditor shall be hired by IITA, on terms of reference acceptable 

to the Bank, to carry out the audit of the entire program. The main independent external audit firm shall 

audit the PMU accounts and the consolidated financial statements that include the results of the PIU’s 

level operations that will also, individually, be audited locally by local affiliates of the main independent 

auditor, or by local partner firms selected by the independent auditor for the purpose, in the absence of 

a local affiliate. All audits of the program shall comply with the Bank’s requirements and terms of 

reference, as well as any other relevant accounting and reporting standards (like IFRS) as might have 

been agreed among the implementing entities. The EA shall transmit to the Bank the audited financial 

reports covering (i) EA program operations; (ii) the consolidated financial report; (iii) a copy of the 

audited financial statements from each of the PIUs; and (iii) a copy of the Management letter in respect 

of each set of financial statements submitted. The audit reports and applicable management letters shall 

be submitted to the Bank no later than six months after the end of each financial year audited. 

  



 

XXIV 

Appendix 11: Summary of Procurement Arrangements (UA’000) 
 

PROCUREMENT 

CATEGORIES 

Procurement Method 

TOTAL INTERNATIONAL 

SHOPPING 

CONSULTING 

SERVICES 
OTHER 

A. GOODS     
 1. VEHICLES 32,95 [32,95] - - 32,95 [32,95] 

 2. EQUIPMENT   47,58 [47,58] 47,58 [47,58] 
B. SERVICES     
 Training - 8 768,06 [4 710,66] - 8 768,06 [4 710,66] 

 Studies - 5 639,40 [5 639,40] - 5 639,40 [5 639,40] 

 Contractual Services - - 21 626,06 [15 096,50] 21 626,06 [15 096,50] 

 Audit - 528,85 [115,80] - 528,85 [115,80] 

C. MISCELLANEOUS - - 2 185,08 [2 185,08] 2 185,08 [2 185,08] 

D. OPERATING COST - - 354,78 [354,78] 354,78 [354,78] 

E. PERSONNEL - - 817,24 [817,24] 817,24 [817,24] 

TOTAL 32,95 [32,95] 14 936,31 [10 465,87] 25 030,74 [18 501,18] 40 000,00 [29 000,00] 
 

Appendix 12: Conditions associated with the Fund’s intervention and Precedent to First 

Disbursement 

Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force 

The Protocol of Agreement shall enter into force upon signature by the Bank and IITA on behalf of the 

CGIAR Centers. 

Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement:  

The obligation of the Fund to make the first disbursement of the Grant shall be conditional upon entry 

into force of the Protocol of Agreement, and the fulfilment by Bank and IITA on behalf of the CGIAR 

Centers, in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, of the following conditions:  
 

 Appointment of the Program Management Unit (PMU) with terms of reference, 
qualifications and experience acceptable to the Fund. 

 Conclusion of Implementation Agreements, in form and substance acceptable to the 
ADF, between IITA and at least ONE of the implementing agencies (including 

AfricaRice,, ICARDA, IFPRI, ILRI, IITA, IWMI, , ICRISAT, and FARA), under which 

the proceeds of the Grant shall be on-granted. Disbursement will be made to only 

implementing agencies which have concluded Implementation Agreements with IITA. 

 Submission of legal opinion(s), issued to the ADF by a legal counsel acceptable to the 
Fund, confirming that the Implementation Agreements between IITA and each of the 

implementing agencies have been duly authorized, ratified and executed on behalf of 

IITA and each of the implementing agencies, and constitutes legal, valid and binding 

agreements on both parties. 

Other Conditions 

IITA on behalf of the CGIAR Centers shall within six (6) months of the signing of the Protocol of 

Agreement: 

 Open a Special Account in the name of the Program, denominated in USD, and a local 
currency denominated account, in a bank acceptable to the Fund, for the deposit of the 

proceeds of the Grant; 

 Establish a Clearinghouse and appoint Key Management Officers comprising the Head 
of Clearinghouse, Partnership Engagement Expert, M&E Officer, Agriculture Outreach 

Expert, and Communications Officer; and Appoint key members of the Program Steering 

Committee (PSC). 



















































Language: English


 

 

  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 
 

NAMIBIA 

 

 AGRICULTURAL MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT 

PROJECT (NAMSIP)  

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

RDGS/AHFR DEPARTMENTS 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  
  
  
  
 P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
 P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  

    
  
  
  
  
  
  



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 
 

 Currency Equivalents, Fiscal Year, Weights and Measures, Acronyms i 

 Loan Information ii 

 Project Summary  iv 

 Results Based Logical Framework (Project Matrix) vi 

 Project Time Frame/General Implementation Schedule viii 
   

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 1 
    

 1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 1 

 1.2 Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 3 

 1.3 Donor Coordination 3 
    

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 4 
   

 2.1 Project Objectives and Components 4 

 2.2 Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored 5 

 2.3 Project Type 6 

 2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 6 

 2.5 Project Target Area, Population and Beneficiaries 8 

 2.6 Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 8 

 2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 8 

 2.8 Project Performance Indicators 9 
    

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 9 
    

 3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 9 

 3.2 Environmental and Social Impacts 10 
    

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 13 
   

 4.1 Implementation Arrangements 13 

 4.2 Monitoring 15 

 4.3 Governance 16 

 4.4 Sustainability  17 

 4.5 Risk Management 17 

 4.6 Knowledge Building 17 
   

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 18 
    

 5.1 Legal Instruments 18 

 5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank’s Intervention 18 

 5.3 Undertakings 18 

 5.4 Compliance with Bank Policies 18 
    

VI. RECOMMENDATION 18 
   

   

LIST OF APPENDICES  

 Appendix 1 Namibia - Comparative Socio-economic Indicators  

 Appendix 2 The Macro-economic and Structural Context - Link between the 

PBO and Agriculture Project (NAMSIP) 
 

 Appendix 3 AfDB’s Active Portfolio in Namibia  

 Appendix 4 Distribution of Project Interventions  

 Appendix 5 Justification to reduce Government’s Level of Contribution  

 Appendix 6 Map of Namibia  

 Appendix 7 Estimated Number of Jobs to be created by NAMSIP  

 Appendix 8 Financial and Economic Performance/Analyses  

 Appendix 9 Environmental Issues  
    

   

 



 

i 

 

Currency Equivalents 
(July 2017) 

 

1 ZAR  =  1.0 Namibia Dollar (NAD/N$) 

1 UA  =  18.1749 NAD 

1 USD  = 13.06241 NAD 

1 Euro   =  14.90687 NAD 

 

 

Fiscal Year 

 
1st April to 31st March 

 

 

Weights and Measures 
 

1 metric tonne (t)  = 2,204 pounds (lbs) 

1 metre (m)  = 3.28 feet (ft) 

1 millimetre (mm)  = 0.03937 inch 

1 kilometre (km)  = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 

1 square kilometre (km2) = 100 hectares (ha) 

 

 

Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 

AfDB …. African Development Bank  MTR …. Mid-Term Review 
ANA …. Annual National Accounts  M&E …. Monitoring and Evaluation 

CAADP …. 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 

Development Programme 
 NAD/N$ …. Namibia Dollar 

CSP …. Country Strategy Paper  NCA …. Northern Communal Areas 

DAPEES …. 
Directorate of Agricultural Production, 

Extension and Engineering Services 
 NDP …. National Development Plan 

DARD …. 
Directorate of Agricultural Research and 

Development 
 NHIES …. 

Namibia Household Income 

and Expenditure Survey 

DPBD …. 
Directorate of Planning and Business 

Development 
 NPC …. National Planning Commission 

DVS …. Directorate of Veterinary Services  NSA …. Namibia Statistical Agency 
DP …. Development Partners  OAG …. Office of the Auditor General 
EA …. Executing Agency  O&M …. Operation and Maintenance 
EIRR …. Economic Internal Rate of Return  PAR …. Project Appraisal Report 
ESMP …. Environmental and Social Management Plan  PIU …. Project Implementation Unit 
FAO …. Food and Agriculture Organisation  PS …. Permanent Secretary 
FIRR …. Financial Internal Rate of Return  PSC …. Project Steering Committee  
GDP …. Gross Domestic Product  PY …. Project Year 
GRN …. Government of Namibia  SDG …. Sustainable Development Goals 

HACCIADEP …. 
Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and 

Integrated Agricultural Development 

Programme 

 SME …. Small and Medium Enterprise 

HPP …. Harambee Prosperity Plan  SOE …. State-Owned-Enterprise 
HH …. Household  TA …. Technical Assistance 
MAWF …. Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry  USD …. United States Dollars 
MIC …. Middle Income Country  ZAR …. South African Rand 



 

ii 

 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:    Republic of Namibia 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) 

 

IMPLEMENTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 

 

Financing plan 
    

Source Amount (ZAR) %age Instrument 

AfDB Group   1.00 billion   70.5% ADB Loan  

Government   0.36 billion   25.5% N/A 

Beneficiaries   0.06 billion     4.0% N/A 

Total Cost   1.42 billion 100.0%  

 

Important Financial Information 

   

Loan Currency South African Rands (ZAR). 

Loan Type  Fully Flexible Loan. 

Tenor 13 years (inclusive of Grace Period). 

Grace period 3 years. 

Average Loan Maturity* 8.13 (function of the amortization profile). 

Repayments 28 consecutive quarterly payments after grace period 

Interest Rate 

Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium. 

This Interest Rate will be floored to zero. 

Base Rate 

Floating Base Rate (3-month JIBAR reset each 1st 

February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November). 

A free option to fix the Base Rate is available. 

Funding Cost Margin 

The Bank funding cost margin as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 

1st February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November. 

Lending Margin 80 basis points (0.8%). 

Maturity Premium Zero (0) % if Average Loan Maturity <= 12.75 years 

Front-end fees 
0.25% of the loan amount payable at signature of the 

loan agreement or latest 30 days from signature. 

Commitment fees 

0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees 

start accruing 60 days after signature of the loan 

agreement and are payable on Payment dates. 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate** 

In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base 

Rate, the Borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating 

or refix it on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate** 

The Borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the 

Base Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount 

Transaction fees are payable. 



 

iii 

 

Option to convert loan 

currency** 

The Borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to 

another approved lending currency of the Bank 

Transaction fees are payable. 

  

FIRR, NPV (base case) 26.00%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.13 billion  

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23.74%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.03 billion  

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval (OpsCom) 23rd March, 2017 

Board Approval 4th December, 2017 

Effectiveness February 2018 

Completion 31st December 2022 

Last Disbursement 30th June 2023 

Last Repayment December 2030 



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

1.1  Project Overview: The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement 
Project’s (NAMSIP) development goal is to improve household food security and reduce 

poverty. The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce 

annual importation of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance 

household incomes, which will improve the lives of the rural people. The Project will be 

implemented nationwide by the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) over a 

period of 5 years. NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 

Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed 

Systems Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, 

(i) Capacity Building, and (ii) Project Management. Gender, environmental and social issues 

have been considered in Project activities. The total Project cost is ZAR 1.42 billion which will 

be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%), (ii) Government contribution of 

ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%), and (iii) beneficiaries contribution of ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%).  

 

1.2  The Project will directly benefit 294,500 crop producers/farmers (157,558 female and 
136,942 male), and also 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). 

In addition, 33 extension and veterinary staff will be trained in agricultural mechanisation 

inorder to ably transfer knowledge and skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 

111 farmer cooperatives. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, women and youth in 

agricultural production and processing. The Project will also indirectly benefit about 800,000 

people along the cereal and livestock value chains. The FIRR is estimated at 26.00% and NPV 

of ZAR 1.13 billion, at 12% opportunity cost of capital. The EIRR is 23.74% and NPV of ZAR 

1.03 billion, at 12 % opportunity cost of capital. To promote inclusive growth, NAMSIP will 

facilitate equitable allocation of resources to participating rural men, women and youths, and 

also implement its activities in a sustainable manner. 

 

1.3  Needs Assessment: Agriculture is the biggest employer in Namibia but contributed 
3.4% share to GDP (2016) and has low wage rates. Consequently, transforming agriculture 

constitutes the biggest pathway for creating quality jobs and reducing inequality in Namibia. 

The Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-2021/2022), Harambee Prosperity 

Plan (HPP: 2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization identify 

agriculture as a priority area which has the potential to contribute to economic progression, 

social transformation and environmental sustainability. The HPP has set up an ambitious target 

with regard to hunger poverty under Pillar 3 (Social Progression) that “no Namibian should 

die of hunger during and after Harambee period”. The Government’s policy is to increase 

agricultural production by expanding the development of irrigation schemes and also 

promoting dryland crop production through agricultural mechanisation and seed systems 

improvement in order to boost cereal crops and livestock production which can be used as 

launch pads for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) driven industrialization. NAMSIP has 

been designed based on the Government’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and 

Integrated Agricultural Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). HACCIADEP was 

developed to stimulate high quality production and market access for crops and livestock 

products especially from small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors. 

NAMSIP’s focus on agricultural mechanization, livestock and seed improvement directly 

responds to NDP5 and HPP which aim at structural transformation through increase in 

agricultural productivity and value addition as game changers. One of the key challenges 

affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely access farm 

machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest handling and 

marketing. Agricultural mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in 

a timely manner, especially in dry land farming system, and also help in increasing productivity 



 

v 

 

and reducing cost of cultivation. Introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, 

since most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilise manual labour 

and draught animal power. The modernization of agriculture, through mechanization, will 

contribute to overall increase in cereal crops production. This will result in 40% reduction of 

the country’s imports of grain/cereal crops needs which is estimated at 60% per annum 

(MAWF/FAO 2016 data). 

 

1.4  Bank’s Added Value: The proposed NAMSIP is responding to development challenges 
in agriculture sector and is in line with the Government’s development agenda. In view of the 

prevailing liquidity constraints in the domestic market, the long term tenure of the Bank’s 

lending in South African Rand (ZAR) will have softer impact on public debt than borrowing 

from international capital market. Through NAMSIP, the Bank will leverage its unique position 

as a reliable and trusted partner of choice to sustain and help implement development projects 

in Namibia. The NAMSIP design has been guided by the Bank’s past and on-going agriculture 

projects which focussed on improving crop and livestock value chains. Lessons learnt from the 

Bank’s involvement in agriculture sector include the need to involve beneficiaries, in a 

participatory manner, during project design and implementation in order to enhance ownership 

and ensure sustainability. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) is anchored 

on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is 

aligned to the second pillar of the CSP through enhancement of crop and livestock development 

with involvement of the private sector, especially in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment. The Project is aligned to the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy 

(TYS: 2013-2022) core operational areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis 

namely agriculture and gender in that it will improve availability and access of agricultural 

mechanisation and certified seeds to enhance productivity, develop irrigation and civil 

infrastructure, enhance household income, food security and nutrition, create jobs and promote 

gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line with Pillar II of the Gender 

Strategy (2014-2018). The Project is also in line with the TYS on inclusive growth by focussing 

on the smallholder farmers. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority-High-5 areas, 

namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP 

design has adopted a value chain approach to address various challenges in a manner that 

increases crop and livestock productivity in order to create an enabling agribusiness 

environment. 

 

1.5  Knowledge Management: NAMSIP will contribute to the generation of knowledge 
throughout the implementation period which will be useful during design and implementation 

of future similar projects especially on how to (i) improve crop and livestock development, (ii) 

use smallholder farmers cooperatives to produce good quality certified seeds to improve 

productivity, (iii) raise household incomes of smallholder farmers, and (iv) broaden 

employment and job opportunities along cereal crops and livestock value chains. The focus on 

livestock disease control and management will also generate knowledge for future 

interventions to enhance livestock production which is in line with the development of 

knowledge-based economy. The generated knowledge will be documented through routine 

monitoring and shared with key stakeholders during Project implementation. The Project-

related online information shall be available, to the public, through the existing 

Government/MAWF website which will be updated regularly by the Project.  



 

vi 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK (PROJECT MATRIX) 

 
Country and Project Name:    Namibia – Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

Purpose of the Project:            To contribute to food security, poverty reduction and economic growth. 
 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

IMPACT 

 

1. Contribute to improved food 

security. 

 

1. Percentage (%) decrease of food 

insecure people. 

2017 

1.   (25) 

 

By 2025 

1.   (12) 

 

Household Income 

and Expenditure 

Survey (NHIES). 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural 

production for cereal crops. 

 

 

 

2.2 Improved rural 

employment. 

 

2.1.1 Nutrient-dense crop production 

(‘000 tonnes) increased. 
 

2.1.2 Annual import (%) of country’s 

grains/cereal crops. 
 

2.2 No of jobs created. 
 

2017 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (1.04); and 

(ii) Pearl Millet (4.23).   
 

2.1.2 (60%) 

 
 

2.2. (0) 

By 2023 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (47.0); and (ii) 

Pearl Millet (162.0). 
 

2.1.2 (20%) 

 

2.2. 111,240 (for men, women 

and youths)  

 

NSA report. 

Market survey 

reports. 

Project reports. 

Assumptions: 

 Favourable 
macroeconomic 

conditions. 

 

OUTPUTS 

 

3. Agricultural Mechanisation 

3.1 Provide assorted farm 
machinery and equipment to farmer 

cooperatives.  

 

3.2 Supply and install 

drip/sprinkler irrigation systems for 

crop production. 
 

 

3.3 Support to animal health and 
traceability equipment.  

 

 

4. Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement 

 

4.1 Establish 3 irrigation systems 

(standard pre-designed drip or 

sprinkler), 200 ha each, for 
foundation seed production. 

 
4.2 Facilitate production and 

distribution of certified seed. 

 
 

 

3.1.1 Set of tractors with accessories. 

3.1.2 Set of walking tractors with 
accessories. 

 

3.2 Set of standard (ready for installation) 

40 kW-powered drip/sprinkler irrigation 

systems (each covering max 10ha). 

 
 

 

3.3.1 No. of animal health equipment. 
3.3.2 No. of traceability equipment. 

 

 
 

 

 
4.1 Total area (ha) under drip/sprinkler 

irrigation. 

 
4.2.1 Quantity of certified seed produced 

(tonnes). 
4.2.2 No. of farmers involved in seed 

multiplication. 

4.2.3 No of farmers involved in certified 
seed marketing. 

(2017) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (0); (ii) 60-

70 KW (0); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (0). 

3.1.2 (0) 

 

3.2  (0) 

 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold 
chain/drug kits (0); (ii) 

automatic drug injection guns 

(0); (iii) deworming applicators 
(0); and (iv) castration 

burdizzos (0). 

3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 
(0); (ii) hoof trimmers (0); (iii) 

ear tag applicator (0); and (iv) 

branding iron (0). 
 

4.1  (0) 

 
4.2.1  (i) maize (0); (ii) 

Sorghum (0); (iii) pearl millet 
(0); and (iv) cowpeas (0) 

4.2.2 (i) total (0); (ii) men (0); 

and (iii) female (0). 
4.2.3  (0) 

(2022) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (150); (ii) 60-

70 KW (100); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (300). 

3.1.2 (700) 

 

3.2  (169) 
 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold chain/drug 

kits (3,500); (ii) automatic drug 

injection guns (3,500); (iii) 
deworming applicators (3,500); 

and (iv) castration burdizzos 

(3,500). 
3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 

(3,500); (ii) hoof trimmers (3,500); 

(iii) ear tag applicator (3,500); and 
(iv) branding iron (700). 

 

4.1  (600) 
 

4.2.1  (i) maize (2,100); (ii) 
Sorghum (900); (iii) pearl millet 

(600); and (iv) cowpeas (600) 

4.2.2 (i) Total (294,500); (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558). 

4.2.3  (294,500) 
 

 

Project Progress 

Reports. 

 

Risk #1: Reduced 
sustainability of irrigation 

schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 
Mitigation #1: The Project, 

through cooperatives, will 

facilitate establishment of 
management entity. The 

certified seed processing 

plant will be managed by 
the cooperatives (Private 

Sector). 

 
Risk #2: Project 

implementation delays. 

Mitigation #2: Regular and 
close follow up by the 

PSC, HCT, and Bank 

supervision missions. 
 

Risk #3: Drastic weather 

variations/climatic 
conditions. 

Mitigation #3: Project 
activities will be 

implemented together with 

                                                 
1 Refer to Appendix 3, for the output indicators’ full list/description including target quantities per Region/geographical distribution. 
2 Unless stated, for the outcome and output indicators, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 



 

vii 

 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

 

4.3 Facilitate procurement of seed 

pre-cleaning machines. 
 

4.4 Facilitate construction of full-
house seed processing plant, with 

associated equipment. 
 

4.5 Procure machinery for seed 

production and processing 
(supplied to cooperatives).  

 

 

 

 

5. Capacity Building 

 

5.1 Support to agricultural training 

institutions. 
 

 

 
 

 

 
5.2 Support to farmer cooperatives 

including community mobilisation. 

 
5.3 Support Gender mainstreaming 

activities. 

 
5.4 Improve food security and 

nutrition. 

 

 

6. Project Management 

 

6.1 Project management improved. 

 

6.2 M&E system established. 

 

4.3 No. of seed pre-cleaning machines. 

 
4.4 No. of seed processing plants 

constructed. 

 
4.5.1 Sets of tractors with matching trailer, 

plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, 

weeding cultivator, fertilizer applicator, 
and herbicide boom sprayer. 

4.5.2 No of equipment and packaging 

material for seeds. 

4.5.3 No. of pearl millet (mahangu), 

cowpeas and maize prototype thresher 

plant supplied. 
 

5.1.1 No of MAWF agricultural training 

centers supported. 

5.1.2 No of farmers trained on the use of 
farm machinery & equipment. 

5.1.3 No of seed growers and seed 

inspectors trained. 

5.1.4 No of staff trained (Training of 

Trainers) 
 

5.2. No of cooperatives 

formed/strengthened supported. 
 

5.3. Percentage of various Gender-related 

activities supported. 
 

5.4.1 No of households trained in food 
security and nutrition. 

5.4.2 No of infants (6-24 months) 

undergoing feeding programme 
(Government support). 
 

6.1 No of key (i) PIU and (ii) PSC staff 

appointed. 
 

6.2.1 No of M&E system established (No). 

6.2.2 No of reports (i) baseline survey; (ii) 
QPR; (iii) MTR; and (iv) PCR. 

 

4.3  (0) 

 
4.4  (0) 

 

 
4.5.1 (i) 80-90 KWA (0), and 

(ii) 60-70 KWA (0). 

 
 

4.5.2 (0). 

 

4.5.3 (0). 

 

 
 

5.1.1  (0) 

 
5.1.2  (i) Total (0): (ii) male 

(0); and (iii) female (0) 

 
5.1.3  (0) 

5.1.4 (0) 

 
 

5.2  (51) 
 

 
 

5.3 (0) 
 

 

5.4.1 (0) 
 

5.4.2 (0) 

 
 

 

6.1. (i) 0; and (ii) 0 
 
 

6.2.1  (0) 
6.2.2  (i) 0; (ii) 0; (iii) 0; and 

(iv) 0 

 

4.3  (8) 

 
4.4  (5) 

 
 

4.5.1  (i) 80-90 KWA (5), and (ii) 

60-70 KWA (5) 
 

 

4.5.2  (4) 
 

4.5.3  (14) 

 
 
 

5.1.1  (3) 

 

5.1.2 (i) Total (294,500): (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558) 
 

5.1.3  (3,000) 

5.1.4  (34) 
 

 
 

5.2.  (111 cooperatives, with total 

membership of 10,681, including 

6,912 women) 
 

5.3 (100%) 
 

5.4.1 (i) 100 FHH and (ii) 2,000 
(MHH). 
 

5.4.2 (2,600) 

 
 

 

 
 

6.1.  (i) 4; and (ii) 5 
 

 

6.2.1  (1) 

6.2.2  (i) 1; (ii) 20; (iii) 1; and (iv) 
1 

conservation agriculture 

based on the cropping 

schedule so that little 
amount of rainfall can fully 

be utilised by the crops. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S
 Components Inputs 

 

Component 1 - Value Chain Improvement:  Sub-component 1.1 Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion); and Sub-component 1.2 

Certified Seed Systems Improvement (0.21 billion). Component 1 cost: ZAR 0.99 billion (69.8%). 

 

Component 2 - Institutional Support: Sub-component 2.1 Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion); and Sub-component 2.2 Project 

Management (ZAR 0.36 billion). Component 2 cost: ZAR 0.43 billion (30.2%). 

 

Project Cost: ZAR 1.42 billion. 

 

ADB Loan: ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%). 

Government: ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%).  

Beneficiaries: ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%). 
 



 

viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIME FRAME/GENERAL IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE3 

 

 
 

                                                 
3 This is a general Project implementation schedule. Consequently, the detailed annual work schedule will be developed before the beginning of each Project Year (PY). 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON PROPOSED LOAN FOR THE NAMIBIA AGRICULTURAL 

MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 

 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation of an ADB Loan proposal of ZAR 

1.00 billion from the Bank resources to finance the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed 

Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1.  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1. Namibia is a semi-arid country in south-western Africa with a total land area of 824,268 km2 
consisting of poorly vegetated semi desert-like areas, Namib Desert, Kalahari Desert, extensive 

savannah and woodlands, and subtropical forests. Namibia is one of the sunniest (300 days per year) 

and driest countries in the world. The climate is characterized by hot and dry conditions with mean 

temperature of 24°C in summer and 14°C in winter. About 92% of the land area is defined as hyper-

arid, arid or semi-arid. Rainfall patterns are characterized by their high temporal and spatial variability. 

Mean annual rainfall is about 285 mm, out of which 83% evaporates, 14% is used up by vegetation, 1% 

recharges groundwater and 2% becomes runoff. Low and variable rainfall and inherently poor soils are 

major obstacles to agriculture production. Five perennial rivers are found along the borders with 

neighbouring countries whilst other inland rivers are ephemeral. Despite this, Namibia is blessed with 

rich natural resources and also well-developed physical infrastructure. Namibia has enjoyed relative 

peace and political stability since independence in 1990 and has good track record of economic 

performance due to a stable political environment and prudent macroeconomic policies. With a median 

growth rate of 4.5% since independence, real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was USD 

11,408.10 in 20154. However, Namibia has one of the most unequal income distributions in Africa, with 

a 2016 Gini coefficient of 0.57. According to Namibia Statistics Agency’s (NSA) Labour Force Survey 

(2016), the overall unemployment rate is 34% due to prolonged drought that has affected the agricultural 

sector. The Labour Force Survey (2016) results demonstrate the importance of the agricultural sector in 

Namibia economy and in the livelihoods of people. Unemployment (34%), poverty (18% of the 

population is below poverty line, that is, less than USD 39 per month) and household food insecurity 

are major challenges. According to the Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-

2021/2022), poverty is a major factor limiting access to food due to reliance on market purchases for 

food. 

 

1.1.2. In 2016, mining accounted for about 11.3% of GDP (Annual National Accounts/ANA 2016), 
but employed only 2% of the labour force. On the other hand, agriculture which is the biggest employer, 

contributed only 3.4% share to GDP (ANA 2016). Although adverse weather is partly responsible for 

agriculture’s relatively small contribution to Namibia’s GDP, lack of modernisation in farming 

techniques and lack of infrastructure in business development have made the agriculture sector less 

efficient and profitable than it might otherwise be. Agriculture sector remains a strategic sector for many 

Namibians. The low employment elasticity of key growth drivers and the low wage in the agriculture 

sector partly explains the failure by the economy to translate high growth rates into more jobs and greater 

income equality. Consequently, transforming agriculture constitutes the biggest pathway for creating 

jobs and reducing inequality. The Project is in line with the NDP5, Harambee Prosperity Plan (HPP: 

2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization which identify agriculture as 

a priority area that has potential to contribute to economic progression, social transformation, 

environmental sustainability and good governance. NDP5 is an instrument for Namibia’s Vision 2030 

on prosperity, harmony, peace and political stability. The HPP has set up a target with regard to hunger 

                                                 
4 World Bank Country Income Classification (December, 2016) categorizes Namibia is as an Upper Middle Income Country.  



 

2 

 

poverty, under Pillar 3 (Social Progression), that “no Namibian should die of hunger during and after 

Harambee period”. The Namibia’s comparative socio-economic indicators are reflected in Appendix 1. 

 

1.1.3. The agriculture sector remains central to the lives of majority of Namibians since it, directly or 
indirectly, supports over 70% of the country's population. The sector can be divided into two distinct 

sub-sectors (i) capital intensive, relatively well developed and export oriented commercial sub-sector 

which covers about 44% of the total arable land, though it accommodates only 10% of the population, 

and (ii) subsistence-based, high-labour, low-technology communal sub-sector which covers 41% of the 

total arable area and accommodates about 60% of the population. Agricultural production, and 

subsequently household income, is low in the subsistence sector due to chronic drought/water shortages 

resulting in death of animals and also crop failures. Other problems include frequent occurrence of 

animal diseases, widespread soil erosion and land degradation, inadequate agricultural land, high cost 

of agricultural inputs, lack of access to finances, poor farmer organisation, low farm-labour force, 

inability of rural farmers to timely access quality certified seeds, and also farm machinery/equipment. 

In Namibia, the major food crops are pearl millet (mahangu), maize, sorghum, and wheat. According to 

MAWF, in 2016, the Government imported about 60% of Namibia’s cereal needs.  

 

1.1.4. The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) has been 
designed in line with MAWF’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and Integrated Agricultural 

Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). The HACCIADEP aims at stimulating high quality 

production and market access for crops and livestock products especially from small and medium scale 

farmers and agro-processors. The HACCIADEP has 10 schemes (total estimated cost of ZAR 13 billion) 

namely: (i) Flood water irrigation and infrastructure development scheme, (ii) Northern Communal 

Areas (NCA) Beef value chain development scheme, (iii) Small stock value chain development scheme 

for small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors in the Southern Region of 

Namibia, (iv) Agricultural mechanization scheme, (v) Cereal value chain development scheme, (vi) 

Horticulture value chain development scheme, (vii) Poultry value chain development scheme, (viii) 

Milk value chain development, (ix) Seed System development, and (x) Debushing and bush value chain 

development scheme. At the request of the Government, NAMSIP will contribute to the attainment of 

HACCIADEP’s 2 schemes, namely (i) agricultural mechanization scheme, and (ii) seed systems 

development scheme, which are key for sustainable crop and livestock value chain improvement. One 

of the key challenges affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely 

access farm machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest preservation and marketing. 

Mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in a timely manner and also help in 

increasing productivity and reducing cost of cultivation, especially in rainfed farming systems, where 

the rainy season is short. Above that, introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, since 

most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilize mainly manual labour and 

draught animal power. The support to the certified seeds system development will help to address the 

challenges on availability of high quality seeds, especially under the dry land crop production 

programme, which will lead to increased nutrient dense crop productivity. Certified seed quality is the 

most important determinant of agricultural production potential on which the efficacy of other 

agricultural inputs depends. Seed of appropriate high value characteristics are required to meet the 

demand of diverse agro-climatic conditions and cropping system. 

 

1.1.5. NAMSIP will enhance dryland crop production, irrigated crop production, State Owned 
Enterprises (SOEs), and Private Sector operations through effective utilisation of agricultural machinery 

and equipment for livestock production, and processing which can be used as launch pads for SME-

driven industrialization. The Project will contribute to the Namibia’s Growth at Home Strategy which 

focuses on supporting value addition for sustainable growth and securing local and international market 

access. NAMSIP will significantly contribute to Government’s plans to (i) achieve “zero deaths” (HPP 

outcome # 7) as a result of hunger, (ii) improve food security and nutrition, and (iii) promote import 



 

3 

 

substitution of staple foods by focusing on cereal-crops and livestock value chains. NAMSIP will also 

contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (i) SDG #1 (No Poverty) - 

growth in agriculture is effective at reducing poverty, (ii) SDG #2 (Zero Hunger) - efficient crop 

production improves food security and nutrition, and (iii) SDG #5 (Gender Equality) - provision of 

resources to women farmers enhance agricultural productivity.  

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 

 

1.2.1. In January/February 2017, the Government of Namibia and the Bank agreed on 2 interventions 
to meet both short term and long term financing needs comprising (i) a Programme Based Operation 

(PBO)/budget support (ZAR 6 billion, approved in May 2017) to support the Government’s bold reform 

programme and finance the fiscal deficit, and (ii) an investment programme (ZAR 4 billion) to fill the 

financing gaps created by fiscal consolidation measures in ‘ready to go’ HPP projects. The NAMSIP 

(ZAR 1 billion) is part of the ZAR 4 billion investment programme and complements the approved ZAR 

6 billion PBO by addressing agricultural mechanisation, certified seeds and infrastructure bottlenecks 

in the agriculture sector, as indicated in Appendix 2. The other 2 investment projects are under Transport 

Sector (ZAR 2 billion) and Education Sector (ZAR 1 billion), which are being processed concurrently.  

 

1.2.2. NAMSIP is aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core operational 
areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis namely agriculture and gender in that it will 

improve availability and access of agricultural mechanisation and certified seeds, enhance household 

income, food security and nutrition, and gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line 

with Pillar II of the Gender Strategy (2014-2018). The Project will ensure inclusiveness of rural farmers 

(men, women and youths) as direct beneficiaries. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority High-

5 areas, namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP design has 

adopted a value chain approach to simultaneously address challenges in a manner that increases 

agricultural productivity and facilitates an enabling agribusiness environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

Feed Africa Strategy’s Enabler #1–“Increase Productivity” through provision of agricultural 

mechanisation and improved certified seeds (pearl millet, maize, sorghum, and cowpeas) since these are 

the weakest links of the cereal crops value chain. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) 

is anchored on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

CSP’s second pillar through involvement of the private sector in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment.  

 

1.2.3. The Bank’s active portfolio in Namibia, as at July 2017, comprised 7 on-going projects with a 
total commitment of UA 577.3 million. The financial sector dominates the portfolio with 43.1%, 

followed by transport sector with 28.3%, social sector with 0.1%, and multi-sector with 28.5%. The 

Projects are mainly funded through the ADB public-sector window (99.83%) and MIC TAF Grant 

(0.17%). Multi-sector operations include a budget support operation, and MIC Grant technical 

assistance projects supporting Walvis Bay Corridor Group capacity building and studies, PPP 

institutional strengthening, statistical capacity building, and higher education quality assurance. 

Appendix 3 presents the Bank’s on-going portfolio in Namibia. According to the Bank’s July 2017 

Portfolio Flashlight, 71.4% of Namibia’s active projects performed satisfactorily. There is no 

problematic or ageing operation. There is no agriculture sector project in Namibia. There is no PCR 

backlog of completed agriculture operations. 

 

1.3.  Donor Coordination   
 

1.3.1. Development Partners’ (DPs) coordination in Namibia is not very strong. Efforts to improve 
coordination have just started under the leadership of the United Nations Resident Coordinator’s office 

in collaboration with the National Planning Commission (NPC) to enhance cooperation, coordination 



 

4 

 

of policies, strategies and approaches which support development and effective communication with the 

Government. The dialogue platform under NPC is for all the sectors and thus there is no platform 

specific to agriculture sector. Through the dialogue platform coordinated by NPC, DPs carry out 

activities and finance projects whose outcomes are usually considered during policy formulation. The 

DPs contribution to the agriculture budget is about 4.2% (2016/2017 financial year), as summarised in 

Table 1.1. Although the Bank (AfDB) has been active in other Sectors (Finance, Transport and Social), 

it is one of the donors, coming on board, to support a major project in the agriculture sector. The Bank 

partnerships will be harnessed with all DPs particularly those operating within the CSP (2014-2018) 

focus areas.  
 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture (2016/2017 Fiscal Year) 
 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labour Force    

  Agriculture 3.4% 3.4% 70%    

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average) : 2016/17   

  Government Donors Japan,  EU       

ZAR m 

(%) 

ZAR 1,068.50 m 

(95.8%) 

ZAR 44.64 m 

(4.2%) 

China, 

FAO  
USAID       

   Level of Donor Coordination  

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups (this sector)   [Y]   

  Existence of SWAps or Integrated Sector Approaches   [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in Donors Coordination   [M]   
 

Key:    L: Leader.    M: member but not leader.     None: no involvement.      Y: Yes.      N: No 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

 

2.1.  Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 Project Objectives: The Project’s goal is to improve household food security and reduce poverty. 
The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce annual importation 

of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance household incomes, which will 

improve the lives of the rural people. 

 

2.1.2 Project Components: NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 
Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, (i) Capacity 

Building, and (ii) Project Management. The NAMSIP components and major activities are summarised 

in Table 2.1. 

Table 2.1: Description of Project Components and Sub-components 
 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

1 Value Chain 

Improvement 
0.99 

(69.8%) 

Sub-component 1.1: Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion, 

55.3%) 

• Procure assorted crop production, harvesting, processing and storage 
machinery and equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmer 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Procure assorted livestock production (animal health, livestock feed and 
traceability) equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmers 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Supply and install 3 drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each covering 
200ha) for crop production. 

 

Sub-component 1.2: Certified Seed Systems Improvement (ZAR 0.21 

billion, 14.5%) 

• Supply and install 169 standard drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each 
covering 10ha, total 845ha) for production of certified seeds (maize, 

pearl millet, sorghum and cowpeas). 



 

5 

 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

• Procure assorted machinery and equipment for production and 
processing of certified seed (as indicated in Appendix 4). 

• Facilitate production of certified seeds under dryland and irrigation. 
• Support 200 certified seed inspection activities (seed production under 

dryland/rainfed and irrigation). 

• Facilitate distribution of certified seeds to silos. 
• Construct 5 full-house-certified seed processing plant (buildings 

including installation of appropriate equipment). 
 

2 Institutional 

Support 
0.43 

 (30.2%) 

Sub-component 2.1: Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion, 4.8%) 

• Support 3 agricultural institutions, under MAWF. 
• Sensitise/mobilise communities/beneficiaries to participate in 

NAMSIP activities. 

• Form/strengthen 111 farmer cooperatives (total membership 10,681, 
including 6,912 women). 

• Train 2,100 households in food security and nutrition activities. 
• Support infants feeding programme (Government support). 
• Support behaviour communication change at household on Infant and 

Young Child Feeding Practices (IYCFP), food diversification and 

water born related diseases (Government support)  

• Intensify campaign on Conservation Farming, agricultural 
mechanisation and improved seeds (Government support). 

• Support livestock (small stock) pass-on scheme for women groups (at 
least 80% women) 

• Train 4,000 farmers in various agriculture-related practices. 
• Facilitate international training for 5 MAWF staff (Training of 

Trainers/ToT, covering operation and maintenance of agricultural 

machinery and equipment).  

• Conduct national training (ToT) for 28 MAWF staff from the 
participating Regions (Training of Trainers/ToT, covering operation 

and maintenance of agricultural machinery and equipment).  

• Facilitate implementation of ESMP activities. 
• Support the existing MAWF-ESMP Task Force. 
• Recruit 3 TAs for MAWF. 
• Support gender mainstreaming activities. 
 

Sub-component 2.2: Project Management (ZAR 0.36 billion, 25.4%) 

• Support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). 
• Provide PIU and Focal Point with Government offices including 

utilities and vehicles (on-going/existing arrangement-Government). 

• Facilitate 5 financial audits and procure 1 accounting package. 
• Facilitate 5 procurement audits. 
• Support activities of Project Steering Committee (PSC). 
• Carry out Project coordination activities. 
• Establish and operationalize gender sensitive participatory Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) system. 

• Prepare 5 Project annual work plans and budgets. 
• Conduct 1 baseline survey, 1 beneficiary impact assessment (BIA), 1 

MTR and 1 PCR. 

Total 1.42  
 

Notes:  

i. Unless stated otherwise, for each activity, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 
ii. Under Component 1 (Value Chain Improvement), the type, quantities, and distribution of Project interventions are indicated in 

Appendix 4 of this Project Appraisal Report (PAR) - Volume I.  

iii. Details of the activities are provided in PAR Volume II Technical Annexes B.2 and C.2.  

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored 
 

The technical solution which was retained comprises use of modern farming machinery, 

equipment and vehicles in order to reduce the time required for land preparation. The drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems have been chosen, due to their high irrigation efficiency, taking into account the 



 

6 

 

scarcity of surface and groundwater resources in Namibia. NAMSIP has included the equipment to 

address the problem of livestock diseases in order to enhance the marketing of livestock and livestock 

products. Table 2.2 indicates other alternatives which were explored.   

 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 
Altenative Name  Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Animal draught 

power and manual 

system. 

Use of work oxen for 

garden preparation.   

Use of animal draught power is relatively less efficient. Livestock 

diseases may affect farming activities if not timely controlled  

Use of traditional hand 

hoe.  

Use of hand hoe is less efficient in terms of timeliness and increases 

drudgery on farmers (low factor productivity – land and labour). 

Surface irrigation 

system 

Irrigating crops from 

open canals using 

furrow or beds.  

This technology is not suitable since water is very scarce resource and 

there is very high evaporation. Surface network attracts high 

maintenance costs and may accelerate soil erosion.  

 

2.3.  Project Type 

 

The NAMSIP is a stand-alone investment Project aimed at improving cereal-crops/grains and 

livestock value chains.  

 

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 
 

2.4.1 The proposed ADB loan is denominated in South African Rand (ZAR) since Namibia Dollar 
(NAD/N$) is pegged to ZAR (1:1) thus (i) avoiding further exchange rate risk exposure, and (ii) 

increasing foreign exchange reserves. The Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is 

ZAR 1.42 billion (net of taxes and duties) which will be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion 

(70.5%) covering all major Project activities, (ii) the Government contribution of ZAR 0.36 billion 

(25.5%) through in-kind (monetary value) for existing Government staff salaries linked to Project 

activities, office space including utilities, and vehicles, and (iii) beneficiaries in-kind contribution of 

ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%) through specific labour during agricultural production activities and also 

valuable time for attending training sessions. The price contingencies were based on projected local and 

foreign inflation rates of 5% and 2% per annum, respectively. The physical contingencies ranged from 

0% (Government staff salaries) to 8% (works) based on (i) common technical practices, and (ii) 

available Engineer’s cost estimates. Summary of the Project costs by components, sources of financing, 

expenditure categories and schedule by component are presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6 and the details are 

in Project Appraisal Report (PAR) Volume II Technical Annex B.2.  

 

2.4.2 Justification for Government Level of Contribution: The Government/beneficiary’s total 
contribution of ZAR 0.42 billion represents about 29.5% of the total NAMSIP cost which is less than 

the recommended 50% minimum counterpart contribution as per the Bank’s 2008 “Policy on 

Expenditure Eligible for Bank Group Financing”. The policy further stipulates that the ADB may 

finance more than 50% of the total project costs on a case-by-case basis and up to a limit that does not 

exceed 100%. The justifications for the reduced Government contribution is based on (i) Government’s 

budget situation and debt level, (ii) country’s Financing Allocation to the Agriculture Sector, and (iii) 

Government’s commitment to implement other development programmes including proposed Transport 

Sector project (ZAR 5.52 billion) in which the Government has contributed over 64%. Details are in 

Appendix 5. In view this, there is a case for the Bank to reduce the Government’s counterpart funding 

of NAMSIP to 25.5%.  

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.3:  Project Cost Estimates by Components (NAD and ZAR ‘000) 

 
Component 

Name 

NAD ‘000 ZAR ‘000 % Foreign 

Cost Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 46 

2. Institutional 

Support 
332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 13 

Total Base 

Costs 
812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical 

Contingencies 
21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 46 

Price 

Contingencies 
82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 20 

Total Project 

Cost 
916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 35 

 

Table 2.4:  Sources of Financing (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (ZAR ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

ZAR % ZAR % ZAR % 

ADB Loan 501,937.63 100.0 498,062.37 54.3 1,000,000.00 70.5 

Government - - 362,174.70 39.5 362,174.70 25.5 

Beneficiaries - - 56,627.65 6.2 56,627.65 4.0 

Total 501,937.63 35.4 916,864.72 64.6 1,418,802.35 100.0 

 

Table 2.5:  Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Category of Expenditure 
Total Amount (ZAR '000) % Foreign 

Cost Foreign Local Total 

A. Investment Costs     

1. GOODS     

Vehicle 67,352.00 - 67,352.00 100 

Equipment 126,519.00 - 126,519.00 100 

Plant and Machinery 100,368.00 333,940.00 434,308.00 23 

Sub-total 294,239.00 333,940.00 628,179.00 47 

2. WORKS     

Irrigation Works 84,500.00 80.00 84,580.00 100 

Seed Processing Plant 1,080.00 42,414.91 43,494.91 2 

Sub-total 85,580.00 42,494.91 128,074.91 67 

3. SERVICES     

Training 31,138.00 52,150.00 83,288.00 37 

Technical Support (MAWF) 30,760.00 - 30,760.00 100 

Financial Audit 1,500.00 - 1,500.00 100 

Procurement Audit 2,000.00 - 2,000.00 100 

Consultancy – Other (Individual) 17,500.00 - 17,500.00 100 

Sub-total 82,898.00 52,150.00 135,048.00 61 

Total Investment Costs 462,717.00 428,584.91 891,301.91 52 

B. Recurrent Costs     

1. OPERATING COST     

Personnel-Govt Staff/NBF - 274,400.00 274,400.00 - 

Daily Subsistence Allowance - 4,590.00 4,590.00 - 

Operation and Maintenance - 105,300.00 105,300.00 - 

Sub-total - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Recurrent Costs - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Base Costs 462,717.00 812,874.91 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical Contingencies 18,474.82 21,346.82 39,821.64 46 

Price Contingencies 20,745.81 82,642.99 103,388.80 20 

Total Project Cost 501,937.63 916,864.72 1,418,802.35 35 

 

  



 

8 

 

Table 2.6:  Expenditure Schedule by Components (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Item Description 
Amount (ZAR ‘000) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
225,436.51 212,053.60 152,053.60 151,628.60 150,516.60 891,688.91 

2. Institutional Support 101,492.00 74,273.00 76,673.00 65,792.00 65,673.00 383,903.00 

Total Base Costs 326,928.51 286,326.60 228,726.60 217,420.60 216,189.60 1,275,591.91 

Physical Contingencies 11,678.86 8,271.59 6,831.59 6,548.94 6,490.66 39,821.64 

Price Contingencies 5,467.56 13,774.15 20,323.71 27,692.29 36,131.09 103,388.80 

Total Project Cost 344,074.93 308,372.34 255,881.90 251,661.83 258,811.35 1,418,802.35 

 

2.5.  Project Target Area, Population and Beneficiaries 

 

 The Project will be implemented nationwide (14 Regions of Namibia) as indicated in Appendices 

4 and 6. Appendix 4 has also included population data for each Region. Namibia has 517,649 households 

with estimated population of 2.28 million (2016/2017 NHIES). The agriculture mechanization scheme, 

if fully implemented, will target 58,900 crop producers (including 50% female) with about 117,857 ha 

of land to be serviced per annum and thus within a period of 5 years the scheme will benefit 

approximately 294,500 producers (including 50%) on 589,285 ha under production. The Project will 

directly target and empower 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). In 

addition, 33 agricultural extension staff will be capacitated on agriculture mechanization for transfer of 

skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 111 farmer cooperatives with a total 

membership of 10,681 of whom 6,912 will be women. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, 

women and youth in agricultural production and processing, as indicated in Appendix 7. The Project 

will also indirectly benefit from 300,000 people under dryland/rainfed agriculture and irrigation through 

generation of employment along cereal crops and livestock value chains, including suppliers, local 

traders, casual labourers, agro-processors, millers, transporters, rural youth, men and women. About 

500,000 people will indirectly benefit and be food secure due to improved cereal crop production. 

2.6. Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

 

The proposed Project intervention areas have been extracted from the HACCIADEP which was 

developed by the MAWF after countrywide consultations with key stakeholders inorder to give 

practical, tangible and visible meaning to policy intentions of the Government, as defined in Vision 

2030, HPP and NDP5. These 3 policy documents had also gone through intensive countrywide 

consultations with key stakeholders during their formulation. The Bank, during NAMSIP preparation in 

January/February 2017, held consultations with senior Government staff in the Ministry of Finance, 

NPC, MAWF, Ministry of Gender and Social Welfare, Ministry of Poverty Eradication and Social 

Welfare, Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and SMEs Development, Ministry of Environment and 

Tourism (MET), and representatives from SOEs (Namibia Agronomic Board/NAB, Agricultural 

Business Development Agency/AgriBusDev, Agricultural Bank of Namibia/AgriBank, Agricultural 

Marketing and Trading Agency/AMTA), Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU), DPs, and Private 

Sector. Consultation and feedback on the interventions were undertaken which informed the NAMSIP. 

During the Project Appraisal Mission (July 2017) further consultations were made with the same 

institutions. Project implementation will be carried out through the existing Government/MAWF 

structures. In line with the Project’s capacity building sub-component, smallholder farmers (rural men, 

women and youth) will be fully involved during implementation of planned activities including 

participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

 

 The Bank has enormous experience in designing and implementation of agriculture projects in 

Africa. Some lessons learnt from implementing past projects and through experience of other donors in 



 

9 

 

Namibia have been used to inform the design and subsequent implementation of NAMSIP, as tabulated 

below: 

 
No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

1.  Lack of construction drawings at project start-up 
resulted in delay in implementation. 

Drawings and tender documents for standard drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems are available with the Government.  

2.  Role played by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
in expediting project execution. 

MAWF’s Project implementation capacity will be enhanced through 

recruitment of 3 TAs who will be part of the PIU. 

3.  Inadequate consultation with stakeholders results 
in poor management of the proposed investments 

Adequate consultations with key stakeholders were undertaken during 

Project preparation and appraisal phases. 

4.  Weak M&E system results in poor assessment of 
implementation progress 

M&E activities with adequate financial allocation have been 

included in Project design. 

 

2.8. Project Performance Indicators 
 

The logical framework (LogFrame) has provided the impact, outcome and output indicators 

which will be measured during Project implementation using M&E system. The impact indicator is 

“percentage (%) reduction of food insecure people”. The outcome indicators are (i) nutrient dense crop 

production (tonnes), (ii) percentage (%) reduction of annual cereal imports, and (iii) number of jobs 

created. Major output indicators are reflected in the LogFrame. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 
 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance 

 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: The financial analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as 
well as the entire Project level. This has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual 

beneficiaries, and aggregated for the Project as a whole on “with Project” and “without Project” basis. 

Gross margin analyses have been carried out for the major crops to be grown under the Project, namely 

maize, pearl millet (mahangu), sorghum and wheat with first 3 crops to be grown under dryland/rainfed 

while wheat will be grown under irrigation. Pearl millet will take up the largest share of land which 

constitutes about 57% of the total land under cultivation. These analyses assumed full utilization of the 

area targeted for production starting from third year of Project implementation period. The land 

distribution per crop per season, summary of analysis of individual crop budgets, and net income (gross 

margin) at household level have been presented in PAR-Volume II Technical Annex B.7. Results: The 

analysis shows that annual net income (gross margin) per farming household in the Project increased 

(under crop production) from ZAR 19,742 to ZAR 74,179 while income from livestock production 

increased from ZAR 5,221 to ZAR 16,012. The gross margin analyses took into consideration the farm 

gate prices of the produce and the total cost of production, including an imputed wage of ZAR 300 per 

hectare for family farm labour per farming season. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) to the 

Project is estimated at 26.00%, and the net present value (NPV), at 12% opportunity cost of capital, is 

estimated at ZAR 1.13 billion.  

 

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The agriculture sector farm inputs market is subsidized by Government and 
therefore financial prices for the farm inputs have been adjusted by a standard conversion factor of 1.3 

that took into account the level of subsidies for the farm inputs and taxes. The economic prices for farm 

produce have been derived using a standard conversion factor of 0.82   Results: The economic internal 

rate of return (EIRR) to the Project is estimated at 23.74% and the net present value (NPV), at 12 % 

opportunity cost of capital, is estimated at ZAR 1.03 billion. 

 

3.1.3. Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity analysis shows that an increase in the cost of production  by 
10% reduces FIRR to 17% and NPV to ZAR 0.51 billion and a fall in the revenue by 10% reduces FIRR 

to 13 % and NPV to ZAR 0.065 billion. An increase in the cost of production by 5% reduced EIRR to 

18.78% and NPV to ZAR 0.64 billion while a fall in revenue by 5% reduced EIRR to 16.88% and NPV 

to ZAR 0.45 billion. 



 

10 

 

 

FIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 26.00% : ZAR 1,13 billion 

EIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 23.74% : ZAR 1.03 billion 
 

Note: calculations are indicated in Appendix 8 of this PAR and also in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.7. 

 

3.2.  Environmental and Social impacts 

 

3.2.1. Environment and Social Issues: The Project was classified as Category 2 in line with the Bank’s 
Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which requires only the Environmental and 

Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMP was prepared by the Government, cleared by the Bank 

and posted on Bank’s website5 on 25th October 2017. The provision of farm machinery and equipment 

to smallholder farmers and agro-processors as well as the development and supply of improved seeds 

are slated to engender significant positive impacts on food production, climate resilience, economic 

development, livelihoods and quality of life of NAMSIP beneficiaries. Nevertheless, the development 

of crop and livestock operations can result in direct and indirect environmental and social impacts, 

including loss of fauna and flora, degradation of terrestrial habitats and disruption or contamination of 

water courses. These negative impacts are expected to be site-specific and can be minimized by applying 

appropriate mitigation measures. During Project implementation, the existing MAWF ESMP Task 

Force will be maintained inorder to ensure adequate environmental and social management, compliance 

with national laws, and to monitor and report on ESMP implementation. NAMSIP has made financial 

provision to address ESMP implementation capacity gaps and environmental and social management 

needs. The total cost associated with ESMP implementation is about ZAR 8 million, excluding costs for 

mitigation measures related to civil works which will be reflected in respective contractors’ bills of 

quantities (BoQs). Additional information on environmental issues is in Appendix 9 and also in PAR 

Volume II Technical Annex B.8. 

 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project was classified as Category 2 and is potentially vulnerable to climate 
risk. Practical climate risk mitigation measures have been taken into consideration in the location and 

design of the proposed irrigation infrastructure. Furthermore, arid conditions and erratic rainfall threaten 

the viability of agricultural production. Therefore, the inclusion of the component on certified seed 

(cereal crops) production through irrigation qualifies as an adaptation activity. This Project will be 

implemented taking into consideration opportunities to enhance climate resilience of the agriculture 

value chains and also enhance adaptive capacity of stakeholders to manage the impacts of climate 

change through improved extension services. The implementation of these activities is aligned with 

national ambitions to “instil resilience to impacts of climate change in the most vulnerable sectors of 

the economy” articulated in Nationally Determined Contributions to the UNFCCC. Proposed activities 

include developing and implementing appropriate responses and adaptation strategies to reduce the 

impacts of floods, low rainfall and high temperatures on people, crops, livestock and infrastructure. 

Agricultural adaptation strategies include (i) coordinating the timing of ploughing and crop planting 

with rainfall events, (ii) using drought-resistant crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) shifting 

livestock to alternative grazing areas, and (iv) implementing soil and water conservation activities. 

Mechanisation in agriculture is usually associated with use of diesel powered equipment whose emission 

will be mitigated through specifications of engines which include either (i) recirculation of exhaust gas 

to dilute intake of air/oxide, or (ii) cooling the exhaust gases in order to inhibit formation of nitrogen. 

With regards to climate finance, NAMSIP’s climate related activities will contribute ZAR 0.2 billion to 

the Bank’s target. The majority of Namibian population, especially rural households, depend on climate-

sensitive sub-sectors such as crop production and livestock farming. Consequently, climate change 

variability will only serve to compound the impacts on livelihoods, food security, and community well-

being. Changes in rainfall patterns and increased temperatures affect crop yields, increases droughts and 

reduces feedstock resulting in livestock losses. Namibia has thus prioritized environmental protection, 

specifically climate change, as evidenced by the adoption of the National Policy on Climate Change 

                                                 
5Web-link:    Namibia - Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) - ESMP Summary 

https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Environmental-and-Social-Assessments/Namibia_-_Namibia_Agricultural_Mechanisation_and_Seed_Improvement_Project__NAMSIP__-_ESMP_Summary.pdf


 

11 

 

(2011) and the National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (2013-2020). The latter aims, under 

the food security and sustainable resource use pillar, to: (i) improve climate change understanding and 

related policy responses in food security; (ii) develop, identify and disseminate climate resilient crop 

farming practices; (iii) enhance sustainable land management and suitable land use practices; and (iv) 

ensure maintenance of resilient ecosystems to ensure climate resilience, and environmental 

sustainability. 

 

3.2.3. Land Issues: Land is fundamental to the lives of smallholder farmers especially women and 
youth since women account for 59% of people engaged in skilled and subsistence agriculture in 

Namibia. The Namibia Constitution and the National Land Policy (1998) lay the foundation for land 

ownership and established basic principles for the governance of all land in Namibia, with a strong 

emphasis on protecting the rights of the poor and women and promoting transparency and accountability 

in land administration. Namibia’s agriculture sector consists of 2 types of land ownership, namely, 

freehold title deeds mainly in the central and southern commercial areas and non-title deeds mainly in 

the Northern Communal Areas (NCA). The Government efforts are in place to bring equity in land 

ownership, through land redistribution and tenure reform which have been shaped by Agricultural 

(Commercial) Land Reform Act 6 of 1995 and the Communal Land Reform Act 5 of 2002. These land 

reforms focus, amongst others, on redistribution of commercial farmland to redress past imbalances in 

land ownership among Namibians. Considering that land tenure is important for the Project, the MAWF 

emphasised the role the communal land reforms plays in strengthening the smallholder farmers’ access 

and ownership to land and credit. The Namibia Constitution in Article 95 (a) accords women the same 

status as men, with regard to all forms of land rights, either as individuals or as members of family land 

ownership trusts. Equal rights to land have been granted to both men and women in communal areas. 

 

3.2.4. Gender: In Namibia, 44% of rural households are headed by females. Most female landowners 
are widows who inherited the land from their husbands, followed by women who obtained land through 

divorce or inheritance from families. Since the commencement of the Communal Land Reform Act 

(CLRA) No. 5 of 2002, single women can register their land without the consent of family members. 

The CLRA protects wives and gives them the right to apply for and register land in their names. In 2016, 

it was estimated that more than 40% of all land use certificates in Namibia were issued to women. The 

land use certificates for communal land guarantee the use of the land in perpetuity. Furthermore, the 

CLRA mandates the inclusion of a minimum of four women in the Communal Land Board (CLB) that 

facilitates land registration. The main source of income for female farmers is subsistence farming. They 

dominate in most cropping activities except in land preparation. On the other hand, animal husbandry 

(cattle, sheep and goats) is almost exclusively a male domain although herding small stock is sometimes 

done by women whilst feeding livestock has a 50/50 gender division of labour. Women and children are 

responsible for fuel wood and wild fruit gathering. Women also dominate post-harvest processing of 

crops such as sun drying, threshing and winnowing, head-loading to markets, and storing for market or 

future use. The Government has embarked on new levels of improving women’s lives in rural areas but 

according to the 2013 Gender Needs Assessment, there are challenges which include: (i) unequal access 

to and control over resources such as agriculture support services, appropriate technology – about 0.9% 

of females in rural areas own tractors in comparison with 2.6% of males; (ii) rural women’s workload - 

family welfare and subsistence agriculture functions increase due to rural-urban migration of men; and 

(iii) inadequate representation in structures of decision making, at community levels - only 10% of 

women head traditional authorities. 

 

3.2.5. Equitable agricultural mechanization in the agriculture value chain will therefore contribute to 
addressing some of the challenges faced by women farmers. Equitable distribution of equipment will 

contribute to higher production levels and reduce the drudgery that women face through non mechanized 

agriculture. Current figures indicate that women form majority of members of seed multiplication, crop 

production and marketing cooperatives. Women will participate as individuals or members of 

cooperatives. The Project will promote: (i) equitable access to farm equipment by women; (ii) training 

female farmers to increase the uptake of technology and mechanization, and in the maintenance of the 



 

12 

 

equipment (at least 50% for female farmers); and (iii) women’s participation in leadership of 

cooperatives. 

 

3.2.6. Social: NAMSIP is aimed at addressing some of the major limiting factors to increased food 
security and sustainable agricultural production through provision of agricultural mechanisation and 

improvement of seeds which will result in multiple socio-economic benefits including contributing to 

improved household income, enhanced food security and nutrition, and increased rural employment. 

The Project will also result in social risks, safety and security concerns related to the increased use of 

machinery and equipment which will be addressed and minimized through implementation of the 

ESMP’s mitigation measures. 

3.2.7. HIV/AIDS: According to the 2015 National HIV sentinel survey, out of the population of over 
2.2 million people, about 210,000 to 230,000 people (10.5%) are living with HIV and the virus 

prevalence is highest among women aged 35-39 years at 32.3%, and women aged 45-49 years at 31.6%. 

The survey highlighted a higher prevalence in rural areas than in urban areas. The most affected Regions 

are Zambezi (23.7%), Omusati (17.4%), Kavango (17%), Oshana (16.1%) and Ohangwena (15.6%). 

Consequently, HIV/AIDS campaigns will be mainstreamed in the implementation of the Project, 

targeting beneficiaries including civil works contractors and consultants. The farmer cooperatives will 

be used to deliver HIV/AIDS awareness messages to the communities. 

 

3.2.8. Inclusive Growth: In the context of broad-based and pro-poor growth, the Project will promote 
inclusive growth with equitable allocation of resources to activities which will benefit all levels of the 

participating communities. In particular, NAMSIP will be implemented in rural areas which (i) have 

very poor households, (ii) are frequently affected by drought, and (iii) have food shortages during some 

months of the year and are consequently nutritionally vulnerable. The Project will assist poor rural men, 

women and youth to participate in planned agricultural activities for increasing productivity, job 

creation, and income generation. 

 

3.2.9. Food Security and Nutrition: Namibia’s food security and nutrition have been weakened by 
severe droughts leading to a number of households depending on market and Relief Food Programmes. 

Namibia produces about 40% of the food it consumes and is highly dependent on imports (60%), mainly 

from South Africa. According to NDP5, poverty is a major factor limiting access to food. Access to 

food in Namibia is affected by reliance on market purchases for food. When combined with the heavy 

reliance on food imports, it makes Namibia vulnerable to high food prices. Overall, the production scale 

of smallholder farmers is lower which is attributed to limited access to inputs, poor soils, access to land 

and frequent occurrence of natural disasters such a drought and flood. For 2016/2017 cropping season, 

MAWF has estimated below average cereal crop production of 75,300 tonnes. Considering that the 

annual national cereal consumption is about 326,500 tonnes, this leaves a huge deficit of 251,200 tonnes. 

Based on the number of food insecure rural people, the Project will scale up irrigated agriculture, dry 

land crop production intervention and promote food security resilience measures through the provision 

of agricultural machinery, equipment and improved seeds at subsidized rates for drought affected 

farmers. Nationwide, the stunting rate for children under 5 is between 24% and 30%. Malnutrition 

continues to blemish the future of children, with an average of 1 out of every 4 children under the age 

of 5 more likely to be stunted. Stunted growth is strongly associated with poor living conditions, 

household food insecurity, poor breastfeeding practices and inappropriate foods for children. The 

Project will support the Government’s efforts on (i) nutrition, especially, breastfeeding awareness 

campaigns, and (ii) expansion of the existing infant (6-24 months) feeding programmes within the 

NAMSIP communities. To that effect, the Project interventions will also lead to increase appropriate 

knowledge and practices regarding infant, young child and maternal nutrition with the aim of 

contributing to SDG #2 target. With regards to nutrition, NAMSIP will promote the Government’s 

feeding programme (1,000 days from pregnancy to two years) in order to reduce malnutrition and 

child/women morbidity. Promotion of availability, accessibility, and consumption of a variety of foods 

will strengthen the capacity of women and households to adopt the optimal nutritional practices. 

Sensitization on water related diseases will help to improve the health of the population.  



 

13 

 

 

3.2.10. The modernization of agriculture through agricultural mechanization for cereal crops and 
livestock production will contribute to overall increase in food production in the country. This will result 

into 40% reduction of the country’s imports of grains/cereal crops which is currently estimated at 60% 

for grain/cereals every year according to MAWF/FAO reports (2016). The use of mechanization will 

also enhance the value of the products and industrialization of the agriculture sector since some of the 

livestock and livestock products will be exported.  

 

3.2.11. Involuntary Resettlement: There will be no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition 
envisioned during implementation of Project activities. The agricultural mechanization and seed system 

development activities will be carried out in beneficiaries’ fields or public land which will benefit 

individual farmers and cooperative members. 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1. MAWF will be the Executing Agency (EA) of the Project which will be implemented, over a 
period of 5 years, using the existing Government structures. At National Level, the existing Programme 

Steering Committee (PSC) comprises (i) Presidential Advisor - Policy Implementation and Monitoring, 

as the Chairperson; (ii) Presidential Advisor - Constitutional Affairs and Private Sector Interface; (iii) 

Presidential Advisor - Economic, and (iv) Permanent Secretary (PS)-Ministry of Finance (MoF). MoF 

will serve as the secretariat of the PSC. This is in line with the Government’s wish to have oversight 

responsibility, at the highest level, for NAMSIP and also the Transport and Education Sectors’ projects 

which have been appraised concurrently, under the Bank’s current support to the country. The PS-

MAWF shall be co-opted when the PSC is deliberating issues concerning agriculture sector. The PSC 

will meet on semi-annual basis, and as need arises, in order to (a) approve annual work plan and budget, 

(b) review progress reports, and (c) provide overall policy and strategic direction of NAMSIP. At Sector 

level, the existing HACCIADEP Coordination Team (HCT) consists of MAWF’s (i) PS, (ii) Deputy PS 

(Department of Agricultural Development), and the Directors of: (iii) Directorate of Planning and 

Business Development, (iv) Directorate of Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering 

Services, (v) Directorate of Agricultural Research and Development, and (vi) Directorate of Veterinary 

Services. The HCT will (i) give the overall sectoral guidance to NAMSIP, (ii) approve Project 

information to be uploaded on MAWF website, and (iii) approve quarterly progress reports (QPRs). The 

MAWF DPBD will be the secretariat of HCT. The HCT has already appointed: (1) members of the 

Project Implementing Unit (PIU) comprising the (a) Project Coordinator, (b) Accountant, (c) Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and (d) Procurement Specialist who will be in charge of day-to-day 

Project implementation; (2) focal points/desk officers (existing MAWF staff) from each Directorate; 

and (3) a focal point (existing senior-level MAWF staff) in each of the 14 participating Regions. The 

PIU staff will spend, at least, 90% of their official time on NAMSIP activities. The Project Coordinator 

will report to the Deputy-PS (Agriculture). The PIU will work closely with the Government appointed 

focal points in the (i) Directorate of Planning and Business Development (DPBD), (ii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering Services (DAPEES), (iii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Research and Development (DARD), (iv) Directorate of Veterinary Services (DVS), and 

(v) Nutrition Unit. The DAPEES and DVS will be responsible for sub-component 1.1 (Agricultural 

Mechanisation) and DARD will be responsible for sub-component 1.2 (Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement). The DAPEES and DARD will be supported by 3 Technical Advisors (Cereal Crops, 

Livestock and Seed Systems) who will be competitively recruited by the Project, based on Bank’s Rules 

and Procedures. Based on the value chain approach, including construction activities, the PIU will be 

supported by SOEs, namely, (i) AgriBusDev Agency, (ii) AMTA, (iii) AgriBank, and (iv) Namibia 

Agronomic Board (NAB). The PIU will also work closely with the Namibia National Farmers Union 

(NNFU). 

 



 

14 

 

4.1.2. The NAMSIP Component 1 will mainly be implemented through farmer cooperatives or 
individual farmers who will be required to save part of their income in a group bank account. The 

cooperatives and individuals, with the assistance of MAWF, AgriBusDev and AMTA, will identify 

appropriate machinery/equipment for their operations based on their needs. A qualifying 

cooperative/farmer will be expected to directly pay about 10% of the overall cost of the associated 

machinery/equipment from their own resources. Procurement of standard machinery/equipment will 

commence in Project Year 1. 

 

4.1.3. Procurement Arrangements:  Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting 
services, financed by the Bank for the Project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and 

following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, procurement will be carried 

out using the following: 

 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 
under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations, Procurement Act of 2015 and Public 

Procurement Regulation (no. 2016), using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) 

or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for various group of 

transactions to be entailed under the project.   

 Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (Bank’s PMPs): The Project will use Bank 
standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   Solicitation Documents SDDs, for contracts 

that are either: (i) Contracts procurement under Open Competitive Bidding (OCB)–international; 

Limited Competitive Bidding (LIB) and Consultancy services of firms; (ii) in case BPS is not 

relied upon for a specific transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case Bank’s PMPs have 

been found to be the best fit for purpose for a specific transaction or group of transactions. 

 

4.1.4. Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 
the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

or Bank’s PMPs)  being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.5. 

Various items under different expenditure categories and related procurement arrangements have been 

developed for goods, works and consultancy services, as reflected in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex 

B.5. 

 

4.1.5. Financial Management (FM): An assessment of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 
(MAWF) as Project Executing Agency (that included a review of the budgeting, accounting, treasury 

systems, internal controls, reporting, and external audit arrangements) was done to ascertain effective 

financial management of the project. The Department of Finance headed by a Director of Finance within 

the MAWF is responsible for the function of planning and budgeting at central and local levels including 

recording expenditures and maintaining assets through the use of the Government-wide IFMIS. The 

system has, however, not been configured to enable comprehensive Project reporting, therefore, a 

suitable system that will include the use of spreadsheets will be used for supplementing the recording 

and reporting of the Project transactions. The MAWF staff (Finance Department) have been involved 

in implementation of donor (EU, FAO, JICA and South-South Cooperation China) funded projects. 

Given the fiduciary requirements related to the Bank’s financing, MAWF has already appointed a well-

qualified Project Accountant to handle Project financial management (FM) tasks.  The Project 

Accountant will work together with other PIU members including Project Coordinator, M&E, and 

Procurement Specialist. Training in Bank requirements regarding financial management will be 

provided as part of project launching and during implementation.   

4.1.6. Internal audit function at the Ministry will cover the project, the reports resulting from the audits 
will be shared with the Bank during supervisions. All deficiencies identified by internal audits will be 

communicated in a timely manner to the Government, for action. The PIU will also be responsible for 

ensuring compliance with the Bank’s reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic 



 

15 

 

progress reports with financial information for the Bank loan and Government contribution to the Bank 

not later than 45 days after the end of the respective quarter. The PIU will also be required to produce 

annual project financial statements. The Ministry’s financial statements are audited annually by the 

Auditor General of Namibia.  In this regard, the Project financial statements will also be subject to audit 

by the AG (or a private independent audit firm under the oversight of the AG) with the audit done in 

accordance with a Bank approved Terms of Reference. The audit reports (including management letter) 

will be submitted to the Bank within six months after the end of the reporting period with costs of the 

audit borne by the loan. These arrangements are in line with the current moderate country fiduciary risk 

levels after mitigation factors. 

 

4.1.7. The overall conclusion of the assessment is that the MAWF’s capacity, to handle all the FM 
aspects of the project, currently meets the Bank’s minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM 

guidelines. In addition, with the implementation of the proposed FM actions, there will be further 

improvement in the Project financial management systems to ensure funds to be made available to 

finance Project activities would be used economically, efficiently and for the purpose intended. The 

overall initial FM risk for the Project is assessed as “Moderate”. This is also in line with current country 

fiduciary risk levels that allow the use of existing systems subject to their satisfactory assessment. The 

detailed analysis and financial management arrangements are contained in PAR Volume II, Technical 

Annex B.4. 

 

4.1.8. Disbursement arrangements: Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the 
Direct Payment method for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification 

of invoices submitted and preparation of disbursement application which will be reviewed and signed 

off by Government designated staff and submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account 

method to be managed by the PIU will be limited to financing the smaller and recurring operating 

expenses. The opening of the Special Account denominated in ZAR together with the associated local 

currency account denominated in NAD will be “other condition” to the Loan. In addition, the 

Reimbursement method will also be available. All disbursements under the Loan would be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s rules and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement Handbook, as 

applicable. In addition, the Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter whose contents were discussed and 

agreed upon during the loan negotiations meeting between the delegations from the Government of 

Namibia and the Bank. 

 

4.2.  Monitoring  

 

The Project monitoring will be at different levels with the highest level being the NPC. NPC has 

developed an M&E framework that guides various sectors and assists to monitor the HPP and NDP5 

Results Framework. In addition, the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) will assist the Project to carry 

out regular surveys. At Sector level, the DPBD will have the overall responsibility for Project monitoring 

and evaluation activities. The Project activities will commence with preparation of AWP&B (based on 

detailed cost tables/DCTs, PAR Volume II Technical Annex B.2), which will be submitted to the PSC 

for approval, before transmission to the Bank. The Project M&E Specialist will establish participatory 

M&E system based on performance indicators. If need be, a short term individual consultant will be 

recruited by the Project to develop the participatory M&E system which will be linked to NPC M&E 

framework. The Project has allocated financial resources to facilitate training on data collection, 

processing and reporting. In Project Year 1, the PIU will develop the Project Implementation Manual 

highlighting the organisation, implementation, financial, disbursement and procurement arrangements. 

The Regional Project launch workshops will be organised by MAWF for key stakeholders with the 

purpose of (i) ensuring that all partners understand the Project components, subcomponents, activities, 

implementation modalities, and reporting needs, and (ii) acting as a networking event to build 

relationships for future knowledge sharing. All spending Regions will submit monthly reports for 

compilation of Quarterly Progress Report (QPRs). All QPRs will be reviewed and cleared by HCT 

before submission to the Bank, not more than 45 days after the end of reporting period. The key Project 



 

16 

 

M&E milestones/reports are presented in Table 4.2. The Bank will monitor NAMSIP implementation 

through supervision missions, at least twice per calendar year, in order to verify progress and monitor 

key verifiable indicators. 

 

Table 4.2: Project Key Milestones 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring and Evaluation Process/Feedback 

Loop 

Year 1  Baseline Survey Report MAWF/NSA: Baseline data generation 

Year 1 - 5 
Procurement (goods, works 

and services) Reports 
MAWF/Bank: Review and approvals 

Year 1 - 5 
Project Implementation 

(QPRs and Aide Memoires) 

MAWF/Bank/Beneficiaries: Progress review 

meetings. Bank supervision missions. 

Year 1 - 5 Audit Reports MAWF/Auditors: Annual financial audit  

Year 3 Mid-Term Review Report MAWF/NSA/Bank Mid-Term technical review 

Year 4 
Beneficiary Impact Study 

Report 
MAWF/NSA: Project beneficiary impact assessment  

Year 5  Project Completion Report MAWF/NSA/Bank: End of Project technical review 

 

4.3. Governance  
 

4.3.1. Namibia is one of the countries with the best governance record in Africa and has continually 
been ranked within the top ten performers on the Mo-Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG), 

which measures the quality of governance in every African country. Namibia has been ranking 6th since 

2000 and improving to 5th in 2015 (2016 IIAG report) based on 4 categories of governance, namely, (a) 

Safety & Rule of Law (score 76.1/100, rank 4th/54), (b) Participation and Human Rights (score 76.1/100, 

rank 2nd/54), (c) Sustainable Economic Opportunity (score 62.2/100, rank 7th/54), and (d) Human 

Development (score 64.7/100, rank 10th/54). The 2013 Corruption Perception Index by Transparency 

International ranked Namibia as the 7th least corrupt country in sub-Saharan Africa. In January 2017, 

Namibia unconditionally acceded to the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), which provides for 

self and peer-assessment of governance policies and practices in Africa. 

 

4.3.2. To achieve inclusive and sustainable development, Namibia has put in place strong 
accountability systems in line with the Constitution and the State Finance Act of 1991 (amended 1995). 

The Minister of Finance presents accountability report, together with other budget documents, at the 

National Assembly every year. The Country’s efforts to reform the Public Financial Management (PFM) 

system are yielding results. This is testified by a transparent, consultative, and inclusive fiscal budgetary 

process that is succeeded by well-controlled and coordinated budget execution mechanisms, which have 

resulted in the decline in public sector over-expenditures. The modernization of the public procurement 

system is being pursued through the new Public Procurement Act 2015, which became effective on 1st 

April 2017, following issuance of Regulations. The Constitution clearly defines the legal and 

institutional framework for the fight against corruption. The Namibia Anti-Corruption Commission, 

established under the Anti-Corruption Act No. 8 of 2003, is mandated to combat and prevent corruption. 

The 2016 Corruption Perception Index ranks Namibia 53 out of 176 countries, with an overall score of 

52/100. The agriculture sector will benefit from AfDB-funded PBO reforms through (i) strengthened 

PFM and SOE efficiency; and (ii) improved business enabling environment, which are expected to result 

in higher GDP growth rates, and reduction in unemployment and poverty. NAMSIP institutional 

arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will serve as an instrument for achieving 

intended objectives. The Project’s specific governance risk mitigation measures include (i) recruitment 

of external audit firm, and (ii) training of PIU in Bank’s rules and procedures. 

  



 

17 

 

4.4.  Sustainability 
 

The Project has been designed in a participatory and consultative manner in order to enhance 

ownership by beneficiaries thus ensuring sustainability. The Project will be implemented using the 

existing Government structures and SOEs, with minimal outsourced technical assistance, which will 

assist to preserve the institutional memory and also build the capacity of the Government staff to ably 

assist the smallholder farmers during and after Project implementation (operation and maintenance) 

period. The Project’s focus on seed system development and agriculture mechanization will enhance 

Private Sector involvement, with good back-up service. Major maintenance of machinery and equipment 

will be carried out by the suppliers and the cooperatives will be paying for the services. Through the 

cooperatives, the beneficiaries will be mobilised and trained to properly operate and carry out routine 

maintenance of the agricultural machinery and equipment. The capacity building for MAWF staff and 

cooperatives will guarantee sustainability of planned activities when the Project phases out. The certified 

seed processing plant including associated equipment will be operated and maintained by the 

cooperatives (Private Sector) for sustainability. Behaviour communication and awareness campaigns 

for food diversification and nutritional interventions have been mainstreamed to build resilience and 

sustainability of the investments. The Project is financially viable and the analysis indicated that 

beneficiaries will be able to generate adequate funds for their household needs, as well as sustain the 

investments made in the agriculture ventures.  
 

4.5 Risk Management 

 
No Potential Risks Rating Mitigation Measures 

1.  Poor sustainability of irrigation 
schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 

Medium Project, through cooperatives, will facilitate 

establishment of management entity. The certified 

seed processing plant will be managed by the Private 

Sector. 

2.  Project implementation delays. Low Regular and close follow up by the NPC, HCT and 
Bank.  

3.  Drastic weather 
variations/climatic conditions. 

Medium Dryland/rainfed Project activities with be 

implemented together with conservation agriculture 

based on cropping schedule so that little amount of 

rainfall can fully be utilised by the crops. 
 

4.6 Knowledge Building   
 

4.6.1. The Project’s agricultural mechanization will scale-up the existing MAWF Dry Land Crop 
Production Programme subsidy-mechanisation programme but using a concept of ownership scheme 

which will generate considerable knowledge on access and sustainable use of modern farm 

machinery/equipment. The focus on livestock disease control will also generate lessons for future 

interventions to enhance livestock animal health, traceability, and productivity. The lessons and 

experiences from NAMSIP will be shared within the Bank and other institutions interested in 

implementing future similar projects. The value chain approach for both crops and livestock production 

will generate information on profitability and sustainability of agricultural investments. The 

establishment of certified seed processing plant to be managed by the Private Sector and cooperatives 

will also provide lessons on how the small-scale farmers’ cooperatives can be integrated into the 

certified seed production value chain.  
 

4.6.2. The Project will contribute to knowledge building through: (i) the M&E system which will be 
designed to generate information on implementation achievements, Project financing, disbursement 

trends, procurement, contractor performance, beneficiary participation, Project outputs and outcomes 

and sustainability; (ii) lessons learnt from supervision mission reports, MTR and PCR; and (iii) 

beneficiary impact assessment and final stakeholders’ workshop will provide feedback on key lessons 

and experiences. NAMSIP will provide an opportunity to strengthen the Bank’s knowledge on the 

agriculture sector in Namibia. Above that, the Project has incorporated specialised training which will 

help to build knowledge, skills and capacity of MAWF staff, cooperatives members and other individual 

beneficiaries.  



 

18 

 

4.6.3. Documentation and sharing of lessons, experience (successes and failures) and good practice 
will be carried out continuously during and after Project implementation. Depending upon the need, 

appropriate support (print and electronic media) and several communication channels (such as 

newspapers, mobile-phone-SMS, radio, TV and billboards) will be used in order to boost visibility. The 

Project-related online information will also be available on the existing Government/MAWF website 

which will be regularly posted after approval by HCT. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1.  Legal Instruments 

 

5.1.1 ADB Loan to the Republic of Namibia.  

 

5.2.  Conditions Associated with Bank’s Intervention 

 

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 

subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions 

of the Bank. 

 

5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Bank to make the first 

disbursement of the Loan shall be conditional upon the entry into force of this Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall:  

 

a. Prior to the request for disbursement of advance to the special account provide evidence of 
having opened one (1) Special Account denominated in ZAR and one (1) local currency account 

denominated in NAD, at the Bank of Namibia into which the proceeds of the Loan will be 

deposited (§4.1.8); and 

 

b. within six (6) months of the signing of the Loan Agreement, provide evidence, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Bank, of the recruitment of 3 Technical Advisors (TA) to MAWF, 

each with skills and qualifications acceptable to the Bank (§4.1.1). 

 

5.3.  Undertakings 

 

The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

of NAMSIP, and report to the Bank on a quarterly basis, as part of the quarterly progress report, 

throughout the Project implementation period (§3.2.1). 

 

5.4 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

 

 Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADB Loan of One 

Billion South African Rand (ZAR 1 billion) to the Republic of Namibia for the purpose of 

implementing the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 

 

 



 

I 

 

Appendix 1:   Namibia  - Comparative Socio-economic Indicators 

 

Indicators Unit 2000 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 (e)

National Accounts

GNI at Current Prices Million US $ 4,005 11,134 12,489 13,446 13,624 12,811 ...

GNI per Capita US$ 2,110 4,970 5,450 5,730 5,670 5,210 ...

GDP at Current Prices Million US $ 3,909 12,410 13,016 12,720 12,838 11,546 10,414

GDP at 2000 Constant prices Million US $ 3,909 6,439 6,765 7,149 7,611 8,014 8,121

Real GDP Growth Rate % 4.1 5.1 5.1 5.7 6.5 5.3 1.3

Real per Capita GDP Growth Rate % 1.9 2.9 2.7 3.2 4.0 2.9 -0.9

Gross Domestic Investment % GDP 17.1 22.4 26.7 25.2 33.0 34.0 26.5

     Public Investment % GDP 5.1 8.2 7.2 6.8 4.3 5.3 5.5

     Private Investment % GDP 12.0 14.1 19.5 18.4 28.7 28.8 21.0

Gross National Savings % GDP 25.0 19.3 21.0 21.2 22.3 21.2 16.8

Prices and Money

Inflation (CPI) % 9.3 5.0 6.7 5.6 5.4 3.4 6.7

Exchange Rate (Annual Average) local currency/US$ 6.9 7.3 8.2 9.7 10.9 12.8 15.1

Monetary Growth (M2) % 66.4 11.3 9.7 6.5 7.7 10.5 11.4

Money and Quasi Money as % of GDP % 58.8 98.9 91.4 84.7 80.4 84.0 87.6

Government Finance

Total Revenue and Grants % GDP 29.6 27.7 31.7 33.0 33.4 35.4 34.9

Total Expenditure and Net Lending % GDP 31.1 39.0 34.0 37.3 42.0 43.6 39.0

Overall Deficit (-) / Surplus (+) % GDP -1.5 -7.2 -1.0 -3.9 -6.6 -8.7 -4.7

External Sector

Exports Volume Growth (Goods) % -0.9 -4.3 -1.1 0.8 -4.1 0.4 9.5

Imports Volume Growth (Goods) % -5.2 -0.6 19.0 1.1 8.5 1.0 3.4

Terms of Trade Growth % 12.7 5.7 1.5 4.7 3.5 -8.3 5.9

Current Account Balance Million US $ 308 -379 -742 -509 -976 -1,582 -1,011

Current Account Balance % GDP 7.9 -3.1 -5.7 -4.0 -7.6 -13.7 -9.7

External Reserves months of imports 1.9 3.4 2.9 2.4 1.7 2.6 2.8

Debt and Financial Flows

Debt Service % exports 16.0 33.2 40.6 30.7 38.7 42.7 43.8

External Debt % GDP 20.4 41.5 35.5 39.1 42.9 50.6 60.3

Net Total Financial Flows Million US $ 127 708 -769 280 -777 394 ...

Net Official Development Assistance Million US $ 152 278 252 261 226 142 ...

Net Foreign Direct Investment  Million US $ 186 1,120 1,133 801 432 1,078 ...

Source :  AfDB Statistics Department;  IMF: World Economic Outlook, April 2017 and International Financial Statistics, April 2017;  

                AfDB Statistics Department: Development Data Portal Database, March 2017. United Nations: OECD, Reporting System Division.

Notes:            …      Data Not Available   ( e ) Estimations   ( p ) Projections Last Update: June 2017

0.0

2.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

10.0

12.0

14.0

2
0

0
4

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
6

2
0

0
7

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

%

Real GDP Growth Rate, 2004-2016

0

2

4

6

8

10

2
0
0

4

2
0
0

5

2
0
0

6

2
0
0

7

2
0
0

8

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

1

2
0
1

2

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

2
0
1

6

Inflation (CPI),           
2004-2016

-20.0

-15.0

-10.0

-5.0

0.0

5.0

10.0

15.0

2
,0

0
4

2
,0

0
5

2
,0

0
6

2
,0

0
7

2
,0

0
8

2
,0

0
9

2
,0

1
0

2
,0

1
1

2
,0

1
2

2
,0

1
3

2
,0

1
4

2
,0

1
5

2
,0

1
6

Current Account Balance as % of  GDP,
2004-2016



 

II 

 

Appendix 2:   The Macroeconomic and Structural Context for the Bank’s Financial Support to Namibia - the Link between the Policy 

Based Operation (PBO) and Agriculture Sector Project (NAMSIP) 
 

The Bank’s financial support to Namibia takes a two pronged approach designed to help advance the country’s development agenda in a comprehensive and coherent manner. The PBO (ZAR6 

billion) constitutes one part to support policy measures for addressing emerging vulnerabilities undermining macroeconomic stability and bold structural reforms for job creation and income equality. 

On the other part, this Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP: ZAR 1.00 billion), builds on and reinforces the PBO results for enhanced sustainable 

development outcomes. 

 
Core Development Challenges Government’s Intervention Budget Support (Policy 

Based) Operation 

NAMSIP 

Emerging 

vulnerabilities 

and challenges 

are 

undermining 

macroeconomic 

stability 

After strong growth performance during the global downturn, 

Namibia is nursing wide fiscal and current account deficits, 

sharp rise in public debt and low international reserves. 

Furthermore, liquidity constraints in the domestic market and 

rollover risks are impacting on the authorities' capacity to raise 

money domestically a traditionally preferred modality for gap 

financing. Recourse to international capital markets, is 

constrained by exchange rate risks and its impact on public 

debt. Fitch and Moody’s in 2016Q4 revised Namibia’s 

sovereign credit rating outlook from stable to negative. 

 

Accelerated fiscal consolidation stance: 

Spending cuts of up to 2.8% of GDP in 2016/17 

budget; Strengthening revenue mobilization and 

tax arrears; Reducing non priority spending, 

containing public sector wage bill.  

Prudent fiscal gap financing: To limit negative 

impact on public debt, GRN is focusing on ZAR 

borrowing from domestic market, JSE and AfDB 

at competitive rates.    

Prior policy actions 

support collection of tax 

arrears and containment of 

wage bill.  

Financing provides fiscal 

space for priority capital 

and social spending.  

Long-term liquidity in 

ZAR mitigates exchange 

rate risk on debt. 

NAMSIP’s construction 

and implementation 

phases will be 

instrumental in catalyzing 

domestic demand and 

creating jobs supporting 

the Government’s 

‘growth friendly’ fiscal 

consolidation stance. 

Weaknesses in 

PFM and 

economic 

governance are 

impacting on the 

quality and 

efficiency of 

public sector 

spending 

Slow pace of PFM reforms is weakening public sector 

efficiency, regulatory oversight and enforcement and 

increased participation of private sector in public investment 

financing. At the same time while State Owned-Enterprises 

(SOEs) play an important role in social service delivery and 

public sector capital investments, the majority exhibit poor 

governance and financial performance and represent a 

significant fiscal burden and risk on public finances through 

annual budget transfers and guaranteed debt estimated at 4.5% 

of GDP. 

Establishing semi-autonomous Revenue 

Agency to strengthen revenue collection; Making 

public procurement more transparent and 

efficient and facilitating participation of SMEs 

Operationalizing Public-Private Partnerships 

(PPP) to strengthen mobilization of private 

financing. Improving SOE governance and 

financial performance to reduce fiscal risks. 

Modernizing PFM law and achieve Auditor 

General’s independence.  

Enhancing public debt strategy.  

Prior policy actions 

support advancements in 

the operationalization of 

the Revenue Agency, PPP, 

new Public Procurement 

law, new PFM and Audit 

law, improvements to SOE 

performance and approval 

of the new public debt 

strategy. 

Use of country 

institutions and systems 

such as public 

procurement, PPP unit 

and related SOEs will 

help strengthen capacity.  



 

III 

 

Core Development Challenges Government’s Intervention Budget Support (Policy 

Based) Operation 

NAMSIP 

Structural 

bottlenecks are 

limiting 

Namibia’s 

capacity to 

achieve broad 

economic 

diversification for 

the creation of 

quality jobs and 

meaningful 

reduction in 

income inequality 

Dependence on mining contributes to growth volatility, slow 

employment creation and income inequality. An analysis of 

the growth pattern, shows that low labor intensive mining 

sector has been a key growth driver. Mining account for the 

largest share of GDP, contributes nearly half of export 

earnings and offers the highest wage rate but employs only 2% 

of the labour force. While agriculture is the biggest employer, 

it contributed 3.8% share to GDP and has low wage rates. The 

low employment elasticity of mining and low wage in 

agriculture partly explains the failure by the economy to 

translate high growth rates into more jobs and greater income 

equality. Economic diversification efforts are hampered by a 

poor business regulatory environment, infrastructure 

bottlenecks, skills mismatch, and lack of financing for Micro, 

Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). 

The HPP has identified SME based 

manufacturing (industrialization) as one of the 

key priorities of the NDP on which to focus 

reforms and resources in order to drive economic 

diversification and long term job creating growth.  

The Growth at Home Strategy provides a clear 

road map for export oriented industrialization. 

It promotes the creation of quality jobs through 

SME value-adding market oriented activities 
in agricultural crops, horticulture and livestock 

and the country’s vast mineral resources including 

diamond, gold and copper.  

The HPP, NDP and Growth at Home Strategy 

underscore the importance of improving 

competitiveness of infrastructure: energy, 

transport, water and sanitation, agriculture, and 

ICT for industrialization. The Green Scheme is 

supporting growth in agricultural productivity. 

The Business and Intellectual Property 

Authority (BIPA) has been established to 

improve the business environment. An MSME 

policy is in place and an Industrialisation 

Agency is being established for oversight. 

Prior policy actions 

support advancements in 

the operationalization of 

the BIPA Authority to 

improve the business 

environment for 

industrialization, MSME 

policy and financing 

strategy and the 

Industrialization Agency. 

NAMSIP will support 

priority investments in 

agriculture infrastructure, 

mechanisation and seed 

systems, including 

capacity building, in 

order to enhance 

agricultural production 

and productivity, SME 

driven agricultural value 

addition and financing to 

promote the creation of 

quality jobs, improve 

household incomes, 

enhance food security and 

nutrition, and reduce 

poverty. 

 



 

 

IV 

 

Appendix 3a:  AfDB’s Active Portfolio in Namibia (July 2017) 

 

No Division Long name 

Status 

of 

Project 

Task 

Manager 

Name 

Finance Project Loan Number Sector Name Window 
Approval 

date 

Entry into 

force 

Project 

completion 

date 

Amount 

(UA) 

Approved 

Amount 

(UA) 

Disbursed 

Disb. 

Ratio 

Age 

(Yrs) 

1 PISD 

Development 

Bank of Namibia 

(DBN) - 
Corporate Loan 

OnGo 
BANDA 
Jonathan 

Richard  

P-NA-HAA-004 2000130014230 Finance  ADB 7/9/2015 7/22/2016 1/1/2028 245,182,170.4 190,697,243.6 77.8 2.0 

2 PISD 

Corporate Loan 

to TRUSTCO 
Finance Limited 

OnGo 
ANSAH 
Dennis 

P-NA-HB0-001 2000130008080 Finance ADB 12/7/2011 12/12/2012 8/1/2019 3,541,520.2 3,541,520.2 100.0 5.6 

              Finance          248,723,690.6 194,238,763.9 78.1 2.0 

3 ECST 

Statistical 
Capacity 

Building Program 

Phase II (SCB-II) 

OnGo 
MUWELE 

Besa 
P-NA-K00-001 5500155004654 Multi-Sector  ADB 7/7/2011 3/2/2012 9/30/2016 490,600.0 490,600.0 100.0 6.0 

4 ECGF 

MIC Grant 

Institutional 

Strengthening for 
PPP 

OnGo 
KOMA 

Baboucarr 
P-NA-KA0-001 5500155009151 Multi-Sector ADB 7/8/2015 11/9/2015 12/31/2019 787,671.0 149,493.8 19.0 2.0 

5 ECGF 

Economic 

Governance and 

Competitiveness 
Support 

Programme 

APVD 
KOMA 

Baboucarr 
P-NA-IAD-004 5500155009951 Multi-Sector ADB 5/10/2017   12/31/2019 163,454,780.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 

              Multi-Sector          164,733,051.2 640,093.8 0.4 2.7 

6 AHHD 

MIC - Support To 

The Namibia 

National Council 
On Higher 

Education 

OnGo 

BANDA 

Kelvin 
Kanswala 

P-NA-IAD-004 5500155009951 Social ADB 2/3/2016 5/10/2016 9/30/2018 396,985.0 184,055.2 46.4 1.4 

              Social          396,985.0 184,055.2 46.4 1.4 

7 PICU 

New Port of 
Walvis Bay 

Container 

Terminal Project 
- Loan 

OnGo 
MALINGA 
Richard 

P-NA-DD0-002 

2000130010780 

Transport 

 ADB 7/22/2013 11/8/2013 12/31/2017 162,474,051.6 100,147,878.8 61.6 3.94 

5500155006651 MIC 7/22/2013 11/8/2013 6/30/2018 1,000,000.0 489,936.2 49.0 3.94 

              Transport          163,474,051.6 100,637,815.0 61.6 3.9 

              Grand Total 577,327,778.4 295,700,727.7 51.2 3.0 



 

V 

 

Appendix 3b:  AfDB’s Active Portfolio in Namibia (July 2017) 

 

Sector Approved Amount (UA) Distribution by sector (%) 

Finance  248,723,690.6 43.1 

Multi-Sector  164,733,051.2 28.5 

Social  396,985.0 0.1 

Transport  163,474,051.6 28.3 

Grand Total 577,327,778.4 100.0 

 

 

 

Namibia: Portfolio Performance by Sector 

Sector  
Number of 

Projects 

Amount 

Approved  

(UA million) 

Disbursement 

Ratio (%) 

Average 

Age 

(Years) 

Finance  2 248.7 78.1 2.0 

Multi-Sector  3 164.7 0.4 2.7 

Social  1 0.4 46.4 1.4 

Transport  1 163.5 61.6 3.9 

Grand Total 7 577.3 51.2 3.0 

 

Namibia: Key Portfolio Performance Indicators 

Selected Indicators July-2017 

Portfolio performance (Flashlight Report) % satisfactory 71.4 

Number of  Projects Flagged Red 0 

Average size of projects (UA million) 82.5 

Average project age (years) 3.0 

No. active operations (#) 7 

Average disbursement rate (%) 51.2 

No. of ageing projects (#) 0 

Slow disbursing projects (#) 1 

Projects at Risk (#) 0 

Commitments at Risk  (UA million) 0 

Commitments at Risk (in %) 0 

Average time from approval to effectiveness (years) 1 

Projects experiencing signature, effectiveness and first 

disbursement delays (#) 
0 

 



 

VI 

 

Appendix 4a:  Distribution of Project Interventions per Project Year (PY) – Details are in PAR Volume II Technical Annex C 

 

No Item Description  
HACCIADEP 

Proposal (Quantity) 

Total 

Qty 

Planned Quantities per Project Year (PY) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 

Crop Machinery and Equipment               

1 
Tractors (80-90 kW) with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide boom sprayer 
150 (15 x 10 regions)          150  30 30 30 30 30 

2 
Tractors (60-70 kW) with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide boom sprayer  
100 (10x10 regions)          100  20 20 20 20 20 

3 
Tractors (40-50 kW) with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide boom sprayer, 
300 (30 x10 regions)          100  20 20 20 20 20 

4 
Walking tractors with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide sprayer  
700  (50x14 regions)          700  140 140 140 140 140 

5 4 row engine propelled Harvesters  80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

6 2 row engine propelled Harvesters  80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

7 Maize Threshing machine  80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

8 Pearl Millet Threshing machine  80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

9 Tricycle with trailers 80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

10 Engine Driven Hammer Mills 80 (8x 10 regions)            80  16 16 16 16 16 

11 
40 kW irrigation pumps with abstraction and delivery pipes, filters, solar or diesel engines 

powered, valves, dripper lines, drip lines, nozzles,  fertigation tanks   
169 (13x13 regions)          169  34 34 34 34 33 

12 Water Tanks  1,400 (100x14 regions)       1,400  280 280 280 280 280 

13 Operational Cost for tractors and maintenance of equipment LS             1  1         

14 Green house sets (100m x100m)  28 (2x14 regions)            28  6 6 6 5 5 

15 Shade netting sets (200mx50m, between 50 to 60%) 112 (8x14 regions)          112  23 23 23 23 20 

16 Knapsack sprayers 2,800  (200x14 regions)       2,800  560 560 560 560 560 

17 Jab Seed Drillers  3,500  (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

18 Vegetable seed drillers 3,500  (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

Livestock Machinery and Equipment               

1 Veterinary Cold chain/drug Kits 3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

2 Castration Burdizzos 3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

3 Dehorning Hot Irons 3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

4 Hoof trimmers  3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

5 Ear tags  92,400 (11550x8 regions)     92,400  18,480 18,480 18,480 18,480 18,480 

6 Automatic drug injection guns 3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

7 De-worming applicators  3,500 (250x14 regions)       3,500  700 700 700 700 700 

8 Grass Mowers  350  (25x14 regions)          350  70 70 70 70 70 

9 Hay rakes  350  (25x14 regions)          350  70 70 70 70 70 

10 Bailers 350  (25x14 regions)          350  70 70 70 70 70 

11 Water troughs  700  (50x14 regions)          700  140 140 140 140 140 

12 Feeding troughs  700  (50x14 regions)          700  140 140 140 140 140 

13 Grass and Hay choppers  350  (25x14 regions)          350  70 70 70 70 70 



 

 

VII 

 

No Item Description  
HACCIADEP 

Proposal (Quantity) 

Total 

Qty 

Planned Quantities per Project Year (PY) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 

14 Trainer of Trainers’ Capacity Building on Agriculture Mechanization (Crop&Livestock) 3,000  (214x14 regions)       3,000  600 600 600 600 600 

Seed Systems Development               

1 
Production of maize certified seed on 60 ha in Zambezi and Kavango East Region (420 t/yr 

x N$10,000/ton x 5yrs = N$ 21,000,000.00) 

60 ha X 7 t /ha  x 5yrs = 

2,100 t 
2100 420 420 420 420 420 

2 
Production of sorghum certified seed on 60 ha in Omusati and Oshikoto Region (180 t/yr x 

N$10,000/ton x 5yrs = N$ 9,000,000.00 

60 ha x 3 t/ha  x 5yrs  = 

900 t 
900 180 180 180 180 180 

3 
Production of pearl millet certified seed on 60 ha in Omusati and Oshikoto Region (120 t/yr 

x N$10,000/ton x 5yrs = N$ 6,000,000.00 

60 ha x 2 t/ha  x 5yrs  = 

600 t 
600 120 120 120 120 120 

4 

Production of cowpea certified seed on 10 ha each in  Zambezi, Kavango East, Kavango 

West, Oshana, Omusati and Oshikoto Region (120 t/yr x N$12,000/ton x 5yrs =  N$ 

7,200,000.00) 

60 ha x 2 t/ha x 5yrs = 

600 t 
600 120 120 120 120 120 

5 

Establishment of three irrigation systems (drip or sprinkler) 200 ha per scheme in Kavango 

West, Omusati and Zambezi (Fixed Sprinklers per hectare is N$ 96,000.00/ha x 200 ha 

=N$19,200,000)  

3 3 3         

6 
Procurement of seed pre-cleaning machines in Kavango West, Kavango East, Omusati and 

Zambezi Region 
8 8 4 4       

7 
Procurement of 4x4 Vehicles  for towing seed pre-cleaners in Kavango West, Kavango 

East, Omusati and Zambezi Region 
4 4 4         

8 Operational costs for vehicles, trucks and capacity building (Lump Sum/LS) 1 1 1         

9 Trucks (10 ton) for seed transportation to Silos 2 2 1 1       

10 
Equipment and Packaging material for seeds for Kavango West, Kavango East, Omusati 

and Zambezi Region 
4 4 2 2       

11 

Construction of a full house processing plant in Ohangwena, Omusati, Kavango West, 

Zambezi and Kavango East. Warehouse for seed processing with weighbridge and plan 

supervision. Construction of a 1,000t capacity @ N$ 6,500/t silo in Kavango west, 

Kavango East, Ohangwena, Omusati and Zambezi 

5 5 5         

12 

5000-E Seed Cleaning SCP80: Specifications: Power about 800-1,000kg/ha with heavy grains; Steel 
construction with high funnel Feed hopper with Ruttelboden; separate vorsteigsichter; uniform fine 

classification by steigsichtergitter; standard equipment; top bottom sieve with each exchangeable, 
Obersiebabreinigung mechanical beater; cleaning sub-screens with electrical adjustable beaters; high 

efficiency. Feed elevator type 161 E: Power about 5t/h (bulk weight about 0.75kg/l; 5 mug/m, 
Gurtgeschw.2.5m/s; overall height 4760mm, length 4000 mm, foot height 400mm, head height 360 mm; 

special design of ALU-belt drums unmixed; elevator with cleaning slides and tensioning device; elevator 
shaft with inspection port; elevator head with Aufsteckgetriebe-motor 1,5 K; Einschutt  funnel  600x600 mm. 

4 4 4         

13 
Tractors (80-90 KWA) with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide boom sprayer 
5 5 2 3       

14 
Tractors (60-70 KWA) with matching trailer, plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, weeding 

cultivator,  fertilizer applicator, and herbicide boom sprayer 
5 5 3 2       

15 Prototype Pearl Millet, Cowpea, Maize Thresher Plant 14 14 7 7       

 



 

 

VIII 

 

Appendix 4b:  Distribution of Project Interventions per Region (Geographical Coverage) – Details are in PAR Volume II Technical Annex C 

 

4b.1. Agricultural Mechanisation (Distribution of Crop Development Machinery and Equipment) 
 

No Region Capital City 
Area 

(km²) 

NHIES 2015/2016 

(No) 
Agricultural Mechanisation (Distribution of Crop Development Machinery and Equipment) 

H
o

u
se

h
o

ld
s 

P
o

p
u

la
ti

o
n

 

T
r
a

c
to

r
s 

(8
0

-9
0

 k
W

) 

T
r
a

c
to

r
s 

(6
0

-7
0

 k
W

) 
 

T
r
a

c
to

r
s 

(4
0

-5
0

 k
W

) 
 

W
a

lk
in

g
 

tr
a

c
to

r
s 

4
R

 

H
a

r
v

e
st

e
r
s 

 

2
R

 

H
a

r
v

e
st

e
r
s 

 

M
a

iz
e
 

T
h

r
e
sh

e
r
 

P
/M

il
le

t 

T
h

r
e
sh

e
r
 

T
r
ic

y
c
le

 

H
a

m
m

e
r
 

M
il

ls
 

Ir
r
ig

a
ti

o
n

 

S
y

st
e
m

s 

W
a

te
r
 

T
a

n
k

s 

G
r
e
e
n

 

H
o

u
se

s 

S
h

a
d

e
 

N
e
tt

in
g

s 

K
n

a
p

sa
c
k

 

S
p

r
a

y
e
r
s 

J
a

b
 S

e
e
d

 

D
r
il

le
r
s 

 

V
e
g

 S
e
e
d

 

D
r
il

le
r
s 

1 Kunene  Opuwo  115,260 22,042 93,375 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

2 Omusati  Outapi 26,551 48,967 241,098 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

3 Oshana  Oshakati  8,647 40,600 178,468 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

4 Ohangwena  Eenhana 10,706 46,205 253,961 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

5 Oshikoto  Omuthiya  38,685 38,875 195,577 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

6 Kavango West  Nkurenkuru 23,166 15,339 94,331 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

7 Kavango East  Rundu 25,576 26,258 159,681 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

8 Zambezi  Katima Mulilo 14,785 23,394 106,361 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

9 Erongo  Swakopmund  63,539 51,907 175,752 
   

√ 
      √ 

√ √ √ √ √ √ 

10 Otjozondjupa  Otjiwarongo  105,460 36,679 151,552 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

11 Omaheke  Gobabis 84,981 18,436 68,037 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

12 Khomas  Windhoek 36,964 104,954 393,830 
   

√ 
      √ 

√ √ √ √ √ √ 

13 Hardap  Mariental 109,781 20,796 83,672 
   

√ 
      √ 

√ √ √ √ √ √ 

14 ǁKaras  Keetmanshoop 161,514 23,197 85,019 
   

√ 
      √ 

√ √ √ √ √ √ 

Total for Namibia 825,615 517,649 2,280,714 
 

 

 

  

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kunene_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opuwo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omusati_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outapi
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshana_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshakati
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohangwena_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eenhana
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshikoto_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omuthiya
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_West
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nkurenkuru
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_East_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rundu
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zambezi_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katima_Mulilo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erongo_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swakopmund
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjozondjupa_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjiwarongo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omaheke_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gobabis
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khomas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windhoek
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardap_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mariental,_Namibia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C7%81Karas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keetmanshoop


 

 

IX 

 

4b.2. Agricultural Mechanisation (Distribution of Livestock Development Machinery and Equipment) 

 

No Region Capital 
Area 

(km²) 

NHIES 2015/2016 

(No) 
Agricultural Mechanisation (Distribution of Livestock Development Machinery and Equipment) 

H
o

u
se

h
o

ld
s 

P
o

p
u

la
ti

o
n

 

V
e
t 

C
o

ld
 

C
h

a
in

 

C
a

st
. 

B
u

r
d

. 

D
e
h

o
. 

Ir
o

n
s 

H
o

o
f 

T
r
im

m
e
r
s 

E
a

r
 T

a
g

s 

A
p

p
l 

A
u

to
 D

r
-

In
j 

G
u

n
s 

D
e
-W

o
r
m

 

A
p

p
l 

G
r
a

ss
 

M
o

w
e
r
s 

H
a

y
 R

a
k

e
s 

B
a

il
e
r
s 

W
a

te
r
 

T
r
o

u
g

h
s 

F
e
e
d

in
g

 

T
r
o

u
g

h
s 

G
r
a

&
H

a
y

 

C
h

o
p

p
e
r
s 

B
r
a

n
d

in
g

 

Ir
o

n
 

T
r
a

in
in

g
 o

f 

T
r
a

in
e
r
s 

1 Kunene  Opuwo  115,260 22,042 93,375 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

2 Omusati  Outapi 26,551 48,967 241,098 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

3 Oshana  Oshakati  8,647 40,600 178,468 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

4 Ohangwena  Eenhana 10,706 46,205 253,961 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

5 Oshikoto  Omuthiya  38,685 38,875 195,577 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

6 Kavango West  Nkurenkuru 23,166 15,339 94,331 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

7 Kavango East  Rundu 25,576 26,258 159,681 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

8 Zambezi  Katima Mulilo 14,785 23,394 106,361 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

9 Erongo  Swakopmund  63,539 51,907 175,752 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

10 Otjozondjupa  Otjiwarongo  105,460 36,679 151,552 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

11 Omaheke  Gobabis 84,981 18,436 68,037 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

12 Khomas  Windhoek 36,964 104,954 393,830 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

13 Hardap  Mariental 109,781 20,796 83,672 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

14 ǁKaras  Keetmanshoop 161,514 23,197 85,019 √ √ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Total for Namibia 825,615 517,649 2,280,714 
 

 

 

  

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kunene_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opuwo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omusati_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outapi
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshana_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshakati
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohangwena_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eenhana
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshikoto_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omuthiya
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_West
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nkurenkuru
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_East_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rundu
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zambezi_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katima_Mulilo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erongo_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swakopmund
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjozondjupa_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjiwarongo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omaheke_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gobabis
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khomas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windhoek
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardap_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mariental,_Namibia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C7%81Karas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keetmanshoop


 

 

X 

 

4b.3. Seed Systems Development (Distribution of Interventions) 

 

No Region Capital 
Area 

(km²) 

NHIES 2015/2016 (No) Seed Systems  Development 

H
o

u
se

h
o

ld
s 

P
o

p
u

la
ti

o
n

 

M
a

iz
e
 F

d
n

 

S
e
e
d

 

S
o

r
g

h
u

m
 

F
d

n
 S

e
e
d

S
 

P
-M

il
le

t 

F
d

n
S

 

C
o

w
 P

e
a

s 

F
d

n
S

 

Ir
r
ig

a
ti

o
n

 

S
y

st
e
m

s 

S
e
e
d

 P
r
e
-

c
le

a
n

in
g
 

M
a

c
h

in
e
s 

4
x

4
 T

o
w

in
g

 

V
e
h

ic
le

s 

T
r
u

c
k

s 
(1

0
 

to
n

-S
e
e
d

) 

E
q

u
ip

 &
 

M
a

te
r
ia

l 

F
u

ll
-h

o
u

se
 

P
r
o

c
e
ss

in
g

 

P
la

n
t 

E
q

u
ip

 f
o

r
 

P
r
o

c
e
ss

in
g

 

P
la

n
t 

T
r
a

c
to

r
s 

(8
0

-9
0

 

K
W

A
) 

T
r
a

c
to

r
s 

(6
0

-7
0

 

K
W

A
) 

P
r
o

to
ty

p
e
 

T
h

r
e
sh

e
r
  

1 Kunene  Opuwo  115,260 22,042 93,375                           √ 

2 Omusati  Outapi 26,551 48,967 241,098   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √  √  √√ 

3 Oshana  Oshakati  8,647 40,600 178,468       √                   √ 

4 Ohangwena  Eenhana 10,706 46,205 253,961                   √ √ √  √  √√ 

5 Oshikoto  Omuthiya  38,685 38,875 195,577   √ √ √                   √ 

6 Kavango West  Nkurenkuru 23,166 15,339 94,331       √ √ √ 
 √ √ √ √ √   √ √ 

7 Kavango East  Rundu 25,576 26,258 159,681 √     √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √  √  √√ 

8 Zambezi  Katima Mulilo 14,785 23,394 106,361 √     √ √ √ 
 √ √ √ √ √  √  √√ 

9 Erongo  Swakopmund  63,539 51,907 175,752                           
 

10 Otjozondjupa  Otjiwarongo  105,460 36,679 151,552                           √ 

11 Omaheke  Gobabis 84,981 18,436 68,037                           √ 

12 Khomas  Windhoek 36,964 104,954 393,830                           
 

13 Hardap  Mariental 109,781 20,796 83,672                           
 

14 ǁKaras  Keetmanshoop 161,514 23,197 85,019                           
 

Total for Namibia 825,615 517,649 2,280,714   

 

 

 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kunene_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opuwo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omusati_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outapi
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshana_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshakati
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohangwena_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eenhana
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oshikoto_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omuthiya
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_West
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nkurenkuru
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kavango_East_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rundu
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zambezi_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katima_Mulilo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erongo_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swakopmund
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjozondjupa_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otjiwarongo
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omaheke_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gobabis
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khomas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windhoek
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardap_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mariental,_Namibia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C7%81Karas_Region
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keetmanshoop


 

XI 

 

Appendix 5:  Justification to Reduce Government’s Level of Contribution 

 

1. The Government’s total contribution of ZAR 0.36 billion represents about 25.5% of the total 
NAMSIP cost which is less than the recommended 50% minimum counterpart contribution as per the 

Bank’s 2008 “Policy on Expenditure Eligible for Bank Group Financing”. The policy further 

stipulates that the ADB may finance more than 50% of the total project costs on a case-by-case basis 

and up to a limit that does not exceed 100%. The justifications for the reduced Government 

contribution is based on (i) Government’s budget situation and debt level, (ii) Country’s Financing 

Allocation to the Agriculture Sector, and (iii) Government’s commitment to implement its 

development programme, as indicated below: 

 

2. The project’s financing information indicates that the level of financing to be provided by GRN 
amounts to UA 19.81.22 million, representing about 25% of the total project cost. This amount is less 

than the recommended 50% minimum counterpart contribution specified in the Bank’s 2008 Policy 

on Expenditure Eligible for Bank Group Financing. The policy further stipulates that the ADB may 

finance more than 50% of the total project costs on a case-by-case basis and up to a limit that does not 

exceed 100%.  

 

3. Following a request received from GRN and discussions with the authorities, the 
recommendation is for the Bank to finance up to 70.5% of the project cost, with the other co-financiers 

providing the remainder (GRN 25.5% and the Beneficiaries 4%). The overarching basis for this 

recommendation is informed on the status of Namibia’s current deteriorated fiscal and debt position 

due to a recent slump in economic activity and a decline in fiscal revenues. The GRN is currently 

implementing a strong fiscal turnaround program, curbing non-productive spending, slowing some 

capital spending while aiming to preserve its capacity to finance growth-enhancing capital investments 

without further overburden public debt. The justification for the reduced Government contribution is 

further rationalised on the following 3 considerations:  
 

 A. Government's budget situation and debt level: Namibia’s small and open commodity-driven 
economy is revealing its vulnerabilities with resulting challenges to its macroeconomic stability. 

Economic growth stalled at 0.2% real GDP growth in 2016, down from 5.3% in 2015, as mega 

construction projects ended, weak commodity prices and drought persisted and the subdued 

economic activity in South Africa and Angola sharply reduced Namibia’s Southern African 

Customs Union (SACU) revenue inflows and services sector activity, respectively. 

 

Table 1: Budget Outturn 
 2016/17 2017/18 (Estimates) 

Total Revenues and Grants (% of GDP) 31.0 32.2 

SACU revenues (% of total revenues) 27.7 34.5 

Total Expenditure (% of GDP) 38.0 38.0 

Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -6.9 -5.6 
Source: Ministry of Finance 

 

 The slump in economic growth contrasted with the expansionary fiscal policy environment, 
generating a fiscal deficit and widening public sector debt. In 3 years (2012/13 to 2015/16) 

Namibia evolved from a nearly zero fiscal deficit of 0.1% to 8.3% share of GDP, as revenue 

inflows failed to keep pace with increasing public spending. Total expenditure increased from 

33.8% of GDP to 43.3%, driven by rapid growth in capital spending, subsidies and transfers and 

public sector wages and salaries. At the same time total revenues grew only marginally from 33.7% 



 

 

XII 

 

of GDP in 2012/13 to 35.5% in at the end of 2015/16 weighed down by a sharp reduction in the 

SACU and domestic tax receipts6. 

 

 
 

 The fiscal deficit financing nearly doubled public debt ratio to GDP. The Government tapped into 
the domestic capital market and used proceeds from the US$750 million Eurobond issued in 2015 

and the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) bonds issued in 2015 and 2016 to finance the deficit. 

The capital market issuances, combined with the depreciation of the currency sharply increased 

public debt from 24% of GDP in 2012/13 to 44.4% at the end of 2016/17 breaching the 

government’s own fiscal limit of 40% of GDP. Current Public and Public Guarantee Debt stands 

at 42.10% of GDP. Nonetheless, the latest Debt Sustainability Analysis carried out by the IMF in 

2016 show that Namibia’s public debt sustainability and outlook remain below the distress 

threshold of 70% of GDP. 

 

Table 2: Public Debt 
 2016/17 2017/18 (Estimates) 

Domestic Debt (% of GDP) 25.37 26.11 

External/Foreign Debt (% of GDP) 16.00 16.04 

Total Debt (% of GDP) 41.40 42.10 
Source: Ministry of Finance and Bank of Namibia 

 

 The GRN is addressing these imbalances through a vigorous fiscal consolidation and public 
financial management reforms to improve the efficiency of spending, strengthening domestic 

resource mobilization, and putting public debt on a downward trajectory. The 2017/18 budget 

Measures include cutting non-priority spending of up to 2.8% of GDP while realigning spending 

plans with revenue streams and introducing some levies and taxes. As a result the Government has 

delayed or cancelled some development projects. The bold measures aim at reining in current non-

productive spending, slowing some capital spending while preserving growth-enhancing capital 

investments and strengthening domestic revenue mobilisation. The MTEF for 2017/18 targets a 

zero net increase in the size of the civil service, with wage increase capped to a maximum of the 

annual inflation rate. These measures which also aim at protecting social spending, are expected 

to put the fiscal deficit on a declining path, to be in compliance with the fiscal limit of 5% of GDP 

by 2018/19 and targeting a fiscal deficit of 1% in 2019/2020.  

 

 B. Country’s Financing Allocation to the Agriculture Sector: Figure 1 provides the 
Government budget allocation to the agriculture sector. In FY 2016/17, the Government has 

allocated 4.11% of the total budget expenditures, a reduction of just 0.69% despite the strong fiscal 

adjustment registering a reduction of 2.4% of GDP of the fiscal deficit, thereby signifying the 

importance the Government attaches to the sector. The reduction was made in the development 

component, while keeping operational expenditure mostly intact. Going forward the Government 

expects to see operational costs increase. 

 

                                                 
6 As a share of total government revenues, SACU receipts represent about 35% in Namibia. In 2015/16 they slowed down to 8.6 % of GDP from 11.6% 

in 2013/14 while tax revenues moderated to 32.7% of GDP from 33.1%. During the period subsidies transfers increased to 11.9% of GDP in 2015/16 
from 10.7% of GDP in 2014/15 while wages and salaries increased from 15.3% of GDP to 16%. 

0
10

0
50

2012/2013 2013/2014 2014/2015 2015/2016 2016/2017

Figure 1 - Fiscal Balance and Public Debt (%GDP)

Public Debt Fiscal Balance



 

 

XIII 

 

 
 

 C. Government’s commitment to implement its development programme: The Fifth National 
Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/18-2021/22) was designed to help the country achieve four key 

goals: (i) Achieve Inclusive, Sustainable and Equitable Economic Growth; (ii) Build Capable and 

Healthy Human Resources; (iii) Ensure Sustainable Environment and Enhance Resilience; and (iv) 

Promote Good Governance through Effective Institutions. According to NDP5, lack of 

industrialization and infrastructure has contributed to Namibia’s economic imbalance. While 

drought and declines in prices on the global market are partly responsible for agriculture’s 

relatively small contribution to Namibia’s GDP, lack of modernisation in farming techniques and 

lack of infrastructure in business development have made the agriculture sector less efficient, less 

robust and less profitable. By modernizing and industrializing the major sectors of agriculture, 

fisheries, manufacturing, mining, tourism and by providing training opportunities so that workers 

can upgrade their skills, Namibia will create decent jobs for its citizens in a diverse range of 

industries. This is indeed the formula for the nation’s long-term economic success. NDP5 has four 

integrated pillars of sustainable development: (i) Economic Progression, (ii) Social 

Transformation, (iii) Environmental Sustainability, and (iv) Good Governance, which are aligned 

with Namibia’s commitment to eradicate poverty and inequality as outlined in Vision 2030, the 

Harambee Prosperity Plan (2016), and SWAPO Party Manifesto (2014). Additionally, the pillars 

support the Agenda 2030, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), The Paris Agreement (CoP21), 

African Union (AU) Agenda 2063, and SADC Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan 

(RISDP). NDP5 has identified 5 game changers that will move Namibia from a reactive, input-

based economy towards a proactive, high performing economy. The 5 game changers are: (i) 

Increase investment in infrastructure development; (ii) Increase productivity in agriculture, 

especially for smallholder farmers; (iii) Invest in quality technical skills development; (iv) Improve 

value addition in natural resources; and (v) Achieve industrial development through Local 

Procurement. The NDP5 has a strong focus on revamping the Agriculture sector. Its underlying 

goal is to address the country’s dual economy, a legacy of the colonial era when a highly productive 

capital-intensive mining sector prospered, while the agro-based subsistence sector, which employs 

the majority of the population, remained less productive.  

 

4. In view of the above 3 considerations, there is a case for the Bank to reduce the Government’s 
counterpart funding of this critical project to 25.5%. It is expected that this amount will ensure requisite 

ownership by the authorities and expedite the project’s implementation process. 

4.79% 4.11% 4.04%

2.0%

4.0%

6.0%

0

5,000

2015/16 2016/17 2017/18

Figure 2 - Expenditure in Agriculture (billions of NAD)

Operational Development Share in total Expenditure (left axis)



 

 

XIV 

 

Appendix 6:  Map of Namibia 

 

 
 

 



 

XV 

 

Appendix 7:  Estimated Number of Jobs to be created by NAMSIP 

 

A. Component 1, Sub-component 1 Agricultural Mechanisation  

 

1. Crop production interventions - through procurement of 550 tractors and 700 walking 
tractors: 

 The area under crop production is expected to increase from 15,000 ha to 64,961 ha. 

 A total of 550 jobs to be created through procurement tractors. Currently the MAWF 
support 127 tractors drivers with the current tractor fleet of 127 tractors. 

 A total of 700 jobs to be created through procurement of walking tractors 

 A total of 10,000 jobs to be created through weeding services considering the anticipated 
increase in ha. Currently the MAWF recruits 2,400 men and women participating in 

weeding services-weeding a total of 4,500 ha.  

 This will translate into 11,250 jobs. 
 

2. Livestock production interventions - through the procurement and distribution of livestock 
support services such as Veterinary Cold chain/drug Kits, Castration Burdizzos, Dehorning 

Hot Irons, Hoof trimmers, Ear tags, Automatic drug injection guns, De-worming 

applicators, Grass Mowers, Hay rakes, Bailers, Water troughs, Feeding troughs, Grass and 

Hay choppers the number of livestock will increase thereby creating a number of job 

opportunities:  

 At the moment a livestock farming household requires on average 4 farm workers to handle 
both cattle and small-stock.  

 An increase in the number of livestock will assume an increase in the number of farm 
workers per farming household. This scheme will benefit 10,000 livestock farming 

households which will mean that a total of 40,000 farm workers will be recruited.  

 

3. Total number of jobs for crop and livestock interventions is 51,250.  
 

B. Component 1, Sub-component 2 Certified Seed Systems Improvement 

 

4. Job creation for seed mechanisation  
 

Activity Employment Total Area 

(ha) 

Total No of Jobs  per 

year 

Total # of Jobs 

for 5 years 

Weeding 25/ha/day 240 x 25 6,000 30,000 

Bird Scaring 2/ha/day 240 x 2 480 2,400 

Harvesting 20 people/ha/day 240 x 20 4,800 24,000 

Threshing 10 people/40t 240 x 10/40 60 300 

Processing & Packaging 12 people/5t 240 x12/5 576 2,880 

Loading/off loading 12 people/35t 240 x 12/35 82 410 

Total Number of Jobs (sub-component 1.2) 59,990 

 

5. Project total (Component 1): 51,250 + 59,990 = 111,240 jobs. 
 



 

XVI 

 

Appendix 8:  Financial and Economic Performance (Analyses) 
 

The financial and economic analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as well as the entire 

project level. At the farm level, the profitability of the farming operations to the farmers involved has been 

assessed while at project level comparisons of the overall benefits and total costs have been compared to 

determine the financial and economic viability of the project. The analysis has been carried out on “with 

project” and “without project” basis. Details are in PAR Volume II Technical Annex B.7. 

 

A.            Financial Analysis 

 

Farm Level: The farm analysis has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual 

beneficiaries, and aggregated for the project as a whole on with and without project basis. Gross margin 

analyses have been carried out for the major crops to be grown under the agricultural mechanization 

component namely maize, pearl millet, sorghum and wheat covering a total of 130,840 ha and also for seed 

multiplication on 680 ha. Pearl millet takes up the largest share of land for production which constitutes 

57% of the total land under cultivation. The analysis assumed full utilization of the area targeted for 

production from year 3 of the project implementation period. 

 

Project Level: The analysis shows that annual net income (gross margin) per farming household in the 

project increased from (under crop production) increases from ZAR 19,742 to ZAR 74,179 while for income 

from livestock production/household increased from ZAR 5,221 to ZAR 16,012. The gross margin analyses 

took into consideration the farm gate prices of the produce and the total cost of production, including an 

imputed wage of ZAR 300 per hectare for family farm labour per farming season. The financial internal 

rate of return (FIRR) to the project is calculated at 26.00%, and the net present value (NPV) at 12% 

opportunity cost of capital is estimated at ZAR 1.13 billion. 

 

Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Analysis: 

a. Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR): The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow 
gave a FIRR of  26.00% 

b. Financial Net Present Value (NPV): The NPV for the project is also estimated at ZAR 1.13 
billion, at a discount rate of 12%.  

 

B.            Economic Analysis 

 

The Agriculture Sector farm inputs market is subsidized by Government and therefore financial prices for 

the inputs including farm machinery have been adjusted by conversion factors of 1.3 that took into account 

the level of subsidies and taxes. The economic prices for farm produce have been derived using a standard 

conversion factor of 0.82.  Results: The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) to the project is calculated 

at 23.74% and the net present value (NPV) at 12% opportunity cost of capital is estimated at ZAR 1.03 

billion.  

 

C. Sensitivity Analysis 

 

The sensitivity analysis has been carried out under two (2) assumptions and the results are as follows: 
 

 FIRR (%) FNPV at 12% cost of capital (ZAR billion) 

Base Figures 26 1.13 

Assumption 1: 10% increase in project costs 17 0.51 

Assumption 2: 10% fall in revenues 13 0.065 
 

 

 EIRR (%) ENPV at 12% cost of capital (ZAR billion) 

Base Figures 23.74 1.03 

Assumption 1: 5% increase in project costs 14.45 0.64 

Assumption 2: 5% fall in revenues 10.47 0.45 
 

 



 

XVII 

 

Appendix 9:  Environmental Issues 

 

1. According to the nature of activities proposed and the Bank’s Environmental and Social 
Assessment Procedures (ESAP), the NAMSIP was classified as Category II and validated by the 

Bank on 3rd August 2017. In this case, the potential environmental impacts from the planned 

activities will be localized, minimal, short term, manageable, reversible and can be mitigated. 

There will be no resettlement issues. The planned provision of farm machinery and equipment to 

small-scale producers and agro-processors as well as the development and supply of new and 

improved seeds are slated to engender significant positive impacts on food production, climate 

resilience, economic development, livelihoods and quality of life. Nevertheless, the development, 

expansion and operation of crop and livestock operations can result in direct and indirect 

environmental and social impacts, including disturbances and loss of fauna and flora, loss or 

degradation of terrestrial habitats and disruption or contamination of water courses and drainage 

systems. These impacts are expected to be site-specific and can be minimized by applying 

appropriate management and mitigation measures. The Project will pay particular attention to 

handling and use of agricultural chemicals. The potential positive impacts might include 

improvement of (i) marginally productive semi-arid land into full production, and (ii) livelihoods 

of rural direct beneficiaries. The negative environmental impacts include disturbance of soil from 

digging of pits and foundations, debushing and vegetation clearing, emission of dust and 

generation of noise which will be experienced during the construction phase and will be localized, 

minimal, short term and can be mitigated. During the operation phase, the negative impacts will 

include solid, liquid, chemical and biological wastes, which will be generated from the normal 

operations of the facilities and can be managed by incorporating the requisite waste and effluent 

handling units. The negative impacts will be localized and can be minimised by using proper 

mitigation measures, as indicated in ESMP. 

 

2. The Project triggered the following tabulated Bank environmental and social policies: 
 

No. AfDB Key Environmental Issues Triggered Yes No 

1. Reversing Land Degradation and Desertification [X] [...] 

2. Protecting the Coastal Zone [...] [X] 

3. Protecting Global Public Goods [X] [..] 

4. Improving Public Health [X] [..] 

5. Enhancing Disaster Management Capabilities [X] [..] 

6. Promoting Sustainable Industry, Mining and Energy Resources [X] [..] 

7. Improving Urban Environmental Management [..] [X] 

8. Environmental Governance [X] [..] 

9. Institution and Capacity Building [X] [..] 

10. Increasing Awareness [X] [..] 

11. Stakeholder Participation [X] [..] 

 

The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Monitoring Plan have been prepared 

by MAWF Team and cleared by the Bank for disclosure. The ESMP detailed report also provides 

the necessary mitigation measures for negative impact as tabulated in PAR Volume II Technical 

Annex B.8. The ESMP has been posted on the Bank’s website, on 25th October 2017, and can be 

accessed using the following link: 

Namibia - Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) 

- ESMP Summary 

 

 

  

https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Environmental-and-Social-Assessments/Namibia_-_Namibia_Agricultural_Mechanisation_and_Seed_Improvement_Project__NAMSIP__-_ESMP_Summary.pdf
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Environmental-and-Social-Assessments/Namibia_-_Namibia_Agricultural_Mechanisation_and_Seed_Improvement_Project__NAMSIP__-_ESMP_Summary.pdf



















































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME  : GOVERNANCE AND AGRIBUSINESS PROMOTION 
     SUPPORT PROGRAMME - (PAGPA) 

 
COUNTRY    : REPUBLIC OF TOGO  

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ECGF/RDGS/PGCL 

 

November 2017 

 

 
Translated Document 

 

P
u

b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

 
 

 
P

u
b

li
c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

 

 



  

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS   ……………………………………………………………………..… i 

ACCRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………………   ii 

GRANT INFORMATION……………………………………………………………………………   iii 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................................... iv 

EXPECTED RESULTS - BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK ........................................................... vi 

I. INTRODUCTION - PROPOSAL ......................................................................................... 1 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT   ......................................................................................................... 2 

2.1. Political Situation and Governance Context ............................................. ….………..2 

2.2.     Recent Economic Developments, Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis .................... 3 

2.3. Competitiveness of the Economy ................................................................................. 4 

2.4. Public Finance Management ........................................................................................ 4 

2.5. Inclusive Growth, Poverty and Social Context ........................................................... 6 

III. GOVERNMENT’S  DEVELOPMENT AGENDA……………………………………. 6 

3.1. Government’s Development Strategy and Medium-Term Reform Priorities ............. 6 

3.2  Obstacles to Implementing the National/Sector Development  Agenda: .................... 6 

3.3  Consultation and Participation Process : ..................................................................... 7 

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY……………………………7 

4.1. Linkages with  the Bank’s Strategy ............................................................................. 7 

4.2. Compliance with Eligibility Criteria ........................................................................... 8 

4.3. Collaboration and Coordination with Other Partners .................................................. 8 

4.4. Linkages with Other Bank Operations ........................................................................ 8 

V. THE ENVISAGED PROGRAMME…………………………………………………….10 

5.1. Programme Goal and Objective ................................................................................. 10 

5.2. Component A : Support for Improved Private Investment Environment and 

Agribusiness Promotion ............................................................................................. 10 

5.3. Policy Dialogue  ......................................................................................................... 16 

5.4. Grant Conditions ........................................................................................................ 16 

5.5. Application of Good Practice Principles on Conditionality ....................................... 17 

5.6. Financing Requirements and Terms .......................................................................... 17 

5.7. Application of  Bank Group Policy on Non-Concessional Loans Accumulation ....... 17 

VI. IMPLEMENTATION…………………………………………………………………… .17 

6.1. Programme Beneficiaries ........................................................................................... 17 

6.2. Impact on Gender, the Poor and Vulnerable Groups .................................................. 18 

6.3.    Impact on the Environment and Climate Change…………………………………..18 

6.4. Macroeconomic Impact: ............................................................................................. 19 

6.5. Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation .............................................................. 19 

6.6. Financial Management and Disbursement .................................................................. 19 

VII. LEGAL FRAMEWORK………………………………………………………………… 20 

7.1.  . Legal Documents……………………………………………………………………………20 

7.2. Conditions related to Bank Intervention……………………………………… ……… ….20 

7.3. Compliance with Bank Group Policies…………………………………………………….20 

VIII.  RISK MANAGEMENT……………………………………………………………… …  20 

IX. RECOMMENDATION…………………………………………………………………    20 

 



 

 

i 

LIST OF TABLES 

 
Table 1 : Key  Macro-economic Indicators   

Table 2 : PAGPA Preliminary Measures  

Table 3 : Financing Requirements 

Table 4 : Risks and Mitigation Measures  

 

LIST  OF ANNEXES 

 

Annex 1 : Government’s Development Policy Letter  

Annex 2 : PAGPA Reforms Matrix  

Annex 3 

Annex 4 

: PAGPA Matrix Reflecting Togo’s Fragility Factors  

: Note on Togo - IMF Relations  

  

 



i  

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

 

(July 2017) 

 
Currency Unit = UA 

UA 1  

UA 1  

= 

= 

SDR 1.00  

USD 1,39139   

UA 1  = EUR 1,22  

UA 1  = CFAF 799,76   

 

FISCAL YEAR 
 

1 January- 31 December  

 

 

  



ii  

ACCRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

ADF African Development Fund  

AFD  French Development Agency  

AfDB African Development Bank 

CEMAC Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa 

CFA Communauté Financière d’Afrique  

CRPP Climate Resilience Pilot Programme 

CSP  Country Strategy Paper 

CWIQ Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire Survey 

DGE Directorate-General for Economy 

DGTCP Directorate General of Treasury and Public Accounting 

ECF Extended Credit Facility 

EU European Union 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GII Gender Inequality Index 

HDI Human Development Index 

HIPC Heavily Indebted Poor Country 

IMF International Monetary Fund 

INS National Institute of Statistics 

ITIE Initiative for Transparency in Extractive Industries 

MTEF  Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 

OTR Togolese Revenue Authority 

PAGFI Fiscal Governance Support Project 

PAGPA Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme 

PANA National Adaptation Action Programme 

PARCI Capacity Building Support Project 

PARG Governance Reform Support Programme 

PA-RGFP Priority Action Plan for Public Finance Management Reforms 

PAMOCI Resource Mobilization and institutional capacity building support project 

PEFA Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 

PEMFAR Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review 

PIMA Public Investment Management Assessment 

RBCSP Results-Based Country Strategy Paper 

SCAPE Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 

SIGFIP Integrated Public Finance Management System 

SIGMAP Government Procurement Integrated Management System 

SP-PRPF Permanent Secretariat for Reform Policy and Financial Programmes Monitoring 

UA  Unit of Account 

UNDP United Nations Development Programme 

WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union 

WB World Bank 

 

  



iii  

PROGRAMME INFORMATION 

 

INSTRUMENT :    General Budget Support 

PBO MODEL DESIGN:                                    Programme Support Operation 

 

GRANT INFORMATION 

Client Information  

BORROWER:       Togolese Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Permanent Secretariat for Reform Policy and 

Programmes Monitoring 

FINANCING PLAN  

 

Source Amount  Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

9.53 Million 

 

GRANT 

FMI 

BM 

UE 

59,67 Million DTS 

50 Million USD                

19 Millions Euros 

 

LOAN 

GRANT 

GRANT 

 

  
Key ADF Financing Information 

 

 

GRANT Currency  

 

UA 

Commitment Fee 0.0%  

Other fees (services) 0.00%  

Maturity  

 

 

Implementation Schedule – Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval 

 

June  2017 

Appraisal July  2017 

PAGPA Programme Approval  29 November 2017  

Effectiveness November  2017 

Last Disbursement  June  2018 

Completion December 2018 

 



iv  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Programme 

overview  

 

Country: TOGO. 

Programme Name: Governance and Agribusiness Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Overall Implementation Schedule: November 2017 – December 2018 

Operational Instrument: General Budget Support  

Programme Cost: UA 9.53 million disbursed in a single tranche in 2017 

Sector: Economic Governance and Agro-industry  

Programme 

Outcomes 
The main expected outcomes under Component A are: (i) a shorter ownership 

transfer timeframe from 283 days in 2016 to 60 days (WAEMU zone recorded 

average); (ii) a reduced agricultural trade deficit from CFAF 64 billion to 40 

billion, (iii) Togo's enhanced resilience to spatial and gender inequality-related 

fragility factors through the promotion of regional development around Agropoles 

and (iv) land tenure security on developed sites. Regarding Component B: (i) 

increased tax pressure from 17.9% in 2016 to 19.1% in 2018; (ii) optimized 

investment management, with the PI-11 rating moving from D to at least C in 2018; 

(iii) improved local tax governance through effective skills transfer and enhanced 

technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

Alignment with  

Bank  

Priorities 

 

PAGPA is aligned with the national development programme, SCAPE 2013-2017, 

notably Pillar (I) development of sectors with strong growth potential and Pillar 

(IV) strengthening governance. It is also aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's 

CSP (2016-2020), namely: (i) Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness 

competitiveness poles and (ii) Support for financial, sector and local governance 

and the Bank's 2013-2022 Ten-year Strategy as well as the Bank's Governance 

Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018), more specifically, it contributes to the 

achievement of three of the Bank's five key strategic priorities (i) "Feed Africa," 

(ii) "Industrialize Africa" through agro-industry promotion measures, and (iii) 

"Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" by supporting reforms seeking 

improved budget management and public action effectiveness through enhanced 

economic and financial governance. 

 

Needs  

Assessment and  

Programme  

Rationale 

 

The encouraging socio-economic performance notwithstanding, Togo remains in 

fragile situation due mainly to the wide spatial disparities in wealth generation and 

distribution. Economic activity remains mainly concentrated in the maritime 

region which generates on average 97% of the tax revenues collected by the OTR, 

against merely 2% for the other regions representing 89% of the territory and 57% 

of the population. To boost its resilience and accelerate its exit from fragility, Togo 

is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector, notably 

through the establishment of agriculture hubs (Agropoles) for economic as well as 

social inclusion reasons. The effective implementation of this strategy requires 

mobilizing substantial investments, both public and private. The total cost estimate 

for the 2016-2020 phase is CFAF 3,791 billion, with an average financing ratio of 

46% from the State budget and 56% from the private sector. PAGPA, by 

concomitantly supporting substantial increase in internal resources, improving the 

private investment climate and strengthening agricultural sector governance, will 

provide Togo with the required financial and technical capabilities to implement 

its agricultural policy, a vehicle for sustainable and inclusive growth. Additionally, 

budget support resources will cover some of the financing requirements of the 

2017 budget, amounting to CFAF 400.6 billion. 

Harmonization Efforts are still required to coordinate the interventions of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs), in particular those engaging in budget support. The budget support 

consultation framework (COAB) set up since 2010, remains inoperative. The TFPs 

are yet to develop a joint matrix of their interventions, for which agreement with 

the government is awaited regarding its orientation, but they are working to 



v  

strengthen the complementarity of their actions in terms of dialogue and reforms 

monitoring. 
 

Bank’s Value  

Added 

 

The Bank has acquired proven expertise in strengthening economic and financial 

governance in Africa, notably in the sub-region (WAEMU). More specifically, the 

Bank has a comparative advantage in Togo for dialogue on reforms, having been 

the first development partner to re-engage after more than 15 years of dialogue 

with the international community; and on account of the results obtained in highly 

strategic areas such as revenue mobilization. Indeed, the Bank lent its full support 

to Togo in its vast and ambitious tax transition project that led to the establishment 

of OTR. PAGPA supports complementary measures to complete reforms seeking 

to optimize this structure, and diversify the economy by creating an enabling 

environment for the establishment of Agropoles. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment  

Increased domestic resources mobilization and greater efficiency in public finance 

management will help improve the living conditions of the people in general and 

women in particular. PAGPA measures will lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the economy, particularly at the local and regional level. The 

numerous opportunities that will open up around major Agropole projects will 

benefit women. In particular, that of the Kara region, the first pilot Agropole to be 

established with the support of this programme should, by 2020, help create 2,500 

jobs, 30% for women and 65% for the youth.  

 

Dialogue on 

Policies and  

Associated 

Technical 

Assistance  

 

 

PAGPA will help reinforce dialogue with the Government on public policies to 

support Togo’s economic transformation. The dialogue will focus on conditions 

for the effective implementation of the agricultural policy, with special focus on 

issues related to broadening the tax base to maximize domestic resources 

mobilization, thus strengthening macro-stability and creating a private investment-

friendly environment. Through ongoing capacity-building projects, the Resource 

Mobilization and institutional capacity building support project (PAMOCI) and 

the Fiscal Governance Support Project (PAGFI), Togo will continue to benefit 

from the assistance of national and international experts in revenue mobilization. 

The implementation of the agribusiness reforms will be supported by the 

investment project being prepared by the department in charge of agriculture in the 

Bank, which is aimed at establishing the Kara Agropole. The submission of this 

project to the Bank's Board of Directors is scheduled for December 2017. 



 

vi 

EXPECTED RESULTS - BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 

Country and Project Name: TOGO: Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Project Goal: Contribute towards creating conditions for strong and inclusive growth supported by agribusiness.  
 

RESULTS CHAIN   PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES  

Indicator (including CSIs)  
 

Baseline Situation Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 Growth is 

sustained and 

more inclusive 

 

Economic Growth Rate   

5,1% in 2016 

 

5.6% in 2020 

INS  

HDI adjusted to inequalities 0.332 in 2015  0.400 in 2020 UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 :  

The 

agricultural 

sector’s added 

value in the 

economy is 

increased 

1.1Number of taxes per year 

 
49 in 2016 At most 39 in 2018. DB-WB 

Report 

Risk 1: Political 

instability: strong 

tensions related to the 

claims  

concerning the 

limitation of the 

number of presidential 

mandates 

 

Mitigation 

measures1: The 

Government is 

committed to revising 

the constitution in 

order to limit the 

number of presidential 

terms to two. The 

dialogue between the 

political actors 

continues 

 

Risk 2: 

Macroeconomic 

instability linked to 

the country's 

economic 

vulnerability to 

exogenous shocks 

Mitigation measures 

2: The Government is 

committed to 

strengthening the 

country's resilience by 

implementing a 

genuine policy of 

structural 

transformation of the 

economy and 

pursuing reforms 

agreed with the IMF 

and other partners. 

Risk 3: Fiduciary 

Risks due to 

weaknesses in the 

public finance 

management system 

Mitigation measures 

3: The effective 

implementation of the 

PA- GFP and the 

measures provided for 

in the PAGPA 1 will 

contribute towards 

consolidating the 

1.2  

Property transfer timeframes 
283 2016 90 days in 2018 

2.3 

 Agricultural trade balance deficit 
-44% in 2015 -38% in 2018 INS/ MEF/ 

Agriculture 

Outcome 2:  

Internal 

resources 

mobilization 

and public 

investment 

management 

are  improved 

1.1 Improved Tax burden  17.9%  en 2016 18.3% in 2017 and 19,1% in 

2018 

OTR SP-PRPF 

MEF 

1.2 Improved investment 

management 
PI.11 D in 2016 PI.11= C in 2018 PEFA/ 

Auto 

A) Support for improved private investment environment and agribusiness promotion 
 

A.1) 

Improving the 

private 

investment 

environment 

a.1.1) Adoption of land code by 

Council of Ministers  

 

Draft Code prepared; 

Transfer timeframe 283 

days in 2016 

Land code and rural registry 

adopted in Ministerial 

Council in 2017 

DADC 

a.1.2) Review and adoption of the 

investment code 

2012 Code in force very 

unfavourable to the 

cross-cutting objective 

of rationalization of 

exemptions, promotion 

of agribusiness and job 

creation 

The Investment and Free 

Zones Promotion Agency 

Operational in 2018 

 

Min industry/ 

Commerce/ 

Agriculture 

a.1.3) Adoption of the revised 

simplified tax code  

Preliminary draft code 

in the validation process 

Simplified tax code 

validated in 2018 

 

a.1.4) Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of a National Strategy 

for Private Sector Development 

A draft Strategy already 

exists  

Private Sector Development 

Strategy adopted in 2018 

Ministry of 

Commerce and 

Private Sector 

MEF/SP-PRFP a.1.5) Creation of the Business 

Climate Unit 

No unit for the actions 

coordination 

Decree adopted by the 

Council of Ministers in 

2017 

A.2) 

Strengthening  

of the legal and 

institutional 

framework for  

agribusiness 

development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a.2.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy 

for Agropoles Development  

 

Preliminary draft 

strategy 

National Agropoles 

development strategy 

adopted in 20170 

Min industry/ 

Agriculture 

a.2.2) Rural roads  built in the area 

of the Kara agropole  

0 Km Km of rural roads built in 

2017 and 35 km in 2018 in 

the area of Kara Agropole 

a.2.3 Agricultural lands 

developed in the area of the Kara 

agropole 

0 Ha 

 
 500 ha in 2017 and 300 ha 

in 2018 of agricultural land 

developed in  the area of 

Kara Agropole, of which at 

least 30% for women's 

and/or mostly women's 

organizations 
a.2.4 Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

No industrial policy or 

agro-industry strategy  

The national 

industrialization policy and 



vii  

Industrialization Policy and  

National Agro-Industry Strategy 

the national agro-industry 

strategy are adopted in 2018 

gains and accelerating 

improved integrity of 

the public finance 

management system. 

Risk 4: 

 Weak human 

capacity to implement 

the reforms identified 

in general, and those 

related to Agropoles 

development, in 

particular. Mitigation 

measures 4: High-

level technical 

assistance to the 

Government on the 

design and 

deployment of 

Agropoles will be 

provided and financed 

by the Bank's Project 

Preparation Fund.  

 

Risk 5: Weakness of 

arrangements for co-

ordination of budget 

support 

 

 

Mitigation measures 

5 
the authorities are 

committed to 

strengthening 

arrangements for 

coordination and 

monitoring of budget 

support to make them 

more operational.  
 

 

 

 

a.2.5) Operationalization of the 

High Authority for Quality and 

technical Quality Structures  

The High Authority 

created is not 

operational 

. Director General is 

appointed and his team  set 

up 
   

B) Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal management of public 
investment 

 

B.1) Improved 

revenue 

mobilization 

 

 

 

 

b.1.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the new National 

Customs Code 

 Draft code 

 

 

Code adopted in 2017 

Code adopted in 2017 

 

SP-PRPF 

OTR 

SP-PRPF 

b.1.2) Establishment of the Fiscal 

Policy Unit by the MEF 

Draft establishment 

instrument 

Establishment in 2017 

b.1.3) Implementation of the 

Lomé tax registry 

 Study conducted The decree establishing  the 

Lomé region tax registry is 

adopted in 2017 

b.1.4) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the bill on the 

transfer of powers and resources 

to local and regional authorities 

Bill prepared  Bill adopted in 2017  

b.1.5) Study on gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy 

No analytical paper on 

the issue 

Study and adoption of an 

action plan for the 

implementation of 

recommendations validated 

in 2017 
b.1.6) Adoption of the national 

gender strategy in 2018 by 

Council of Ministers 

 No strategy National gender strategy 

adopted in 2018 

B.2)Enhanced 

investment 

management 

b.2.1Development of a public 

investments planning, selection 

and programming manual 

No manual or formal 

procedures 

 

Manual approved in 2017, 

PIP revised, 100% of the 

projects registered for 2018 

are validated by the 

selection committee 

 

SP-PRPF/DP 

b.2.2 Creation of Agency for 

government participation 

 

Poor performance  in the 

monitoring of investments 

Decree adopted in 2017 ; unit to 

be operational in 2018. 

b.2.3  adoption by the Minister a 

decree related on  reorganization 

and functioning of regional 

monitoring committees of 

investment project 

No coordinated 

monitoring of project 

implementation at local 

level 

 

The committees are set up 

in 2017 and 100% of 

investment projects in 

region have been supervised 

in 2018 

b.2.4) Finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the 

technical requirements of the 

implementation of programme 

budgets (2019 Budget Policy 

Debate follows programme 

budget) 

BPD does not follow 

programme budget 

format  

Holding of the DOB in 2018 

at the National Assembly 

according to the programme 

budget format  

 

b.2.5) Deconcentration of 

financial control and duties, 

organization and functioning of 

financial control 

 

Centralized financial 

control 

Decree adopted in 2017; 

The controllers of the 5 

regions and the Ministry of 

Agriculture are appointed 

and installed in 2018 

SP-PRPF/DCF 

 

b.2.6) Conduct and regular 

publication of public procurement 

audits 

 

Audits of 2013 

conducted and 

published 

 Public Procurement Audit 

Reports 2014 and 2015 

published in 2017 

Components Funding 

Component A: Support for the promotion of Agropoles 

and strengthening of local governance 

 

AfDB : UA 9.53 million in 2017  

External financing of the funding requirement 2017 

Bank: UA 9.53 million 

IMF: SDR 50.4 million 

EU: EUR 19 million  

WB: USD 50 million 

Component B: Support for internal resources 

mobilization and optimal management of public 

investments 
 



1  

I. INTRODUCTION - THE PROPOSAL. 

1.1 Management submits the following proposal and recommendation for a grant of 

UA 7.21 million from Transition Support Facility (TSF) resources, and a grant of UA 2.32 

million from African Development Fund (ADF) resources, to the Republic of Togo to 

finance the Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGBA). 

PAGPA supports reforms aimed at creating a private and public investment environment 

conducive to agribusiness promotion, and improving revenue mobilization notably for capital 

investment purposes. It is designed as a reform operation funded by a budget support of 

total amount of UA 9.53 million to be disbursed in a single tranche in 2017. 

1.2 Single tranche disbursement, was justify by the particularity of 2017 fiscal year 

situation, which presents a high level of need for concessional financing mainly due to Togo's 

limited access to borrowing resources;  this is in accordance to the Government commitments 

under the framework of the economic program (2017-2019) supported by the IMF's Extended 

Credit Facility approved in May 2017. It also emerges from the revised budget prepared 

following the conclusion of the program with IMF, an overall need for financing gap of 280.8 

CFAF billions excluding grants, part of which will be financed by the ADF and TAF grant 

resources. On account of this financial support for Togo's budget, social sector allocations will 

be maintained, thus minimizing risks of the social climate deteriorating at this crucial 

transitional phase towards exiting fragility. With the programme spanning the November 2017 

to December 2018 period, the Bank will maintain sustained dialogue with the Togolese 

authorities for the effective implementation of the reforms scheduled for 2018. These reforms 

will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF, World Bank and European Union whose 

programmes cover the 2017-2019 period. 

1.3 Despite the favourable outlook, Togo remains confronted with a number of socio-

economic challenges, including inadequate internal resources and an underperforming 

economy with low and non-inclusive value added creation. Despite efforts by GoT and the 

structural reforms implemented in recent years, including the creation of the OTR and the 

adoption of a new customs code, internal resources mobilization remains low compared to the 

financing requirements of the Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 

(SCAPE). The operationalization of the OTR, which is strongly supported by the Bank, has 

definitely yielded encouraging results, with a tax burden of 17.9% in 2016 that is expected to 

reach 18.3% in 2017 and 19.1% in 2018. However, despite this positive trend, on account of 

Togo's weak capacity to create value-added with one of Africa’s lowest GDPs, the absolute 

value of domestic revenues collected falls far short of the budget’s funding requirements. The 

average coverage rate of budgetary spending by tax revenue is about 60%, hence its heavy 

dependence on external financing and public borrowing both internally and externally. Indeed 

since 2016, Togo's debt risk is considered high with a debt ratio of 80.8% of GDP. In this regard, 

GoT has committed, under the new programme with the IMF, to lowering this rate to not more 

than 73% by 2019. 

 

 



2  

1.4 In a bid to maintain medium and long-term viability of the macro-fiscal 

framework, Togo is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector 

to give sustained and inclusive impetus to accelerated economic growth. To leverage this 

sector as a prime mover of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has formulated 

and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "a modern, sustainable and 

high value-added agriculture to support a strong, inclusive, competitive economy generating 

decent and stable employment by 2030". The country’s agriculture sector employs 60-70% of 

the working population and accounts for up to 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential 

with 3.4 million hectares of arable land, of which only 45% is currently under cultivation 

yielding less than 50% of the optimum level. Furthermore, the industrial processing of 

agricultural products is in its infancy, as is the Togolese industrial sector as a whole. Over the 

last three years, the industrial sector, which is not well developed and is poorly integrated with 

the rest of the economy, contributed an average of 17.8% to GDP, with an average annual 

growth rate of 1.3%. PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's previous PARG-II budget support 

and will allow more in-depth reforms focusing on strengthening public finance management 

and creating conditions conducive to agro-industry development. 

1.5 PAGPA is aligned with Togo's national development policies and contributes 

towards implementing the Bank's intervention strategies in Togo. PAGPA is in line with 

the national development agenda, SCAPE 2013-2017, particularly Pillar (I) "development of 

sectors with strong growth potential" and Pillar (IV) "strengthening governance". It is also 

aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's CSP (2016-2020), namely: “Development of inclusive 

growth and agribusiness competitiveness poles” and (ii) “Support for financial, sector and local 

governance”. It is also consistent with the Bank's ten-year strategy 2013-2022 and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018). More specifically, it is aimed at contributing to 

the achievement of three of the Bank's High-5s: (i) "Feed Africa", (ii) "Industrialize Africa" 

and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". 

1.6 In accordance with the Bank's Policy on Budget Support Operations, this proposed 

operation is subject to consideration by the Board following the implementation of the agreed 

prior actions, which are fully consistent with the reform programme of the Government of Togo 

(GoT), designed in consultation with civil society and the country's technical and financial 

partners. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1 Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Political Situation: The 2015 presidential election which was won by the Presidential 

Party, and intensified dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition, contributed towards 

easing the political climate up to the end of the first half of 2017. This relative political stability 

has been conducive to the implementation of structural reforms for a progressive exit from the 

situation of fragility. However, the August 2017 political demonstrations, with sporadic 

violence, indicate that the dialogue during the budget support programme period could unfold 

in the context marked by tension arising from the holding of the legislative elections in 2018, 

local elections in 2019 and the presidential election in 2020. 



3  

2.1.2 Fragility Situation: Despite the progress achieved in recent years, particularly in 

economic terms, Togo remains in a fragile situation. Its average score in the Bank's and World 

Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) is 3.2 out of 6. The reconstruction 

process following the political-democratic crisis is still ongoing. The North-South ethnic and 

regional divide continues to fuel the radicalization of the divergent positions among the political 

class and recurrent social tensions. The ownershipof sustainable mechanisms of socio-political 

dialogue, that is courteous, inclusive and constructive among the political class and the elite as 

well as the strengthening of institutions, constitute major challenges that Togo will face in terms 

of political governance. Moreover, the economy’s extremely heavy dependence on the 

phosphate sub-sector (over 40% of export earnings), and on revenues from port and airport 

traffic, also constitutes a source of fragility, as do the persistent spatial socio-economic 

development and gender disparities. The new development-oriented national agricultural policy 

has the dual objective of diversifying the economy and reducing inequalities in opportunities 

between the maritime region and other regions; and between men and women, by facilitating 

women's access to land through the provisions of the new land code that is in the process of 

adoption. 

2.1.3 Governance: According to the 2016 Mo Ibrahim report on the assessment of global 

governance in Africa, Togo ranks 33rd among 54 countries evaluated with a score of 48.5 out 

of 100. Notwithstanding its poor overall ranking, Togo, with an average change of +9.7 points,  

ranks 2nd  best governance reformer over the period 2006-2015, behind Côte d'Ivoire (13.1), the 

same as Zimbabwe (+9.7) and ahead of Liberia (+8.7), and Rwanda (+8.4). It is the only country 

whose overall governance has improved steadily with progress in each of the 14 sub-categories 

of the IIAG. The 2016 report by Transparency International ranks Togo 116th  out of 176 with 

a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 32 against 29 in 2014, on a scale of 0 (high corruption) 

to 100 (very low corruption). 

2.2 Recent Economic Developments, Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis 

2.2.1 The country is characterized by limited transformation of its economy, which is 

dominated by agriculture with 47.6% of GDP, followed by services (36.2%) and industry 

(16.2%)with merely 6.4% for manufacturing. However, despite a challenging external 

environment, the Togolese authorities were able to maintain a positive trend of economic 

activity. Indeed, the GDP growth rate, which was 6.1% in 2013, remained at an average of 5.4% 

over the period 2014-2016 due to the good performance of the agriculture and infrastructure 

investment sectors. This trend is expected to continue in 2017, with a growth rate of about 5.0% 

which could reach 5.3% by 2018, due to the combined effects of fairly good rainfall and 

increased productivity arising from the agricultural sector’s transformation and the improved 

transportation system. Inflation is also contained through the stabilization of food, energy and 

transport prices. It dropped from 1.8% in 2015 to 0.9% in 2016 and is projected to be negative 

at -0.1% for 2017. An analysis conducted in 2016 by the IMF and World Bank shows that Togo 

is at high overall debt risk. 

 

 



4  

2.2.2 The country's debt risk level is deemed extremely worrying. The public debt stock 

rose sharply from 48.8% at end- 2010 to 80.8% of GDP at end- 2016, above the Community 

norm of 70%. This increase is due mainly to infrastructure investments in 2015 and 2016. 

Togo's new programme (2017-2019) under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with the IMF 

seeks mainly to create conditions conducive to a substantial public debt level reduction from 

80.8% of GDP in 2016 to 67.8% by 2020.1 

TOGO – Macroeconomic indicators 2013 2014 2015 2016 
2017(e) 

2018 (p) 
2019 

(p) 

GDP Growth 6,1 5,9 5,3 5,1 5,0 5,3 5,6 

 population  growth 2,8 2,8 2,8 2,6 2,6 2,6 2,6 

Real GDP growth rate per inhabitant 3,3 3,1 2,5 2,5 2,4 2,7 3,0 

Inflation 1,8% 0,2% 1,8% 0,9% -0,1% 1,2% 1,4 

Budget balance (commitment base incl. grants)  (% GDP) -4,6 -3,4 -6,3 -3,2 -2,3 -2,5 0,2 

Budget balance (cash base)  (% GDP) -5,8 -7,9 -7,8 -9,6 -4,9 -4,7 -0,7 

Current account  (% GDP) -13,9 -10,2 -11,3 -10,1 -9,0 -8,3 -7,6 

Tax burden rate (% GDP) 

 
15,9 16,2 17,4 17,9 18,3 19,1 19,3 

Source : National administrations; calculations by the authors & IMF staff report article IV May 2017 

2.2.3 The budget deficit (cash basis) deteriorated progressively over the period 2013-

2016. It reached a record 9.6% of GDP in 2016,2 against 5.8%, 7.9% and 7.8% of GDP 

respectively in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Such deterioration in the budget balance is due mainly to 

a sharp increase in the aforementioned infrastructure spendings, and high cost of commitments 

under the "pre-financing" method used by the country to finance them. This deficit is projected 

at 4.9% in 2017 and should improve slightly to 4.7% in 2018 with the discontinuation of the 

pre-financing practice at end- 2016 and the renegotiation of the terms of the related 

commitments in 2017. The external current account balance is structurally in deficit, standing 

at CFAF 142.5 billion in 2016. It could rise to CFAF -140.5 billion in 2017, representing an 

improvement of CFAF 2 billion, attributable to an increased services balance (+ CFAF 4.1 

billion) and secondary revenues (+ CFAF 1.2 billion), which is cushioned by the decrease in 

the goods trade balance (CFAF -4.0 billion). 

2.2.4 The outlook is deemed favourable. The combined effects of support for the 

modernization of agro-industry, including Agropoles and extractive industries, and the 

envisaged reforms to strengthen competition rules in the hospitality, electricity, banking and 

telecommunications sectors, should help achieve an average growth rate of 5.3% over the 

period 2017-2019. Additionally, lessons learned from the implementation of budgets (2012-

2016) and the implementation of the programme with the IMF under the Extended Credit 

Facility (2017-2019) should lead to improved budget credibility and stability. 

2.2.5 Competitiveness of the Economy    

The Togolese economy’s competitiveness is structurally constrained by low overall 

productivity and high production costs. In the report Doing Business 2018 Togo loses two 
places compared to 2017 and ranks the 156th. Similarly, although the labour force has grown 

through improved education, physical capital accumulation has stagnated since the 1990s, 

contributing to a steady decline in overall factor productivity. However, significant progress is 

                                                 
1  Togo : Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under 

the Extended Credit Facility, May 2017 
2  Data from IMF staff report Article IV, Table1. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2013 – 21, page 25, May 2017. 



5  

being made by Togo in the international transport sector, which is crucial to improving its 

competitiveness. Mention can be made of (i) the 700 km trans-Togo road, (ii) the coastal back 

road (54 km), (iii) the modernization and extension of the port of Lomé, whose capacity has 

increased from 0.5 to 2 million containers per year, and (iv) the construction of a new airport 

in line with international standards. These impactful infrastructures, as well as their 

geographical position, represent opportunities that reinforce Togo's objective of becoming, in 

the medium term, one of the best performing logistics hubs in the region, given its current 

comparative advantage in that domain. In that regard, the World Bank's 2016 report on the 

logistics performance index (published every two years) shows that Togo has climbed 47 

positions, from 139th out of 160 to 92nd, and remarkably 64 positions on the "Speed" indicator, 

measured by shipment forwarding to freight forwarder times or  expected goods to port delivery 

times. 

2.3 Public Finance Management   

2.3.1 Since 2010, the Government has had a National Finance Reform Strategy with a 

Public Finance Management Reform Plan (PA-RGFP), the implementation of which is 

considered generally satisfactory although subject to improvement. Following the PEFA and 

PEMFAR conducted in 2008-2009, which revealed Togo’s extremely weak public finance 

management system, GoT in September 2010 adopted a public finance management reform 

strategy for the period 2010-2020, with an action plan (PA-RGFP) implemented on a sliding 

triennial basis. The PEFA and PEMFAR evaluations conducted in 2016 show that Togo has 

made significant efforts to put in place budget management tools and procedures that are 

good enough to restore public finance sustainability. 

2.3.2 Regarding budget preparation, the budget nomenclature in force (former WAEMU 

1998 standards) is considered adequate to ensure budgetary transparency. The new 

nomenclature, which complies with the new WAEMU guidelines, is being finalized and should 

enter into force for the 2019 budget at the latest. The budget programming process has also 

improved considerably since PEFA 2008, with an increased focus on short- and medium-term 

financial balances in conjunction with medium-term macro-economic and budgetary 

frameworks, debt sustainability analyses and cash flow plans. PEFA 2016 also noted an 

increased involvement of Parliament in the budget debate. 

2.3.3 In terms of budget execution and control, developments are also deemed positive, 

with noted improvement in revenue collection and the means used to ensure better tax base 

control, as well as enhanced taxpayer monitoring. Additionally, the national government 

procurement system has been assessed by the Bank as overall satisfactory, with a moderate 

level of risk. Similarly, financial control has been strengthened and is governed by general 

regulations that are aligned with good practices in terms of segregation of duties in public 

finance management. The national procurement system was assessed in accordance with 

accepted transparency and competition standards. 

 

 

 



6  

2.3.4 However, despite the above-mentioned progress, there are lingering weaknesses, 

although overall fiduciary risk has been assessed as moderate (see Technical Annex 1 on 

Fiduciary Risk Assessment). Accrual accounting is yet to enter into force, and still depends 

on the effective establishment of stock accounting. Similarly, the process of setting up the 

Single Treasury Account, initiated in 2013, has made no notable progress since the State’s 

accounts census stage. Through the Resource Mobilization and institutional capacity building 

support project (PAMOCI) project, the Bank is supporting the implementation of WAEMU 

directives and the Single Treasury Account. Furthermore, the adoption of the legal framework 

governing the financial regime of local and regional authorities has been delayed; the 

completion and publication of public procurement audits are not regular, and PIMA 2016 

reports that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a gap of almost 70% against 

the most efficient countries, which would represent an efficiency loss of approximately 2/3 of 

the potential impact. These weaknesses have been taken into account in the design of the 

PAGPA. At the end of the last PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA exercises conducted in 2016, the 

PA-RGFP was updated to take into account the findings and recommendations. The 

implementation of this plan should be accelerated, with a view to improving the overall 

performance of public finance management, in particular PI-11 "Investment Management." 

2.4 Inclusive Growth, Poverty and Social Context 

2.4.1 While the social indicators have improved slightly, Togo remains in the bottom 

quintile of the Human Development Index (HDI). The net enrollment ratio (NER) in primary 

education improved overall to 94.3% by 2015. The poverty incidence declined from 61.7% in 

2006 to 55.1% in 2015, but far short of the target of 27.6% expected in 2030 (SDG 1.2) and the 

extreme poverty rate has virtually remained unchanged , moving from 28.6% in 2006 to 28.7% 

in 2015. The Gini index improved from 0.393 to 0.380 between 2011 and 2015 (ODD 10), but 

growth is not yet pro-poor. Despite the progress of the last five years, spatial and gender 

inequalities persist. In rural areas, almost 7 out of 10 Togolese are poor and the availability of 

curative care decreased from 41% in 2014 to 37.7% in 2015, and more than a third of the 

population has to travel at least 5 km to a health centre. Only 50% of women are literate 

compared to 77% of men, and 25 women per 100 men own land, with their average areas 50% 

smaller than for men (CWIQ 2015). As a result, the Human Development Index 2016 remains 

low with a score of 0.487 ranking it 166th out of 188 countries. 

III. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

3.1 Governmental development strategy and medium-term reform priorities 

3.1.1 The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) is the single 

reference framework for interventions under the Government's development agenda for the 

medium term. In 2013, GoT adopted SCAPE for 2013-2017; it is the reference framework for 

governmental action and comprises five strategic Pillars: (i) development of sectors with high 

growth potential; (ii) strengthening economic infrastructure; (iii) development of human 

capital, social protection and employment; (iv) strengthening governance and (v) promoting 

participatory development. The National Development Programme (PND 2018 - 2022), which 

is being prepared, will replace SCAPE. The transformation of the agriculture sector into a strong 

and inclusive growth sector is at the core of the Government's priorities. Furthermore, Togo is 



7  

working to strengthen financial management by continuing, in particular, with reforms fostering 

increased tax revenues, optimal management of public investments as well as public debt 

reduction.  The proposed PAGPA supports the implementation of these reforms through its 

Component (A), which aims to create a public and private investment framework conducive to 

agribusiness promotion; and component (B) which supports reforms aimed at increasing 

internal resources and improving their predictability in order to facilitate the capital expenditure 

necessary for the agriculture sector’s development. 

3.2  Obstacles to Implementing the National/Sector Development Agenda 

3.2.1  Togo has made remarkable progress which certainly places it on the road to lasting 

resilience. These gains must be consolidated in order to firmly lay the foundations of social 

peace and sustainable and equitable development. Progress is noted in the following areas: 

strengthening of security and stability, economic recovery with average growth rates of 5% 

over a ten-year period, implementation of major institutional and economic reforms, and 

strengthening of regional cooperation. However, the persistent ethnic and regional divide could 

constitute a setback to political stability, thus posing a severe threat to social peace and to exit 

from fragility. These challenges, if not addressed speedily, could impede economic progress. 

Moreover, the effective implementation of the SCAPE is severely constrained by inadequate 

financial resources. It is indeed clear from the last review of SCAPE, ahead of the development 

of the new NDP 2018-2022, that during the period 2013-2015 a total amount of merely CFAF 

516 billion, or 68%, was mobilized for the implementation of the scheduled priority action 

programmes against a requirement of CFAF 2.228 billion. Furthermore, the unsuitability of the 

business environment also constitutes a major obstacle to the emergence of a dynamic private 

sector, capable of driving the transformation of economic activity which remains unstructured 

and over 90% dominated by the informal sector.  

3.3 Consultation and Participation Process 

3.3.1  SCAPE 2013-2017 was developed in a participatory manner to ensure a 

comprehensive consideration of the different concerns of political and socio-economic 

stakeholders countrywide. SCAPE was prepared in consultation with all central and regional 

level stakeholders (central government, local authorities, civil society, private sector, political 

parties, traditional and religious leaders, etc.). Moreover, Togo's technical and financial partners 

were involved throughout the preparatory process.  

3.3.2 The design of the proposed PAGPA benefitted from broad consultations with key 

stakeholders. In particular, detailed discussions were held with the Permanent Secretariat for 

the Monitoring of Reform Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) the Togolese 

Revenue Authority (OTR), the budget directorate and the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce 

and Industry, Livestock, Rural Development, Environment and Gender. These discussions were 

followed by broader consultations with civil society (ONGs and producer associations). These 

exchanges led to agreement with the authorities on the need to involve the Togolese rural 

organizations and farmers’ associations in the framework for follow up and monitoring of 

implementation of the reforms.         



8  

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1 Linkages with Bank's Strategy 

The reforms under PAGPA support the implementation of the Bank's Togo CSP (2016-

2020). The programme’s first component supports reforms within the framework of Pillar (I) 

of the CSP, which aims at "Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness competitiveness 

poles”, and its second component largely contributes to the implementation of the Pillar (2) 

"Support for financial sector and local governance ". The proposed PAGPA, envisaged in the 

CSP, also contributes to the implementation of the Bank's 2013-2022 ten-year strategy and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018 ); more specifically, it contributes to three of the 

Bank's High Five strategic priorities: (i) "Feed Africa"; (ii) "Industrialize Africa" through 

measures to promote agro-industry and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" 

by supporting reforms aimed at improving budget management and public action effectiveness 

through strengthening economic and financial governance and the key sector of agriculture. 

4.2  Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

Togo fulfills the pre-requisites for budget support operations, as defined in the Bank's policy 

on reform programme support operations (see Technical Annex 3). However, efforts are still 

required in terms of coordination. The budget support consultation framework (COAB) is not 

optimal; there is no joint policy matrix of budget support interventions. Additionally, delays are 

noted in the implementation of a number of public finance reforms, translating into 

unsatisfactory results in the PEFA 2016 evaluation, where 28 out of 30 indicators are rated "C" 

or "D". Similarly, PIMA 2016 assessed the management of weak-efficiency investments. 

However, in view of the consistency of the measures of institutional reform being implemented 

and the level of integration of the national framework of the public finance management (see 

technical annex 1), global fiduciary risk has been rated moderate. In addition it should be 

minimized if the reforms planned in the PAGPA and others being finalised in the different 

departments concerned were diligently implemented. Furthermore, the Government is 

determined to accelerate the implementation of the national public finance reforms plan of 

PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA, updated at the end of the 2016 fiscal year. 

4.3 Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

In designing the proposed programme, the Bank met with key technical and financial partners 

(TFPs) intervening through budget support, namely the IMF, WB, and EU. The AFD and 

UNDP also participated in the discussions. The operations in progress, or under preparation for 

the period 2017-2019, are: (i) the IMF's ECF of USD 241.5 million; (ii) the WB’s reform 

programme of USD 75 million and (iii) the EU’s budget support of EUR 54 million. Although 

thus far there is no joint intervention matrix, which awaits agreement with the government on 

its orientation, all partners, including the Bank, are strongly committed to harmonizing their 

actions in terms of dialogue and monitoring reforms. The areas of intervention of the TFPs are 

presented in Technical Annex No. 10. 



9  

4.4 Linkages with other Bank Operations 

4.4.1 Bank’s Active Portfolio in Togo: The active portfolio at April 2017 consists of ten 

operations for a total net commitment of UA117 

million (USD 160 million). It comprises eight 

national operations of UA 41.7 million (USD 57 

million) or 36% of the overall envelope. It also 

includes 64% for two multinational operations of UA 

75.3 million (USD 103 million). A high 75% of the 

portfolio is financed by grants. The sector 

distribution of the portfolio indicates the 

predominance of transport infrastructure with about 

64%, followed by economic and financial governance (17%), the social sector (16%), the water 

and sanitation sector (1%) and agriculture (1%). 

4.4.2  The March 2016 Portfolio Review assessed the portfolio performance as overall 

satisfactory, with a score of 3 out of 4 according to the rating of the latest Implementation Status 

and Results Report (ISRR). The portfolio’s performance is considered satisfactory with an 

overall disbursement rate of 42%, for an average age of 2.3 years. The portfolio is fairly young, 

with 50% of the projects approved between 2015 and 2016. The key challenges concern the 

mobilization of the national counterpart funds (particularly for transport projects) and the 

administrative red tape for disbursement and procurement. Special attention should be paid to 

the release of the national counterpart funds for the Togo-Burkina road rehabilitation and 

transport facilitation project, which is scheduled to close at end- 2017. The government will 

also take steps to accelerate the construction of the Togo-Benin juxtaposed checkpoint financed 

by the Lomé-Cotonou road rehabilitation project and transport facilitation on the Abidjan-

Lagos Corridor, Phase 1. 

4.4.3 Complementarity with Previous Operations: PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's 

previous PARG-II budget support through the strengthening of public finance management and 

improvement of the business environment (see technical annex 7 on the achievements of 

PARGII). The implementation of the first component reforms will create the appropriate legal 

and institutional framework for the investment project under preparation by the department in 

charge of agriculture in the Bank, aimed at establishment of the Kara Agropole. The 

presentation this project to the Board is scheduled for December 2017. Furthermore, the second 

component reforms will benefit particularly from the capacity building activities under PAGFI 

(2016-2020), which is institutional support for the modernization of the OTR for optimized 

revenue collection. Additionally, the programme budget and the deconcentration of payment 

authorization and financial control will be further facilitated as the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System (SIGFIP) will be fully deployed and adapted to the new the new budget 

framework. The technical assistance and equipment needs for its deployment are fully covered 

by PAMOCI (2015-2018). Lastly, PAGPA is in complete synergy with the project to support 

markets reconstruction and traders in Kara and Lomé (2014-2018); the project to support youth 

employability and integration (2015-2020) and the project to support the financial inclusion of 

vulnerable women (PAIFFV 2016-2018). 

Water & 
sanitation

1%

Agric
1%

Gov
17%

Social
16%

Finance
1%

Transport
64%



10  

4.4.4 Lessons Learned from Previous Operations:The completion reports for PARCI I and 

II, and PARG II, indicate the following lessons: (i) the match between the scope of the reform 

programmes and the implementation capabilities of the structures involved; and (ii) the need to 

underpin reform programmes with institutional support. These lessons are taken into account 

in the design of PAGPA. The programme focuses on a limited number of reforms, but is 

strategic and aligned with the national objectives of the SCAPE. Furthermore, the programme 

will be supported by capacity building projects (PAMOCI and PAGFI), and the monitoring and 

evaluation mechanism will involve civil society in periodic reviews.  

4.4.5 Analyses Underlying the Operation: Analyses conducted by GoT, the Bank and other 

technical and financial partners (TFPs) served as the basis for the preparation of the budget 

support programme. The foremost among them are: (i) Public Expenditure Management and 

Financial Accountability Review (2016 PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR), at the end of which the 

PA-RGFP action plan was updated; (ii) the WB's 2018 Doing Business report; (iii) the IMF's 

Article IV consultations report in November 2016; and (iv) the report of the Dutch Consultancy 

Kadaster on the reform of the Directorate of State Land and Cadastral Affairs (DADC). The 

main recommendations of these studies concern (i) strengthening budget credibility and 

accelerating the fiscal transition, (ii) improving land management, and (iii) the need for 

economic transformation to drive strong and more inclusive growth. 

V. THE  ENVISAGED PROGRAMME  

5.1 Programme Goal and Objective  

5.1.1 The programme’s principal objective is to contribute towards creating conditions 

conducive to inclusive economic growth. Its specific objectives are to support the development 

of an investment climate conducive to agribusiness development in a context of improved 

internal resource mobilization capacity to support the required public investment. The 

programme addresses Togo’s major persistent challenges in terms of exiting fragility and 

reducing its vulnerability to social crises. Furthermore, the programme will extend the Bank's 

interventions to reforms geared towards gender mainstreaming in government actions, 

particularly in the agriculture sector. 

5.1.2 The programme comprises two components: A) Support for improved private 

investment environment and agribusiness promotion: this component supports implementing 

reform measures aimed at setting up efficient mechanisms and a business environment 

conducive to agribusiness development; (B) Support for enhanced internal resource 

mobilization and optimization of public investment management: This component aims to 

strengthen the mobilization of internal resources, and streamline the management of public 

investments, in order to offset the agricultural sector’s infrastructure deficit and attract more 

private investors to agribusiness. 

 



11  

5.2 Component A: Support for improved private investment environment and 

agribusiness promotion 

Sub-component A.1: Improving the private investment environment 

5.2.1 Context, Constraints & Challenges. The private sector’s contribution to the national 

economy remains relatively low. It contributes merely15% to GDP and remains dominated by 

the informal sector. The formal industrial private sector contributes only 4 to 6% to GDP, which 

is well below the country’s potential. The agricultural sector offers the greatest potential in 

terms of job and wealth creation. However, formal private sector investment is undermined by 

the constraints of this sector. The main constraints on private sector development, particularly 

in  agribusiness, include: (i) predominance of the informal sector; (ii) lack of competitiveness 

due to the high cost of inputs (water, energy, transport, the Internet, etc.); tax policy not aligned 

with private sector development, in particular the need to create more synergy between the 

Investment Code incentives and the Free Zone regime; (iii) insecurity of land tenure; (iv) a 

dispersed institutional framework based on a multitude of entities dedicated to the same 

investment promotion functions (Togo's Presidential Investment Council, Togo-Invest, 

Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, Investment Promotion Agency and non-operational 

free zones, etc.); (v) limited capacity of management structures to support SME/SMI enterprises 

in developing business plans for access to markets and technology; (vi) mismatch between 

training and employment in relation to the actual needs of the Private Sector; and (vii) 

inadequacy of the regulatory framework for management of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 

Contracts (the revision of framework and establishment of the PPP Unit is envisaged after the 

adoption of the pertinent UEMOA directives). 

5.2.2  Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted national and sector strategy papers focusing on the private 

sector as the prime mover of economic growth, jobs and wealth creation. The establishment of 

structures, such as the One-Stop Shop and the Presidential Council for Investment in Togo 

(CPIT), which is a framework for dialogue between the Government and the Private Sector at 

the highest level, has been beneficial. The CPIT helped identify the major constraints on the 

Togolese Private Sector’s attractiveness and competitiveness, and made recommendations that 

enabled the country to climb from 164th to 149th position, moving up 15 places in one year in 

the Doing Business 2015 ranking. But this ranking has deteriorated in successive reports by 

2016, 2017 and 2018 with respective ranks of 154th and 156ieme on 190 ranked economies. 

However, the country has made progress compared to the year 2016, notably in the following 

areas: Starting a business (+7 points); Getting electricity (+1 point); Trading across borders 

(+10 points); and Resolving insolvency (+3 points). Togo must not only consolidate the above 

gains by pursuing structural reforms, but also make efforts to improve its ranking in the 

following areas: lengthy timeframes for: (i) ownership transfer (283 days against an average of 

60 days in WAEMU) and (ii) obtaining a building permit (163 days against 156 days in the 

WAEMU), and the multiplicity of taxes paid per year (49 against an average of 39 in the 

WAEMU). Furthermore, the government has established DOSI. This structure, supported by 

the bank under PAMOCI, is aimed at supporting informal sector operators to gradually 

formalize their activities. The government has also supported the setting up of recognized 

management centres in line with the directive of UEMOA. In addition, the government is 



12  

committed, under the FMI programme and the World Bank operation under preparation, to 

implement structural measures to improve the competitiveness of the sectors of energy and 

telecommunications with a view to reducing production costs.    

5.2.3  Reforms envisaged: Creating a business environment conducive to private sector 

development in Togo requires removing the above constraints through administrative and 

institutional reforms. These include: (i) updating the Investment Code to attract foreign and 

domestic investment and strengthen it, with a view to employment creation under SCAPE; (ii) 

operationalizing the Investment and Free Zone Promotion Agency by appointing the Director 

General and his team; (iii) adopting a National Strategy; (iv) adoption of a new tax code aimed 

at simplifying the tax structure and procedures; and (v) the creation of a Business Climate Unit 

dedicated to strengthened monitoring and improvement of indicators of performance relating 

to the business environment. 

Sub-component A.2: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for agribusiness 

development  

5.2.4 Context and Challenges: Since the 1960s, the State of Togo has demonstrated its 

willingness to promote the industrial sector, through the transformation of a substantial part of 

agricultural and mineral commodities successively through a State model based on imports 

substitution until the late 1980s and then through liberalization policies granting the private 

sector an increased role. Despite these efforts, it is clear that the industrial sector remains poorly 

developed and weakly integrated with the rest of the economy. Embryonic and sparse, Togo’s 

industrial fabric comprises around ten large companies, a hundred medium-sized industries and 

a relatively large number of very small industrial units. The industrial sector's contribution to 

GDP over the last three years averaged 17.8%, with an average growth of 1.3% per year. Togo 

has opted for the transformation of the agricultural sector as the basis for the structural 

transformation of its economy. Togo’s agricultural sector employs 60-70% of the working 

population and accounts for 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential, with 3.4 million 

hectares of arable land, of which, only 45% are currently under cultivation with low yields of 

below 50% of the optimum level. It is characterized by a very low level of mechanization and 

professional expertise, with 89% of the cultivated land sown manually (hoes and machetes). To 

leverage this sector as an engine of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has 

formulated and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "modern, 

sustainable and high value-added agriculture ". The promotion of agro-industry and Agropoles 

is pivotal in this policy, which will enable the creation of integrated development zones around 

agricultural activity in order to support the promotion of industrial and services clusters and 

stimulate growth. The Agropoles pilot programme covers three of the country’s five regions 

that have been selected on the basis of their comparative advantages, as well as inclusion and 

poverty reduction criteria. The priority target products are rice, soybean, cashew nuts and 

sesame, sorghum, millet, maize and livestock. The objective is to enhance food security through 

import-substitution and exporting surpluses in the regional markets of WAEMU and 

ECOWAS, given Togo's age-old trade tradition, the opportunities offered by its geographical 

position and the expected increase in regional demand due to population growth, urbanization, 

income growth and diet diversification. 



13  

5.2.5 Major constraints on the promotion of Agropoles and agro-industry in Togo are: (i) 

lack of industrial policy and lack of serviced industrial sites; (ii) weak integration of the 

industrial sector with other sectors of the economy in general and the agricultural sector in 

particular, due mainly to supply difficulties and the lack of organization of the sectors; (iii) 

inadequacy of quality infrastructure and production support that hamper the development of the 

industrial fabric and agribusiness in particular; (iii) weak competitiveness of industrial 

products, due notably to the high cost of production factors (energy, transport, communications, 

etc.), non-conformity of industrial products with international standards, unfair competition 

from some industrial products imported fraudulently, and absence of legal instruments and an 

institutional quality control system for consumer products marketing in Togo; (v) credit access 

difficulties, notably for the agricultural sector which represents on average 1-2% of the bank’s 

portfolio, due particularly to the poor organization and professionalization of agricultural value 

chains and land tenure insecurity, especially for women; (vi) weaknesses in the institutional 

framework for industrial support, due mainly to strategic, organizational and institutional 

weaknesses at the level of the Ministry of Industry and industrial support services3; (vii) lack 

of accredited laboratories and inspection bodies capable of carrying out physical/chemical and 

microbiological analyses of industrial and agro-industrial products, testing and calibration in 

metrology and certifications to international standards for local marketing and export; (viii) 

territorial imbalance between the maritime region, which hosts nearly all the industrial units, 

and the country’s other regions which are agriculture-oriented and under-industrialized due 

mainly to the lack of appropriate infrastructure.      

5.2.6 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted a number of reforms with special focus on industrial 

development. These include the Framework Law of 12 August 2009 on the organization of the 

national harmonization scheme for standardization, accreditation, certification, metrology, 

environment and promotion of quality in Togo; Decree of 27 December 2013 issued pursuant 

to Law No. 2011-018 of 24 June 2011 on the status of the industrial free zone; Law of 20 

January 2012 on the Investment Code in the Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 

issued pursuant to Law No. 2012-001 of 20 January 2012 on the Investment Code in the 

Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 on the allocation, organization and operation 

of the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments and the Free Zone and the Accelerated 

Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) 2013-2017, under which industrial 

development and the transformation of agriculture are major pillars. More recently in 2016, the 

Agricultural Policy, together with the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in 

Togo by 2030, was also adopted.  

5.2.7 Several measures have also been implemented with a view to facilitating access to 

financing, in particular the creation of the National Agency for the Promotion and Guarantee 

of Financing of SMEs and SMIs (ANPGF). Additionally, the WAEMU Directive on public 

procurement and the delegation of services was made internal in 2014. This instrument, which 

did not take into account partnership contracts, nevertheless provided for the development of a 

PPP strategy and the setting up of a PPP management unit. These two reforms are suspended 

                                                 
3  In particular the quality management infrastructure: Metrology-Standards-Quality Control (MSQC) 

 



14  

pending a new institutional framework by WAEMU, which more clearly separates delegation 

and partnership contracts, on the one hand, from public procurement, on the other. Lastly, the 

finalization of the National Industrialization Policy is underway and will be followed by an 

Industrialization Strategy, which will be prepared in collaboration with the Bank and UNIDO. 

To this end, the authorities sent a request for technical assistance to the Bank aimed at making 

Togo a pilot experiment for the implementation of the strategic pillar relating to the 

industrialization of Africa. 

5.2.8 Reforms envisaged: Accelerating industrial development in Togo requires 

implementing a number of reforms aimed at removing the above constraints, particularly 

through measures such as: (i) adoption of a National Industrialization Policy; (ii) 

operationalization of the High Authority for Quality and Technical Quality Structures (the Fund 

and the Agencies) through the appointment of the Director General and his team and the 

allocation of the necessary resources for its start up in the 2018 budget; (iii) the adoption of a 

National Agropoles Strategy; (iv) adoption of instruments governing the national Agropoles 

development structure; (v) adoption of a new Land Code governing the land registry which 

would foster agribusiness development and loan access. 

5.2.9 The main expected outcomes of Component A are: (i) improving the agricultural trade 

balance deficit, (ii) strengthening Togo's resilience to fragility factors related to spatial and 

gender inequalities; (iii) improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector; (iv) securing 

land for the development of agribusiness and facilitating access to financing; and (v) improving 

the business environment for domestic and foreign private investment. 

5.2.10 Component B: Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal 

management of public investments: 

Sub-component B.1: Improved Revenue Mobilization 

5.2.11 Context Constraints and Challenges: Togo has committed, under the programme with 

the IMF, to substantially reducing the level of public debt by prohibiting any new external non-

concessional loan and by capping the volume of concessional commitments. Against this 

backdrop, and faced with the urgent need to pursue investment spending that is crucial to 

achieving the development objectives of SCAPE, maximizing internal resources mobilization 

in the short term is essential as the main factor for macroeconomic stability and the 

sustainability of the budget framework. The establishment of the OTR in 2014, coupled with 

the modernization and extension of the Lome Port Authority, has definitely helped to enhance 

Togo’s revenue mobilization capabilities. The ratio of tax revenues (cash basis) to GDP 

increased from 15.9% in 2013 to 17.9% in 2016 and could reach 19% in 2018, nearly the 20% 

WAEMU standard. However, recent economic developments in the sub-region have 

highlighted the great sensitivity of OTR's performance to customs duties; with OTR’s, results 

for 2016 falling below target for the first time. This underperformance, though minimal (-1.1%), 

is mainly due to the sluggish economic conditions in the country's key trading partners (Nigeria, 

Ghana). In this regard, the major challenge for the country is to optimize domestic taxation by 

broadening the tax base through the exploitation of the land niche in particular. Additionally, 

simplification of customs and tax procedures should be pursued to attract private investment 

and accelerate added value creation. 



15  

5.2.12 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to the challenge of improving 

internal revenue mobilization, the Government, with the Bank's support, initiated structural 

reforms that culminated in the establishment in 2012 of the Togolese revenue authority (OTR), 

which incorporates the two State financial administrations (taxes and customs) into a single 

entity with administrative and financial management autonomy. The operationalization of the 

OTR has enabled Togo to increase its budgetary revenues substantially; they increased from 

CFAF 403.6 billion in 2013 to 568.5 billion in 2016, representing a 40.8% rise. The average 

growth rate of tax revenues over the period 2013-2016 is 12.7%. Furthermore, the country 

adopted a new Customs Code which entered into force in 2014 (Law No. 2014 - 003 of 28 April 

2014) replacing the old instrument dating from 1966. A new revision of the Customs Code is 

underway to, among other things, further clarify the division of powers and responsibilities 

between the OTR and the Ministry in charge of finance and fiscal policy. In addition, the draft 

text of the new Customs Code will take into account recent developments in international trade 

regarding trade facilitation and improved customs procedures. Similarly, the GoT initiated the 

revision of the tax code with a view to simplifying the tax system to make it more attractive to 

investors and also more accessible to tax administration and taxpayers. Lastly, the GoT in 2016 

committed to a feasibility study for the establishment of a tax registry for an optimized property 

tax base. 

5.2.13 Reforms Envisaged: To accelerate enhanced internal resources mobilization, PAGPA 

will support the adoption by the Council of Ministers of the: (i) Lomé Tax Registry Decree, (ii) 

new national Customs Code; (iii) decree establishing the fiscal policy unit by the MEF; and (iv) 

bill on the transfer of powers and resources to local and regional authorities. 

Sub-component B.2: Strengthening Public Investment Management 

5.2.14 Context, Constraints and Challenges: Investment management was assessed as very 

unsatisfactory by the PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR exercises conducted in 2016. The PIMA 

report shows that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a nearly 70% gap 

compared to the best performing countries. This represents a loss of approximately 2/3 of the 

effectiveness of the potential impact. The Public Investment Program (PIP) is not aligned with 

the budget. An absolute gap of 15% between the 2016 PIP component and the draft budget for 

2016 transmitted to Parliament was noted. Inadequacies have been identified at all levels of the 

process (multi-year programming, ex ante evaluation, project selection, public procurement 

performance monitoring, and availability of investment credits). PEMFAR4 noted the absence 

of "national guidelines defining the principles and conditions for the economic and financial 

evaluation of projects". Economic evaluations of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness are not 

always conducted, and whenever this is done no review mechanism for results review by an 

independent structure of the contracting authority is in place. Additionally, project recurrent 

costs are poorly estimated and only the operating costs of a project as an administrative unit are 

included in the budget. This partly accounts for the shortcomings noted in the public 

investments monitoring with irregular implementation monitoring activities and incomplete or 

non-existent data bases on physical and financial implementation of investments. The 

investment management situation in Togo deteriorated further with the so-called "pre-

                                                 
4  PEMFAR 2017 Report 



16  

financing"5 practice that the GoT applied between 2011 and 2016. Under this mechanism, 

besides the shortcomings of the basic financial package, pre-financing agreements were 

concluded and executed outside the public expenditure circuit and to the total exclusion of the 

internal control and external audit bodies. State reimbursements to banks thus faced high risks 

of fictitious progress payment claims and/or poor quality work. Lastly, investment management 

and, in general, the implementation of public policies in Togo are also handicapped by the lack 

of programme budgets, weak results-based budgeting practices and the centralization of 

financial control. PEMFAR 2016 noted that "in Togo, the centralization of authorizing officer 

and financial controller functions are veritable sources of delays and inefficiency in the 

expenditure circuit". Indeed, having no local or regional delegations, all vote holders in local 

authorities must travel to Lomé to submit their commitment and validation files. 

5.2.15 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: As part of its IMF- backed programme, 

the government stopped the pre-financing practice in the latter half of 2016. The government 

also pledged not to undertake new pre-financed investments, to validate all existing pre-

financed investments and to include pre-financing debt in the outstanding public debt. The 

authorities have also decided to follow in future the budgetary and procurement procedures for 

all new public investments. Besides the effective abandonment of pre-financing, it is crucial to 

establish an efficient investment management system, systematize programme budgets and 

decentralize financial control speedily in order to ensure an optimal framework for future 

investments, notably those required for the implementation of the national Agropoles 

development strategy. 

5.2.16 Reforms envisaged: PAGPA will support (i) the development of a public investments 

planning, selection and programming manual; (ii) adoption of the ministerial order on the 

framework for regional monitoring of investment projects execution; (iii) finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the technical requirements for the implementation of programme 

budgets; (iv) adoption by the Council of the Ministers of the decree on the deconcentration of 

financial control and powers, organization and functioning of financial control; (v) publication 

of the 2014 and 2015 public procurement audit reports; and (vi) the creation of Unit for 

government participation with a view to strengthening the monitoring of public investments 

and the management of state assets. 

5.2.17 The main results of Component B are: (i) sustained revenue growth, (ii) improved 

PIP implementation rate; (iii) improved local fiscal governance; and (iv) enhanced financial 

and technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

5.3   Policy Dialogue 

5.3.1 PAGPA will strengthen dialogue with the Government and consultation with other 

TFPs, mainly in the following areas: (i) internal resources mobilization, where discussions will 

focus on the need to broaden the tax base; and (ii) transformation of the Togolese economy with 

special focus on the conditions for effective implementation of the agricultural policy. In this 

regard, and relying on its country office, the Bank will continue support for improved land 

                                                 
5  PEMFAR 2017 Report: This mechanism consists in awarding a public contract to one or more contractors to carry out a public investment. 

Successful bidders are financed by commercial banks to perform the work with guarantees from the Togolese State. The State in its 

capacity as contracting authority reimburses the former as and when the works/services are performed, in principle after acceptance of 

progress payment claims submitted by the operators. 



17  

management in order to speed up the establishment of a reliable registry to secure land tenure, 

a prerequisite for attracting private investors. In addition, PAGPA will enable the Bank to raise 

the level of dialogue with Togo on issues of gender promotion and civil society’s participatory 

role. Lastly, ongoing discussions will be continued with the Togolese government towards 

operationalizing the joint framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the performance of 

budget support and reform program. 

5.4 Grant Conditions  
 

Table 2. PAGPA Preliminary Measures 

 

5.5 Application of Good Practice Principles on Conditionality 

In accordance with the 14 March 2012 Bank policy on budget support operations, the design of 

the proposed PAGPA applied good practice principles on conditionalities. Eight conditions 

precedent have been agreed with the Country and these are in line with the country's priorities. 

They are drawn from national reform documents, in this case the agricultural policy and PR-

GFP. The programme’s Pillars and the results-based logical framework were discussed, and 

agreed, with the Government and all stakeholders, including other TFPs and civil society. The 

disbursement schedule is aligned with the budget cycle. 

5.6 Financing Requirements and Terms 

The macroeconomic framework was updated as part of the supplementary budget approved by 

the Cabinet in November 2017 in order to take into account the commitments made under the 

IMF program which aims to reduce Togo's indebtedness risk. This revised budget 2017 projects 

a level of revenues (excluding grants) of CFAF 560.4 billion against expenditures of CFAF 

841.23 billion (including arrears payments). The resulting financing gap of CFAF 280.83 

billion is entirely covered by internal financing and external resources from technical and 

financial partners including the Bank.  

Preliminary Measures 

General Prerequisite – Maintaining a stable macroeconomic  framework, as reflected by IMF reports or evaluations 

Component A – Support for  Agribusiness Promotion  
Component B –  Support for Internal Resources Mobilization and Optimal 

Management of Public Investment 

 

Action 1: Adoption by the Council of Ministers of the 

National Agropoles Development Strategy 

Evidence 1: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy for Agropoles 
Development Strategy  

Action4: Establishment of the Tax Policy Unit. 

Evidence 4: MEF Order establishing the Tax Policy Unit  

Action 2 : Creation of the Business Climate Unit   

Evidence 2 : Decree adopted by the Council of Ministers  

Action 5: Adoption of the new national Customs Code 

Evidence 5: Release of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the bill on the new 

customs code.  

Action 3: Adoption of the National Private Sector 

Development Strategy, 

Evidence 3: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the national private sector development 

strategy 

Action 6: Deconcentration of financial control, powers, organization and functioning 

of financial control 

Evidence 6: Decree of the Council of Ministers on the deconcentration of financial 

control, powers, organization and functioning of financial control 

 Action 7 : Creation  of Agency for government participation 

Evidence 7 : Decree of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the creation of Agency for 
government participation  



18  

Table 3 – Estimated Financial Requirements and Sources in CFAF Bln 

  Rubriques 2017 (Bln CFAF) 

 

A Total revenues and grants 707,1 

                   Of which : tax revenues 503 

B                 Of which : grant 146,7 

C Total net expenditures and loans  771,23 

   Of which: interest payments  58,7 

   Of which :capital expenditures 313,5 

D Overall balance (base settlement excl. grants) (A -B-C) -210,83 

E Accumulation of arrears -70 

F Overall balance (cash basis) ( D+E) -280,83 

G External financing net (less Bank contribution ) 259,78 

H Bank contribution  7,95 

I Internal financing (net) 13,1 

J Financing (F + G+H) 280,83 

K Financing gap  (J+F)  0 

 Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy – Report’s Authors 

 

5.7 Application of Bank Group Policy on Non-Concessional Debts Accumulation 

The proposed PAGPA is financed by a grant and thus not governed by the Bank Group Policy 

on non-concessional debt accumulation. 

 

VI. IMPLEMENTATION  

6.1 Programme Beneficiaries 

The direct beneficiary of the programme is the Ministry of economy and finance through 

the financing of the national budget. In an indirect way the program will benefit to the 

whole Togolese population. PAGPA will help lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the local economy and regions around major Agropole projects, as a source 

of resilience to address fragility concerns in the rural areas (about 62% of Togolese population) 

and on the outskirts of Lomé and the regional capitals. In particular, the development of the 

Agropole in the Kara region should enable the creation of 2,500 jobs by 2020, of which 30% 

for women and 65% for youth, an electricity access rate of 43% (against 16% in 2015) and 55% 

access to drinking water (against 25% in 2015). 

6.2 Impact on Gender, the Poor and Vulnerable Groups 

Despite the progress made over the past five years, gender discrimination persists. In 2011, 

Togo adopted a National Policy on Gender Equity and Equality. In 2014, the Code of Persons 

and Family was also revised, thus enabling legislation on major discriminations that existed in 

marriage and inheritance. In particular, Article 99, which provided that "The man shall be the 

family head" has become "The family shall be run by the spouses". However, in the absence of 

a clear intervention strategy, exclusionary practices identified in the National Policy remain 

topical, including difficulty of access to farmland for women. In addition to the family code, 

PAGPA will support the adoption of the law on gender parity in elective and appointive 

positions, the effectiveness of which will do more to further raise the required awareness among 

opinion leaders. Moreover, the programme will support a study to explore equitable gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy without altering the impersonal nature of taxation. The 

recommendations of this study will form an integral part of the national gender strategy also 

supported by the programme. 



19  

6.3 Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

PAGPA is classified as Category III in accordance with the Bank's environmental and 

social impact assessment procedures. PAGPA has no negative environmental impact. 

However, the country is faced with the adverse effects of climate change and environmental 

challenges, particularly in the agricultural, forestry, energy, mining and water resources sectors 

and in coastal zone management. The GoT demonstrates a strong commitment to providing 

lasting solutions to the environmental degradation problems and considering climate change in 

public policy. Since 29 December 1998, Togo has adopted its National Environment Policy in 

accordance with international environmental agreements (the Vienna Convention and the 

Montreal Protocol, the Rio Conventions and their respective Protocols, Rotterdam Convention, 

Stockholm Convention)6. Furthermore, SCAPE 2013-2017 lays special emphasis on the 

environment and community resilience to climate change, with the intensification of actions 

provided for under initiatives such as: (i) National Adaptation Plan (PANA); (ii) National 

Programme for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + 2010-

2050); (iii) National Action Plan for the Management of Marine and Coastal Environmental 

Resources; and (iv) Environmental Management Capacity Building Programme (PRCGE). 

6.4 Macroeconomic Impacts 

The proposed PAGPA will contribute to macroeconomic stability by improving the agricultural 

sector’s performance and reducing the trade deficit. Furthermore, according to a study by the 

Dutch firm Kadaster on the reform of State lands and Cadastral Affairs Directorate (DADC), 

the potential yield of property tax (Land Taxes on built-on estates, land ownership registration 

duties) at the national level, based on a computerized cadastre on only the 400 000 plots already 

identified, would be over CFAF 100 billion against CFAF 1.4 billion of revenue collected in 

2016. PAGPA would help generate the budgetary resources required to make impactful 

investments, notably those needed for the Agropoles, which represent sources of new business 

and employment opportunities. 

 

6.5 Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 

The Programme’s executing agency is the Permanent Secretariat for the Monitoring of Reform 

Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) within the Ministry of Economy and Finance. 

The implementation of PAGPA will be monitored through semi-annual and annual 

implementation reports, prepared by the SP-PRPF on the basis of a joint review with the 

programme’s participating structures as well as members of civil society, in particular the 

Coordination of Togolese farmer organizations and agricultural producers. The Togolese 

authorities will also transmit to the Bank the compliance report on the 2017 budget review law 

no later than 31 December 2018, drawn up by the Audit Court. The Bank will monitor the 

Programme in coordination with the group of TFPs acting through budgetary support. The Bank 

will undertake at least two programme supervision missions per year, and ensure that it interacts 

with all Programme stakeholders, including civil society. 

 

                                                 
6  CSP 2016-2020 
 



20  

6.6 Financial Management and Disbursement 

 

6.6.1 Disbursement: The resources of the proposed operation comprise as follows:  

 An amount of UA 2.32 million (ADF) that will be disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, 

upon entry into force of the ADF Grant Agreement between the Republic of Togo and the 

African Development Fund and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the 

disbursement in section 7.2.3 below; and 

 An amount of UA 7.21 million, from the Transitional States Facility (TSF), that will be 

disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, upon entry into force of the TSF Grant Agreement 

between the Republic of Togo, African Development Fund and African Development Bank 

and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the disbursement in section 7.2.3 

below. 

 

6.6.2 Financial Management and Audit: The assessment of the fiduciary framework of the 

public finance management system shows moderate fiduciary risks (see technical annex 1). In 

accordance with the fiduciary strategy for the CSP 2016-2020 period, PAGPA will be entirely 

managed within the national public finance management system. The effective payment of 

budget support resources into the State budget will be monitored through the Audit Court’s 

General Compliance Report on fiscal 2017, which will be transmitted to the Bank and the 

National Assembly of Togo at the same time. In addition, the Audit Court will audit the 

financial flows of the Special Account opened in the name of the Treasury and intended for the 

deposit of the grant resources. This report must be sent to the Bank no later than 3 months after 

the disbursement. 

 

6.6.3 Goods and Services Procurement: The grant will be in the form of general budget 

support. Accordingly, its implementation does not directly entail any goods and services 

procurement issues. It is clear from the fiduciary risk assessment that the legal and institutional 

framework for public procurement in Togo is overall operational, and that public procurement 

is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement Code. However, some 

shortcomings are noted, particularly, the regular absence of: (i) annual audit reports; (ii) post-

auditing of contracts below the review threshold of the National Procurement Audit Department 

(DNCMP); and (iii) capacity constraints of the contracting authorities. The reform measures 

identified under the proposed PAGPA, and the political dialogue on the continued need to 

improve the procurement system, will help address these shortcomings. Furthermore, the 

revision of the public procurement code and its implementing instruments initiated since 2011 

is being finalized, and should lead to the adoption before end- 2017 of a new legislative and 

regulatory framework. 

 

 



21  

VII. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

7.1 Legal Instrument 

The Programme will be financed through two Grant Agreements between the African 

Development Fund (ADF) and the Togolese Republic, for the ADF grant and the African 

Development Fund, the African Development Bank and the Togolese Republic for the TSF 

grant. 

7.2 Conditions related to the Bank’s Intervention 

7.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the Grant Agreement: The entry into 

force of the Grant Agreements is conditional upon signature (i) by African Development Fund and the 

Republic of Togo of the ADF grant, and (ii) by African Development Fund, African Development Bank 

and the Republic of Togo of the TSF grant.  

7.2.2 Conditions Precedent to Board Presentation of the Programme: Presentation of the 
Programme to the Board of Directors of the Fund shall be subject to evidence, provided by the 

Republic of Togo, of the implementation of all preliminary measures agreed with the Fund as 

specified in Table 2 in para: 5.4. 

7.2.3 Conditions Precedent to Disbursement: The disbursement of the resources of the grants 
is conditional upon realisation, by the Republic of Togo, to the satisfaction of ADF, of the following 

condition: Submit to the Bank the details of the Treasury bank account into which the resources of  the grant will 
be deposited 

7.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The proposed PAGPA is in line with the Bank Group policies and guidelines on reform support 

operations (2012). 
 

 

 

Table 4 – Risks and Mitigation Measures 
 

Risks 
Significanc

e of risk 
Mitigation Measures 

Political instability related to demands 
for Presidential term limits 

Substantial The government is committed to revising the constitution to limit presidential terms 
to two mandates.  Dialogue on this issue is ongoing with political parties. 

Macroeconomic instability due to 

the country's economic 
vulnerability to exogenous shocks 

Moderate The Government is committed to strengthening the country's resilience by 

implementing a genuine policy of structural transformation of the economy 
and pursuing the reforms agreed with the IMF and other partners. 

Fiduciary risks due to weaknesses 

in the public finance management 

system 

Moderate The effective implementation of the PA-GFP and the measures provided for 

under PAGPA I will contribute towards consolidating the gains and 

accelerating the improvement of the integrity of the public finance 
management system. 

Weak human capacities to 

implement the reforms identified in 

general, and those linked to the 
development of Agropoles, in 

particular 

Moderate High-level technical assistance to the Government on the design and 

deployment of the Agropoles will be established and financed by the Bank's 

project preparation fund. Other institutional and technical assistance funded 
by the Bank and other technical and financial partners is aimed at enhancing 

public administration capacity both at central and decentralized levels. 
Weakness of the budget support 
coordination mechanism 

Moderate The authorities have undertaken to strengthen the institutional arrangements 
for coordinating and monitoring budget support for make it more operational 

 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

 

In light of the foregoing, it is recommended that the Boards of Directors approve a TSF grant 

not exceeding UA 7.21 million and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 2.32 million for the Republic of 

Togo, to finance the governance and agribusiness promotion support programme (PAGPA) in 

accordance with the conditions set forth in this report.



 

I 

ANNEX I: Government’s Policy Letter 
 

MINISTRY OF THE ECONOMY             

REPUBLIC OF TOGO 

       AND FINANCE                               Work-Freedom-Fatherland 

   ---------------                   ---

------- 
PERMANENT SECRETARIAT FOR THE  
MONITORING OF REFORM POLICIES AND  

FINANCIAL PROGRAMMES  

             

            -------- 

  N°_________/MEF/SP-PRPF     Lomé, _____________ 

 
 

The Minister of the Economy and Finance  
 

To   

 

Mr Akinwumi ADESINA 

African Development Bank Group President  

Avenue Joseph Anoma 

01 BP 1387 Abidjan 01 

 

Côte d'Ivoire 
 

 

Subject: Letter of Development Policy. 

Mr President, 

This Letter of Development Policy (LDP) outlines the progress Togo has made in implementing 

its national development strategy and the prospects for 2017-2020. It describes the development 

objectives and policies the authorities have defined for the pursuit of their reform agenda to 

consolidate economic growth and reduce poverty. To achieve these goals, the Government 

continues to seek the technical and financial support of all the various partners, in particular the 

African Development Bank, through the Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support 

Programme (PAGPA). 

I. Status of Implementation of the Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion 

 Strategy (SCAPE 2013-2017) 

The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy is in its final year of 

implementation. At end-2016, the implementation by strategic thrust stands as follows: 

1. For the thrust on the development of sectors with high growth potential, performance 

indicators show progress in the agricultural production sector, in the development of handicrafts 

and in services. On the other hand, the industrial development sector falls short of the 

objectives. The results recorded in the agricultural sector stem from the implementation of the 

PNIASA projects. Thus, agricultural GDP grew by 7% relative to 2015. The rate of coverage 

of cereal product needs is on average 110% over the 2013-2016 period, and that of livestock 

products is estimated at 56% of national needs in 2016. In services, the balance of goods and 

services as a percentage of GDP indicates an improvement in the deficit from -21.1 in 2013 to 

-9 in 2016. With regard to industrial development, the harmonized production index rose from 

121.9 in 2011 to 147.5 in 2013 and fell to 126.9 in 2014, 99.7 in 2015 and 97.3 in 2016. 



II  

2. There has been significant progress in the area of human capital, social protection 

and employment, particularly in the education, health and employment sectors. The primary 

school completion rate reached 94.8%; maternal and neonatal mortality recorded a downward 

trend and 8,143 permanent jobs and 11,478 temporary jobs were created. Social indicators have 

improved slightly in recent years but still rank Togo in the last quintile of the Human 

Development Index (HDI). The net enrolment ratio (NER) in primary education improved 

overall to 94.3% in 2015. The incidence of poverty fell from 61.7% in 2006 to 55.1% in 2015, 

and the extreme poverty rate has not witnessed any tangible improvement. The Gini index 

improved from 0.393 to 0.380 between 2011 and 2015 (SDG 10) despite progress over the last 

five years and spatial and gender inequalities persist. In rural areas, nearly 7 out of 10 Togolese 

are poor and the availability of curative services decreased from 41% in 2014 to 37.7% in 2015. 

The 2016 Human Development Index remains weak with a score of 0.487, ranking Togo 166th 

out of 188 countries. 

3. Significant progress has been made in the area of infrastructure strengthening. In 

order for Togo to bridge its infrastructure deficit, the socio-economic infrastructure 

rehabilitation and construction policy was the most financed of the SCAPE focus areas. Roads 

with fairly good service levels reached 60%, compared with 16.7% in 2011; thus, the average 

time taken by a truck to ply the NL1 dropped from 72 hours in 2012 to 48 hours in 2016. 

Extension of the PAL, by the construction of the dock and third quay with a capacity of 14,000 

TEU, helped to boost traffic especially regarding transhipment (70,808.537 or 55.8% of the 

traffic in 2016). Thanks to the extension and modernization of GNASSIMGBE Eyadema 

International Airport, airport activities have grown and traffic has increased from 694,335 to 

758,784 passengers, representing a rise of 9.2% in 2016. The electrification rate rose from 

28.3% in 2014 to 35.5% in 2016, and the fixed and mobile telephony penetration rate rose from 

67.11% in 2011 to 77.6% in 2016. 

4. With regard to the promotion of participatory, balanced and sustainable 

development, the evaluation of indicators at end 2016 shows progress. Thus, 25.67 billion 

worth of micro-credits were granted on guarantee funds to support grassroots communities in 

2016, compared with 2 billion in 2013. As regards the number of development hubs created, 

the Government, through SCAPE, planned to promote wealth creation at local level based on 

the potential of each region. Public action aims to develop agricultural clusters, industrial 

clusters and service clusters. As regards the balanced emergence of development hubs, no 

cluster has yet been created. 

5. Progress has also been made regarding the strengthening of governance. The CPIA 

indicator rose from 2.94 in 2011 to 3.55 in 2013, and stagnated at 3 as from 2014. The 2016 

Mo Ibrahim report on the evaluation of global governance in Africa shows that Togo ranks 33rd 

out of 54 countries evaluated with a score of 48.5 out of 100. Notwithstanding the low overall 

ranking, Togo, with an average evolution of +9.7 points, was ranked the 2nd best governance 

reformer country during the 2006-2015 period; Transparency International's 2016 report ranks 

Togo 116th out of 176 with a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 32 compared to 29 in 2014 

on a scale of 0 (high corruption) to 100 (very low corruption). 

Socio-economic Context 

6. Despite a difficult external environment, economic growth was sustained over the 

2013-2016 period with an average rate of 5.2% thanks to the sound performance of the 

agricultural sector and infrastructure investments. This trend is expected to continue in 2017 

and 2018 due to the combined effects of fairly good rainfall and productivity gains from 

agricultural processing, and operation of the improved transport system. Inflation has also been 



III  

contained, falling from 1.8% in 2015 to 0.9% in 2016, and projected at 1.5% in 2017. However, 

due mainly to infrastructure investments in 2015 and 2016, total public debt increased 

considerably from 48.8% in 2010 to 80.8% of GDP by the end of 2016, above the Community 

norm of 70%. As a result of the increase in the above-mentioned infrastructure spending and 

the high cost of pre-financing commitments, the overall budget deficit (cash basis) widened to 

9.6% of GDP in 2016 against 7.8% of GDP in 2015. The deficit, projected at 9.7% in 2017, is 

expected to improve to, and stagnate at, 3.6% in 2018, according to IMF estimates.  

7. An analysis conducted in 2016 by the IMF and the World Bank shows that Togo 

presents a risk of over-indebtedness in respect of the overall debt stock. Togo's new programme 

(2017-2019) under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with the IMF aims essentially to create 

favourable conditions for a substantial reduction of Togo's public debt, from 80.8% of GDP in 

2016 to 67.8% by 2020. In this regard, the Government has discontinued the practice of pre-

financing and has committed to implementing measures to build the institutional public debt 

management capacity. 

II. Prospects for 2017-2020 

8. As part of its National Development Programme (NDP), the Government is committed 

to vigorous action in growth-enhancing sectors, particularly the agricultural sector. It will pay 

particular attention to improving the governance and performance of social sectors in order to 

enable our country have a healthy and well-educated population fit for the labour market. The 

private sector’s contribution will be further fostered by improvements in the business climate 

to enhance its competitiveness for it to become the real driver of strong and inclusive economic 

growth. 

Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Overall Objectives  

9. The main objective of the PAGPA is to help create conditions conducive to strong, 

sustainable and inclusive growth. The programme has two components: (i) support to 

strengthen the mobilisation of domestic resources and optimal management of public 

investment: this component aims to strengthen domestic mobilisation and streamlining of 

public investment management, in particular in the agricultural sector; (ii) support for the 

promotion of agropoles and the strengthening of local governance: this component aims at 

implementing reforms geared towards setting up effective mechanisms and a business 

environment conducive to the development of agropoles. 

Reforms Supported by the Programme and Expected Outcomes 

10. Support for the promotion of agribusiness: the main reforms focus on: (i) the 

adoption by the Council of Ministers of the National Agropoles Development Strategy; (ii) 

operationalisation of the Agency for the Promotion of Investment and Free Trade Zones; (iii) 

development and adoption of the national industrial policy; (iv) preparation and adoption of the 

national private sector development strategy; (v) adoption of instruments for the establishment 

of the national standardization and quality control office; (vi) adoption of the land code and a 

rural land registry; and (viii) adoption of the national gender policy monitoring and evaluation 

mechanism. 

11. Support for domestic resource mobilisation and optimal public investment 

management: The main reforms aim at: (i) the adoption of the new National Customs Code; 

(ii) establishment and operationalisation of the tax policy unit and adoption of the draft 

simplified tax code; (iii) establishment of the tax registry in Lomé; (iv) adoption of the draft 

law on the devolvement of powers and resources to local and regional authorities; (v) adoption 

of the framework for monitoring the implementation of investment projects at the local level; 



IV  

(vi) adaptation of SIGFIP to the technical requirements of programme budgets; and (vii) 

adoption of the decree on the devolvement of financial control and powers, organisation and 

operation of financial control. 

12. The main expected outcomes of the PAGPA are: (i) improvement of the agricultural 

trade balance deficit, (ii) strengthening of Togo's resilience to fragility factors related to spatial 

and gender inequalities; (iii) improvement of the agricultural sector’s competitiveness; (iv) 

securing of land tenure for developed sites; (v) sustained revenue growth, (vi) improvement in 

the PIP implementation rate; (vii) improvement of local tax governance and (viii) building of 

the financial and technical capacity of local government bodies. 

Other Structural Government Reforms during the 2017-2020 Period:   

Governance, Transparency and Structural Reforms  

13. The Government is committed to further improving public finance management as part 

of economic and financial governance. In this regard, evaluations (PEFA, PEMFAR, PIMA and 

DeMPA) were carried out in 2016 and made it possible to update the public finance 

management action plan. This new action plan covers the 2017-2021 period. 

14. The Government is committed to continuing the fight against corruption and fraud as 

well as the establishment of a judicial and regulatory environment conducive to economic 

activity. To take into account WAEMU public financial management guidelines, and to attune 

control bodies to international standards, the instruments governing these bodies are being 

reviewed by a committee set up for this purpose. Similarly, the Government will continue to 

strengthen the national public procurement system; revision of the public procurement code to 

include the PPP management framework, among others, is ongoing and is expected to be 

finalized during the first quarter of 2018. 

15. In addition, the 2017 budget is being implemented with rigour, transparency and 

efficiency, and regarding the domestic debt clearance process, the Government will no longer 

accumulate domestic and external arrears or resort to exceptional procedures in the execution 

of public expenditure. This budget, like the previous one, gives priority to expenditure targeting 

the social sectors, particularly education, health, and basic socio-economic development in rural 

and semi-urban areas. Revenue generation and expenditure implementation reflect the 

implementation of reforms undertaken by the Government. The 2017 budget is based on the 

Integrated Public Finance Management System (SIGFIP), taking into account the economic and 

administrative aspects. Arrangements have been made to adapt and implement SIGFIP in all its 

functionalities and extend it to all ministries, institutions and regions in order to improve 

coordination and ensure the effectiveness of the programme budget by January 2019. The 2018 

draft budget will be adopted by the Council of Ministers and voted by the National Assembly 

within the constitutional deadline. 

Business Climate Reforms  

16. In order to improve the business environment needed to promote the private sector, 

Government action will be directed towards: (i) further simplifying business creation 

procedures and formalities; (ii) further simplifying cross-border trade procedures and 

formalities; (iii) implementing the SME/SMI Charter; (vi) conducting the inventory and 

mapping of SMEs/SMIs; (iv) strengthening the private sector promotion and support system; 

(ix) building the skills of economic operators in SMEs/SMIs; (x) providing support to 

strengthen the Togolese Court of Arbitration to enable it to play its role of resolving conflicts 

or disputes between economic operators; (xi) strengthening dialogue and public-private 

partnership; and (xii) facilitating access to finance and diversifying financial supply and 

products (Guarantee Fund, leasing, FNFI, etc.). 



V  

Agricultural Sector Reforms  

17. Various initiatives are being implemented by the Government to address the major 

challenges and consolidate the gains made towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 

No. 2 (SDG) relating to the elimination of hunger and food security for all. These actions 

include the development of agricultural mechanization, restructuring of actors in the various 

sectors around buoyant value chains, definition of a quality label and the setting up of national 

safety nets. 

18. In addition to these actions, and in anticipation of the emergence of agro-industrial 

enterprises, alongside micro processing enterprises, the Government has undertaken various 

initiatives to encourage private investors in the agricultural sector, in particular by effecting 

reforms in the energy, financial, social, and water and sanitation sectors. 

The NDP Process  

19. The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 2013-2017 is in its final 

year of implementation. The Government has engaged with all stakeholders in the process of 

developing the new national strategy (National Development Plan - NDP) for the period 2018 

to 2022. Based on the priorities identified through a countrywide participatory process, NDP 

2018-2022 will build on five pillars, namely: (i) the fight against poverty and for the 

improvement of social welfare; (ii) promotion of sustained and inclusive economic growth; (iii) 

strengthening of the potential of growth sectors; (iv) sustainable environmental management 

and reduction of spatial inequalities; and (v) consolidation of governance and peace. As part of 

implementation of this NDP, the Government undertakes to fully integrate the identified 

priorities into the budget, and domestically financed social expenditure, in particular for 

projects with a considerable impact on poverty reduction. 

Programme Monitoring and Evaluation  

20. The Ministry of the Economy and Finance is responsible for the overall 

implementation of the reforms supported by the Agribusiness Governance and Promotion 

Programme (PAGPA). The daily monitoring and evaluation of the programme is the 

responsibility of the Permanent Secretariat for the Follow-up of Reform Policies and Financial 

Programmes (SP-PRPF). This structure, which coordinates the implementation of the 

Government programme, will periodically organise a joint programme review with all 

stakeholder structures as well as members of civil society, including the Togolese Coordination 

of Farmers' Organisations and Agricultural Producers. The Government will submit quarterly 

reports to the AfDB on programme implementation progress, measured against agreed 

timetables and performance indicators. 

Request for Financing 

21. The growth prospects of the Togolese economy over the 2017-2018 period remain 

favourable, with real GDP growth rates projected to average 5.30%. For the year 2017, the 

macroeconomic framework projects a total revenue (excluding grants) of CFAF 567.5 billion 

against an expenditure of CFAF 968.1 billion (including arrears payments), or a financing 

requirement of CFAF 400.6 billion. The financing identified amounts to CFAF 323.3 billion, 

leaving a residual gap of CFAF 77.3 billion. 

The required ADF contribution to cover the 2017 financing needs stands at about CFAF 7.6 

billion (at the rate of UA1 = CFAF 799.76). 

 

Please accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my highest consideration. 

 

       Sani YAYA 



VI  

 
 

 

 



VII  

 
 

 

 

 



VIII  

 
 

 

 

 



IX  

 

 
 

 

 



X  

 
 

 

 

 



XI  

 

 
 

 



 

XII 

ANNEX II : REFORM MEASURES MATRIX 
 

 

Objectives Measures 2017 Measures  2018 Output Indicators  Outcome indicators IR/SD 
 

A) Support for improved private investment environment and agribusiness promotion  

A. 1) Improvement of 

the private investments 

environment  

 

 

Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the Land Code 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Land code and rural registry 

adopted by Council of Ministers in 

2017 
 

The ownership transfer 

timeframe is at most 90 

days in 2018 (decreases 

from 283 in 2016) 

 

Number of taxes decreases 

from 49 in 2016 to at most 

39 in 2018. 

 

Agricultural trade balance 

deficit improves from – 

44% in 2015 to -38% in 

2018 

 

 

DB-WB Report 

 

Ministries of Industry 

 

Ministry in charge of Private 

Sector Development 

 

Ministry of Agriculture 

 

INS/MEF/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ministry of Agriculture 

 

  

 

 

 

 Review and adoption of the 

Investment Code 

 

 

New Investment Code adopted in 

2018 by the Council of Ministers 

 

  

 

 

 

 

Investment and Free Zones 

Promotion Agency 

operationalized 

Appointment of the Director and 

setting up of the team of the 

Investment and Free Zone 

Promotion Agency, which goes 

operational in 2018 

Adoption of the revised 

simplified Tax Code 

 New Simplified Tax Code 

available in 2017 
Private Sector Development 

Strategy adopted 

 

 National Private Sector 

Development Strategy 

Creation of the Business 

Climate Unit 

 Decree adopted by the Council of 

Ministers in 2017 

A.2) Strengthening of 

the legal and 

institutional  

framework of 

Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

Strategy for the Development 

of the Agropoles  

 National Strategy for Agropole 

Development is available 2017 

 



 

 

 

XIII  

Objectives Measures 2017 Measures  2018 Output Indicators  Outcome indicators IR/SD 
agribusiness 

development  
 

 

 

 

 

 

Operationalization of the 

National Agropoles 

Development Strategy 
 

At least 80 km of rural roads built 

in 2017 and 35 km in 2018 in the 

area of  the Kara Agropole  
At least 500 ha in 2017 and 300 

ha in 2018 of agricultural land  in 

the area of  the Kara Agropole, of 

which at least 30%  for women's 

and/or mostly women's 

organizations 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ministry in charge of gender 

 

 

 

Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

Agro-Industry Policy 

 National industrialization policy 

adopted in 2018 

 

 Operationalization of the 

High Authority for Quality 

and Technical Quality 

Structures 

The Director General is appointed 

and his team  set up 

B)  Support for  internal resource mobilization and optimum management of public investments  
B.1) Improved revenue 

mobilization 

 

 

 

 

Adoption of the new 

National Customs Code by 

the Council of Ministers 

 Code adopted in 2017 Improvement of the tax pressure 

from 17.9%  in 2016 to 18,3% 

in 2017 and 19,1% in 2018 

 

 

 

 

Improved investment 

management: PI.11 moves 

from D in 2016 to C in 

2018 

 

 

100% of projects registered 

for 2018 are validated by 

the selection committee in 

accordance with the 

procedures manual 

 

OTR  

 

SP-PRPF  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Directorate of Budget  

 

 

MEF 

 

 

Ministry of Planning 

 

Establishment of the fiscal 

policy unit by the MEF.  

 Establishment in 2017  

Establishment of the Lomé 

tax registry. 

 The decree establishing the tax 

registry for the Lomé region is 

adopted in 2017 
Establishment of the 

Financial Regime of Local 

and Regional Authorities 

 Draft decree adopted in 2017 

Adoption of the bill on the 

transfer of authority and 

resources to local and 

regional authorities by the 

Council of Ministers. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bill adopted in 2017 



 

 

 

XIV  

Objectives Measures 2017 Measures  2018 Output Indicators  Outcome indicators IR/SD 
Adoption of the Bill on parity 

by Council of Ministers. 

 Bill on gender equality adopted by 

the Council of Ministers 

 

100% of the PIP 2017 

investment projects 

supervised at least once in 

2018 

 

DADC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEF 

 

SP-PRPF  

 

 

 

Study on gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy. 

 Study on gender mainstreaming in 

tax policy validated 
 Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the National 

Gender Strategy 

incorporating the 

recommendations of the 

study 

 

 

 

Study on the gender 

mainstreaming in tax polic   

National gender strategy available 

in 2018 

   

 

 

 

 

B.2)  Enhanced 

Investments 

Management  

Production  of a manual of 

procedures for planning, 

selection and programming 

of public investments 

 The validated manual is available 

in 2017 and the is PIP revised 

Adoption of the ministerial 

order on the framework for 

regional monitoring of  

investment project execution 

 The committee is set up in 2017 

 Finalization of the adaptation 

of the SIGFIP to the technical 

requirements of the 

programme budget 

implementation (2019 

Budget Policy Debate in line 

with programme budget 

format) 

Holding of the BPD in 2018 in the 

National Assembly according to 

programme budget format  

 



 

 

 

XV  

Objectives Measures 2017 Measures  2018 Output Indicators  Outcome indicators IR/SD 
Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the decree on the 

deconcentration of financial 

control and powers, 

organization and functioning 

of financial control 

 Decree adopted in 2017 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Implementation of 

deconcentration 
The Controllers of the  5 regions and the 

Ministry of agriculture) are appointed 

and  installed in 2018   

Creation of Agency for 

government participation 

 

 

 Decree adopted in 2017 ; unit to 

be operational in 2018. 

 



 

XVI 

ANNEX III: PROGRAMME MATRIX REFLECTING TOGO FRAGILITY FACTORS  

 
Fragility factors identified at 

fragility assessment  

Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by general State Policy with the backing of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs)  

Measures supported by AfDB 

intervention under PAGPA 

(2017-2018) 

Political, institutional and 

security factors  

 

 

 

1. Legitimate policies and political governance (legitimacy, inclusiveness,  strengthening of statehood and trust in State institutions 

Legitimacy: Togo has achieved significant progress which definitely sets it on the path to lasting resilience. 

Such achievements include enhanced security and stability, economic recovery with average growth rates of 

5% over a ten-year period, implementation of major institutional and economic reforms, stability, 

consolidated social cohesion and strengthening of regional cooperation. TFPs continue to commend the 

Togolese government for its efforts to rebuild infrastructure and boost the country's economy following the 

resumption of cooperation in 2006. These improvements notwithstanding, the reconstruction process in the 

aftermath of the political/democratic crisis is far from over. The North-South ethnic and regional divide 

continues to undermine political stability and underpin deep-seated discord among Togo’s political 

protagonists. Slowness in the democratic transition and weak institutions constitute the major challenges to 

political governance in Togo. This has heightened mutual distrust between the dominant coalitions and 

weakened ownership of sustainable, courteous, inclusive and constructive mechanisms for socio-political 

dialogue within the political class and among the elite. 

PAGPA proposes a series of 

reforms designed to improve 

economic governance and 

transparency of government 

actions. The implementation 

of these reforms should help 

to systematically address 

institutional credibility and 

trust issues and thus mitigate 

some noted pockets of 

political governance 

weaknesses. 



 

 

 

XVII  

Fragility factors identified at 

fragility assessment  

Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by general State Policy with the backing of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs)  

Measures supported by AfDB 

intervention under PAGPA 

(2017-2018) 

Governance:  Togo has undertaken a series of actions to improve its situation. Through this process 

coordinated by the Permanent Secretariat for Reforms, several instruments have been prepared, including 

a public procurement code, those on the operationalization of the Audit Court and the Finance General 

Inspectorate, and the establishment of a single window at the Treasury, as well as the reports on the budget 

review law. The Togolese administration’s capacities remain weak both at the central and local levels in 

terms of contracts management and award, as well as regarding the preparation, implementation and 

monitoring and evaluation of development programmes and projects, and the internalization of 

accountability principles. 

The reforms proposed under 

PAGPA seek enhanced 

political, economic and 

financial governance. 

Greater fiscal credibility, 

empowerment of audit and 

anti-corruption agencies, 

and enhanced local 

government capacity are 

expected when the 

programme ends. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Transparency:  Despite remarkable progress, perceptions of corruption remain high according to 

Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index (116
th
 among 176 countries in 2016 against 107

th
 

among 168 countries in 2015) and Togo’s corruption perception rating puts it below the global average (30 

against 43) of the most corrupt countries out of 168. Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are plagued by the 

non-existence of a formal consultative framework and are often misused to award contracts by direct 

negotiation. Other challenges include non-transparency in natural resources management and allocation. 

The lack of transparency and good governance in public procurement contract awards and unlawful use of 

private permits in large-scale land allocations for mining purposes are symptomatic of major unresolved 

resource governance issues and weaknesses. To remedy this situation, the government deemed fit to set up 

an institution with the necessary resources to combat corruption, hence an independent administrative 

institution, HATPLC, was established on 28 July 2015. Its members were appointed on 3 January 2017 and 

were officially sworn in on 7 February 2017. This body is tasked with promoting and strengthening 

corruption prevention as well as combating corruption and related offences in the administration, public 

institutions, private enterprises and non-governmental organizations. It enjoys administrative and financial 



 

 

 

XVIII  

Fragility factors identified at 

fragility assessment  

Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by general State Policy with the backing of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs)  

Measures supported by AfDB 

intervention under PAGPA 

(2017-2018) 

autonomy. It shall also protect whoever reports to the competent authorities, in good faith, all facts relating 

to established offences. Not being a State crackdown apparatus or court of law, it must forward substantiated 

complaints to the public prosecutor. 
 

2.        Security and violence issues, security sector capacity and performance 

Security: Despite the largely stable security situation in Togo, potentially destabilizing   incidents continue 

to occur sporadically, thus justifying a sustained social sector reform effort to address the diverse and now 

recurrent demands for better living conditions in the education and health sectors. Overall, security 

problems manifest through violent attacks on individuals and property as well as the criminalization of the 

economy, including the informal or even illicit exploitation of natural resources. 

While PAGPA does not 

directly contribute to the 

security issue, it however 

provides solutions that 

mitigate the risks likely to 

undermine the security 

situation. 

 

 

3. Justice sector (inclusive  access to justice, rule of law and  independence of the judiciary, checks and balances) 

A weakened judicial system: The successive crises arising from the democratic transition and the sanctions 

imposed for over a decade by Togo's leading technical and financial partners very negatively impacted the 

judicial system. Rendered dysfunctional by the various fragility factors, it has been exploited for political 

gain by the entire political class and is undermined by a lack of independence, corruption, and inadequate 

technical and material resources. Thus, in the aftermath of the crises, deep distrust remains between litigants 

and the justice system. Aware of this situation, regional leaders in each member country have embarked on 

justice sector reform. To date, significant progress has been achieved, albeit modest compared to the 

people’s expectations. In the light of this, Togo was called upon and pledged to accelerate the justice system 

modernization process, the adoption of the Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code, and the reform of 

the National Commission on Human Rights (CNDH). 

PAGPA while not directly 

contributing to the justice 

system, addresses the issue 

of inclusion, which is a 

source of social injustice by 

mainstreaming the 

vulnerable groups, notably 

women and youth, in the 

reforms to be carried out. 

 
Economic and financial  

factors 
4.        Strengthening the economic base and community resilience (equitable access to infrastructure and natural resource benefits) 

  



 

 

 

XIX  

Fragility factors identified at 

fragility assessment  

Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by general State Policy with the backing of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs)  

Measures supported by AfDB 

intervention under PAGPA 

(2017-2018) 

Togo has recorded encouraging macro-economic performances which have enabled its return to growth. 

However, it remains fragile and particularly sensitive to exogenous shocks and climatic hazards due to the 

structure of its economic fabric which in recent years has scarcely changed. Growth remains structurally 

constrained by low overall productivity and high production factor costs. Similarly, although labour force 

quality has improved thanks to better education, physical capital accumulation has stagnated since the 

1990s, contributing to a steady decline in total factor productivity since 1980. Togo must explore ways of 

turning its geographical position into an asset. The modernized port and airport as well as the presence of 

the ASKY airline hub constitute impactful infrastructures through which it can regain its past position. 

Various reforms proposed 

under PAGPA will 

contribute towards creating 

an environment conducive to 

Togo’s economic 

diversification in order to 

cushion the effects of 

exogenous shocks, through 

the Agropoles to be set up 

and professionalization of 

agriculture. 

 
Social factors: poverty and 

inequality  

 

5. Increased mobilization of resources to develop opportunities relating to employment, income and inclusive access to basic social services, focusing on 

the crucial role of the State, improved financial governance and an appropriate refocusing of the functions of the State 

 

Inequalities: Progress in human development varies across regions and prefectures and will fall short of the 

goals of Agenda 2030 for sustainable development. The education and health systems as well as the living 

standards of the Togolese people while slowly improving, face multiple setbacks, namely inequalities, which 

diminish the impact of growth on poverty reduction; the lack of genuine structural transformation, which 

limits economic opportunities; and stagnation in gender equality, which reflects on skills and business  

development. Beyond this, there are enormous challenges delivering human development to an ever-

growing, youthful and mobile employment-seeking population which the government must factor into the 

huge reform task it has embarked upon with the resumption of cooperation with various donors.  

 

The range of PAGPA-

supported reforms is aimed 

at preparing an environment 

conducive to the 

operationalization of 

Agropoles as a key element 

of the structural 

transformation of a rural 

social fabric that is affected 

more by inequalities. 

 

 

Revenue sources: The economy’s dependence on the phosphate sector as well as port and airport traffic is 

a fragility source. The largest share of GDP is generated by two prominent sectors: the port of Lomé and 

the exploitation of a huge phosphate deposit, which accounts for more than 40% of export earnings. The 

country is the world’s fifth largest phosphate producer. Many studies have revealed that "countries whose 

  

The indicators proposed 

under PAGPA include 

sustained revenue 

mobilization and 



 

 

 

XX  

Fragility factors identified at 

fragility assessment  

Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by general State Policy with the backing of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs)  

Measures supported by AfDB 

intervention under PAGPA 

(2017-2018) 

economies depend on the export of a limited number of commodities are more prone to political fragility" 

and conflict. To avert this, the authorities plan to invest heavily in the structural transformation of the under-

productive agricultural sector by developing Agropoles and thus consolidating the agricultural sector’s 

GDP share and progressively curbing food import expenditure 

rationalized management of 

public investments required 

to boost local resources. 

 

Regulatory framework (State’s role in services provision): Togo has the advantage of having renovated its 

road networks connecting it to neighboring countries, and developed good quality urban roads in the capital 

city even if these have deteriorated due to the political/democracy crisis. The constraints on infrastructure 

development by the State to improve the quality of its services vary across activity sectors. Although progress 

is recorded in the international transport sector despite significant lingering regional disparities, the public 

utility sectors (water, waste, electricity and transport) are struggling to take off due to the lack of quick and 

efficient action, and also delayed financing. The unbalanced distribution of public utilities between regions 

and population strata is another fragility factor likely in the long term to heighten sociopolitical tensions if 

remedial measures are not taken to stamp out any social divide. 

The noted urban-rural 

service availability 

imbalance will be 

significantly mitigated by 

operationalizing the 

Agropoles for which the 

PAGPA proposes a number 

of reforms designed to 

facilitate the establishment 

of Agropoles, which will be 

comprehensively serviced 

agribusiness centres of 

excellence, conducive to the 

socioeconomic integration of 

communities. 
 



 

XXI 

ANNEX IV: Note on the relationship with IMF 

 
IMF Staff Team Completes Review Mission to Togo 

October 31, 2017 

End-of-Mission press releases include statements of IMF staff teams that convey 

preliminary findings after a visit to a country. The views expressed in this statement are 

those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive 

Board. Based on the preliminary findings of this mission, staff will prepare a report that, 

subject to management approval, will be presented to the IMF's Executive Board for 

discussion and decision. 

 Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the first half of 2017, accompanied by 

a low inflation. 

 Performance under the ECF-supported program has been good, with all quantitative 

performance criteria met and structural reforms continuing to be gradually implemented. 

 Lingering tensions could take a toll on the macroeconomic situation. 

An International Monetary Fund (IMF) team led by Ivohasina Razafimahefa visited Lomé 

during October 23-30, 2017 to conduct discussions on the first review of the program 

supported by an Extended Credit Facility (ECF) which was approved in May this year. 

At the conclusion of this visit, Mr. Razafimahefa issued the following statement: 

“Economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the first half of 2017, accompanied 

by a low inflation. End-year economic growth is expected to be slightly below 5 percent. 

Headline year-on-year inflation rate through July was -2.5 percent, driven primarily by 

lower food prices; the core inflation rate, excluding food prices, was 0.6 percent. Fiscal 

consolidation has begun with the aim of reducing debt to a safer level. Expenditure has 

been curtailed significantly. The primary fiscal balance registered a surplus of 1.4 percent 

of GDP during January-June 2017. 

“Despite broadly positive medium-term outlook, supported by the expected boost in 

productivity from recent infrastructure upgrading and external concessional financing, 

Togo’s economy faces risks. In particular, lingering tensions could affect consumer and 

investor sentiment and, thus, take a toll on macroeconomic performance. 

“The authorities are making strong efforts to align the draft 2018 budget with the 

authorities’ economic reform agenda supported under the ECF arrangement. The 

authorities target further fiscal consolidation with a projected domestic primary fiscal 

deficit of 0.2 percent of GDP. This consolidation will be achieved through both an increase 

of revenue and a reduction of domestically financed investment. The mission encouraged 

the authorities to pursue their consolidation efforts to bring debt below the threshold of 

heightened risk of public sector debt. These efforts will help create fiscal space for 

additional social spending which are critical for poverty reduction. The mission also 

reiterated the need to further improve the business climate and encourage private 

investments. 

“The mission reached staff level agreement with the authorities on economic and financial 

policies that could support approval of the first review of their three-year program under 

the ECF. The country's economic program has remained broadly on track, with all 

quantitative performance criteria under the program met and structural reforms continuing 

to be gradually implemented. In particular, the non-orthodox financing of public 

investment—which had led to a rapid debt accumulation in recent years—was halted. The 

first review under the ECF is tentatively scheduled to be considered by the IMF Executive 

Board in December 2017. 

“The mission met with President Faure Gnassingbé, and held discussions with Minister 

Sani Yaya (Minister of Economy and Finance), Kossi Assimaidou (Minister of 

http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/pr15297.htm


 

 

 

XXII  

Development Planning), Kossi Ténou (National Director of the regional central bank 

BCEAO), other senior government officials, as well as representatives of the private 

sector and development partners. The IMF team wishes to express its gratitude to the 

authorities for their hospitality and all interlocutors for the collaborative discussions. ” 

IMF Communications Department 



















































CONEPT NOTE


 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 
 

UGANDA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

(AVCP) – PROJECT 1 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/AHAI DEPARTMENTS 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  
  
  
P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 P

u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  

    
  
  
  
  
  
  



 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

I.     STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE .......................................................................... 1 
1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives .................................................... 1 
1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement .................................................................................. 2 
1.3. Donors coordination ........................................................................................................ 3 

II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 4 

2.1. Project components ......................................................................................................... 4 
2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored ......................................... 7 
2.3. Project type...................................................................................................................... 7 
2.4. Project Cost and financing arrangements ........................................................................ 7 
2.5. Project’s target area and population ................................................................................ 9 

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design......................................... 10 
2.8.Key performance indicators ........................................................................................... 10 

III.   PROJECT FEASIBILITY ................................................................................................ 11 

3.1. Economic and financial performance............................................................................ 11 
3.2. Environmental and Social impacts ................................................................................ 12 

IV.  IMPLEMENTATION ....................................................................................................... 14 
4.1. Implementation arrangements ....................................................................................... 14 

4.2. Monitoring .................................................................................................................... 17 
4.3. Governance ................................................................................................................... 18 

4.4. Sustainability ................................................................................................................. 18 
4.5. Risk management: ......................................................................................................... 18 
4.6. Knowledge building ...................................................................................................... 19 

V.   LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY ............................................................... 19 

5.1. Legal instrument............................................................................................................ 19 
5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention ........................................................... 19 

5.3. Other Conditions ……………………………………………………………….         19  

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies .................................................................................... 19 

VI. RECOMMENDATION………………………………………………………………19 

 

Appendix I:   Country’s Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators 

Appendix II:  Status of Bank Portfolio in Uganda 
Appendix III: Map of the Project Area 

Appendix IV: Project Beneficiary Districts 

Appendix V:  Key related projects financed by the Bank and other Development Partners in the  

Uganda 

Appendix VI:.Procurement Plan



 

i 

 

Currency Equivalents 
As of November, 2017 

 

Currency Unit =  Ugandan Shillings (UGX) 

 

UA 1   =  UGX 5,112.97  

UA 1  = USD 1.40 

USD 1  = UGX 3,640 

 

 

 

Fiscal Year 
July 1 – June 30 

 

 

Weights and Measures 
 

1metric tonne  = 2204 pounds (lbs) 

1 kilogramme (kg) = 2.200 lbs 

1 metre (m)  = 3.28 feet (ft) 

1 millimetre (mm) = 0.03937 inch (“) 

1 kilometre (km) = 0.62 mile 

1 hectare (ha)  = 2.471 acres 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

  



 

ii 

 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

ADB  African Development Bank  

ADF  African Development Fund  

ASDPG Agriculture & Rural Development Donor Coordination Group 

AVCP Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme 

CSP Country Strategy Paper 

EU  European Union  

FAO  Food & Agriculture Organization  

FIEFOC Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project 

GDP  Gross Domestic Product  

GOU  Government of Uganda  

IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development  

JICA Japanese International Cooperation Agency 

MDB Multilateral Development Banks 

MAAIF  Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries  

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  

MFPED  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  

MGLSD  Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development  

MoWE  Ministry of Water and Environment  

NAADS  National Agricultural Advisory Services  

NDF  Nordic Development Fund  

NFA  National Forest Agency  

NEMA  National Environment Management Authority  

NGO Non-Governmental Organization 

O&M  Operation and Maintenance  

PCN Project Concept Note 

PIU  Project Implementation Unit  

PY  Project Year  

RWHS  Rainwater Harvesting Structure  

SSI  Small Scale Irrigation  

SWAPs Sector Wide Approaches 

TA  Technical Assistance  

UA  Unit of Account  

UGFO  Uganda Field Office  

UGX  Uganda Shillings  

UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 

WAPs  Watershed Action Plans  

WUA  Water Users’ Associations  

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



 

iii 

 

Loan and Grant Information 
 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER   : Republic of Uganda 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY : Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)  

 

Financing plan 

 

 

Source Amount (UA Million) 

 

Instrument 

ADF  

 

 57.00  Loan  

Government  

 

7.41 Not applicable  

TOTAL COST 

 

64.41  

 

 Key financing information 

 

Loan  currency 

 

UA 

Interest Type* Note Applicable  

Interest rate spread * Note Applicable  

Commitment Fee 0.5% 

Other fees* 0.75% Service Charge   

Tenor 600 months  

Grace period 120 months  

FIRR 

NPV (USD base case ) 

20%  

2.127 Million  

EIRR (base case) 23% 

*if applicable 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 
Concept Note approval 22 January, 2017 

Project approval 11 December 2017 

Effectiveness March , 2018 

Completion December ,2022  

Closing Date  June,  2023  

Last repayment 50 years; December, 2068  

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

iv 

 

Project Summary 

 
1. Project Overview: 

1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed within 
the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been designated 

by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate the country’s 

Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; generate 

employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote science and 

technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for accelerating 

socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, notably, 

construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to enhance 

household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan 

(ASSP) 2015/16-2019/20, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Local 

Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) (2013-2023), and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

AVCP will be implemented along commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention to 

regulatory reforms. In agreement with Government, the project will focus on three commodity value 

chains, namely: Rice, Maize and Dairy/Beef value chains; and will comprise of three (3) operational 

and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity Enhancement, ii) 

Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and (iv) Project 

Management and Coordination. 

 
1.2 According to Uganda National Household Survey 2013, about 19.7%, of the total population 

representing 6.7 million people, are unable to meet their basic needs and are living below absolute 

poverty line. The incidence of poverty is highest among food-crop growing category in the rural areas 

due to low income. The project seeks to increase farmer incomes through improvements in Production 

and Productivity Enhancement, Infrastructure Development and Market Development and Trade 

Facilitation.  

 

1.3  The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various Districts across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, 

Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, 

Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; 

Rice: Locations where the Bank and Government have developed large irrigation schemes, Sironko-

Acomai irrigation scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and 

Pader. The soft components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity 

building would be extended to all irrigation schemes undertaken with support of the Bank under FIEFOC 

1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on 

the cattle corridor districts (from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara 

district as the springboard. The target population in those districts is about 1,816,756 of which 51.7% 

are women and comprising 386,543.8 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase 

in yields of major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average 

of 10%. In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating 

activities from natural resources, capacity building  and service delivery of the project would specifically 

target women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved  yields and incomes. Moreover, the project is expected to 

provide technical skills in conservation and other farming practices through targeted training that 

promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural productivity in the proposed 

project area. It will also assist in the formulation and implementation of measures that reduce 

deforestation and promote agro-forestry through introduction of economic trees which will lead to 

emission reductions and the protection of carbon reservoirs as part of the Reduction of Emissions from 



 

v 

 

Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) agenda. The carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestered as a result of 

tree planting by the project is estimated at 245, 000 tons of over 20 years. Training under the project 

will provide an opportunity for special attention to be given to intensification of climate-smart farming 

operations. 

 

2. Needs Assessment:  

2.1 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to achievement 

of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; develop the 

infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in response to a 

request from the Government of Uganda to provide assistance for the transformation of agriculture in 

Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had initially fielded a Country 

Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, July and September, 2016 

respectively.  The missions were to understand the extent of implementation of the ASSP and the general 

context of agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to achieve 

the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting processing and marketing activities in this sector. 

The feasibility study and preliminary designs of the Achomai irrigation scheme in Bukedia/Bulambuli 

Districts was developed by JICA. In the course of the development of this project, the project team also 

held several consultation meetings with various stakeholders of the project; including civil society and 

development partners. 

 

2.2 Hence the project is demand driven by farmers, local governments, various stakeholders and the 

GoU to address requirements of increased agricultural production and enhancement of household 

incomes.  The project will build on Uganda’s relatively strong record in improving gender equity 

through deliberate inclusion and promotion of project activities with farms and agribusiness activities 

owned, operated, and managed by women. The project will aim to empower more women and youth to 

make decisions, invest in agriculture, and improve their social and economic status for the family’s 

overall wellbeing. 

 

2.3 In keeping with the Bank’s new strategy on addressing fragility and building resilience, the project 

has also been developed with the goal of building resilience in mind. Food security is critical to 

community resilience, and agribusiness provides value addition, creating agro-industries, and export 

promotion.  By helping the development of agribusiness and cottage industries, the Bank will contribute 

to more stable sources of income, greater food security, boosts youth employment, and expand economic 

opportunities for the communities. 

 

3. Bank’s Added Value: 

3.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP),  the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement 

Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department of the Treasury 

MDB Awards, the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm Income Enhancement 

and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws extensively from lessons 

learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of the completed Projects. The most pertinent 

lessons include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building the 



 

vi 

 

capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and project 

sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project 

 

4. Knowledge Management:  

4.1 Knowledge gained from implementation of the above projects, particularly on the need to build 

country capacity for project implementation, has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same 

pattern, the knowledge that will be generated by the project will be instrumental in designing and 

managing similar Bank-financed projects in the future. Provisions made for knowledge and information 

management include on web-based technology for natural resources data collection, ICT platform to 

network value chain actors, compilation and presentation, the market Information System (MIS) that 

will generate data pertaining to prices, sources and volumes of commodities to be shared with all 

stakeholders and the gender sensitive value chain analysis and development that allow women and youth 

to design and manage sustainable SMEs.



 

vii 

 

AVCP RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and project name: UGANDA: Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme 

Purpose of the project :  To improve farm incomes, rural livelihoods, food security and contribute to poverty reduction through irrigated agriculture, sustainable natural resources management and agricultural 

enterprise development. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
  

1.1 Farm incomes increased, food 
security improved and poverty reduced  

 

1.1: Average household farm income (USD per year) 

 
 

1.2:  Reduction in Poverty Level (%) 

 

2017 

1.1: 672 
(2016) 

1.2: 26 

 

2022 

1.1 730 
 

1.2: 14.2 

Household survey, 

Bureau of 
Statistics (UBOS) 

reports, 

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

 

2.1. Improved rice and maize 
production, and livestock genetic 

breed  

 
 

 

 
 

2.2 Improved integrated natural 

resources management 
 

 

2.3 Improved rural employment 
(30%youth and women) 

 

 

 

2.1.1  Number of hectares under improve rice production 
 

2.1.2  Number of hectares under improve maize production 

 
2.1.3 Number of farmers accessing improved livestock genetic breeds 

by dairy and beef farmers  

 
 

2.2: % change in tree cover (ha) in selected catchments 

 
 

 

2.3: Number of  skilled/semi-skilled jobs created (of which women and 
youth)  

2017 

 

2.1:  0 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

2.2: 0 

 
 

 

2.3: 0 
 

2022 

 

2.1.1: 7,750;  
 

2.1.2 6700;  

 
2.1.3 500,000 

 

 
 

2.2: 30% 

 
 

 

2.3: 40,000 
 

 

 

 

Crop forecasting 
survey. 

Market surveys. 

 
. 

  

 

Risk 1: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value addition 

activities. 

Mitigation 1: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services to 

potential SMEs actors will motivate 

them to participate in the project 

O
U

T
P
U

T
S
 

3.0 Components   

 
3.1 Irrigation infrastructure developed  

3.2 Access road construction 

3.3 Support ongoing consolidation of 
a central database for Ugandan 

farmers 
3.4 Establishment of an efficient input 

distribution system based upon the e-

wallet platform,  
35.Selection of best varieties of maize, 

rice, and dairy cattle for dissemination 

to farmers  
3.6 Improved breeds of dairy and beef 

cattle developed 

3.7 Farmer organization of the 
irrigation scheme established and 

trained 

 

 

 
3.1: Acreage of new irrigated area (Ha) 

3.2: Number of kms of access road constructed 

3.3 Number of farmers profiled in the central database for Ugandan 
farmers  

3.4. Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled maize seed  
       Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled rice seed  

 

3.5.1: Yield per hectare for maize, (MT)  
3.5.2: Yield per Hectare for Rice (MT)  

 

3.6.1 Change in productivity of  livestock developed through AI 
3.6.2 Change in litres of milk produced in the project area.  

 

3.7: Formation and registration of farmer organizations in the project 
areas. Number of farmers utilizing the services of the farmer 

organization 

 

2017 

 
3.1:  0 

3.2:0 

 
3.3: 0 

3.4: 0 
 

 

3.5.1: 0 
3.5.2: 0  

 

3.6.1:0 
3.6.2:0 

 

3.7:0 
 

 

 

2020 

 

3.1:  1608 
3.2: 20 

 

3.3 700,000 

3.4 450,000 

200,000 
 

3.5.1:5 

3.5.2: 4 
 

3.6.1: 20% 

3.6.2: 30% 
 

3.7  +35% 

 
 

 

 

Quarterly and 
Annual Project 

reports 

 
Crop surveys 

records 
Bureau of 

Statistics (UBOS) 

reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

Quarterly reports; 

 

 

Risk 2: Poor sustainability of 
infrastructure. 

Mitigation 2: Establish and support 

management entity for O&M. 
 

Risk 3: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value 

addition activities. 

Mitigation 3: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Risk 4: political willingness 

Mitigation 4: The design will be 



 

viii 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

3.8 Watershed management activities 
implemented 

 

3.9 Volume of value added 
commodities traded 

 

3.8: Number of tree seedlings planted in the water-shed managed 
 

 

3.9.1 Volume of Maize exported (MT) 
 

3.9.2 Volume of Rice exported (MT) 

3.8 
 

 

3.9.1: 
 

3.9.2: 

3.8: 18,500 
 

 

3.9.1: 4,000,000 
 

3.9.2: 404,000 

 
 

Credit Surveys by 
intermediaries 

 

participatory and stakeholder 
consultations 

 

4.  Project Management and 

Coordination 

4.1: National Project Coordination 

Unit fully constituted 

 
4.2 Disbursement of ADF loan 

 

 

 
4.1: Establishment of NPCU  

 

 
4.2: Percentage of ADF Loan disbursed 

 

 

2017 

 
4.1:  2 (40%)

  

 
4.2: 0% 

2022 

 
4.1: 5 (100%) 

 

 
4.2: 100% 

Progress reports, 

M&E reports, 
Audit reports, 

Supervision 

Mission reports 
 

Risk 7: Delayed fulfillment of loan 

conditions. 
Mitigation 7: UGFO will work and 

follow up closely with Government  

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 Components Inputs 

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement:  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development:  

Component 3: Market Development and Trade Facilitation:  
Component 4: Programme Coordination and Management. 

 

Total Project Cost:  UA 64.41  

ADF Loan:  UA 57.00 million 

Government: UA 7.41 million 
 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Timeframe  

 

 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 

Initial Activities                            

Internal Processing of Appraisal                            

Loan negotiations                            

Signature of loan agreement and Disbursement effectivness                            

Recruitment of project staff                           

Project Launching                           

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement                           

Award of contract to ICT companies                           

Genetic improvement of of Dairy/Beef cows                           

Production of required quality/quantity of seeds                            

Development of a central data base for farmers                           

Component 2: Infrastructure Development                           

Award of contracts for the project supervision                            

Bidding documents (BDs) preparation and award of contracts for the construction of the scheme                           

Construction of the irrigation infrastructure                           

Establishment of WUA and capacity building                           

Implementation of watershed management activities                           

Construction of a bridge and access road                           

Market Development and Trade Facilitation                            

Provide postharvest facilities and services                           

Develop database of village agents, processors, large offtakers of maize, rice, and dairy                            

Develop Market Information System (MIS)                           

Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) and quality infrastructure                            

Establishment of food safety laboratory building                           

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                           

Stakeholders sensitization and mobilization                            

Establishment of the baseline situation                           

Project Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                           

Capcity building interventions                             

Coordinate Financial Management and Annual financial auditing                            

Procurement of Goods                           

Environmental monitoring                           

Mid Term Review                            

Project Completion report                            



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OFMANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED ADF LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF 

UGANDA FOR THE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 

PROGRAMME (AVCP) 
 

Management hereby submits this Report and Recommendation for an ADF loan of UA 57 million, 

under ADF terms to finance the Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme activities in 

Uganda.   

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed 

within the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been 

designated by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate 

the country’s Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; 

generate employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote 

science and technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for 

accelerating socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, 

notably, construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to 

enhance household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic 

Plan (ASSP) 2015/16-2019/2020, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the 

Local Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

1.1.2 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to 
achievement of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; 

develop the infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in 

response to a request from the Government of Uganda, to provide assistance for the transformation 

of agriculture in Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had 

initially fielded a Country Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, 

July and September, 2016 respectively. The missions were to understand the extent of 

implementation of the Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan (ASSP) and the general context of 

agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to assist the 

Government in achieving the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting the development of 

financing arrangements that can support commercial production, value addition and marketing 

activities in this sector. 

 

1.1.3 The Project’s key outputs, notably, development of irrigation infrastructure, promotion and 

development of agribusiness, and trade facilitation to enhance household incomes are consistent with 

the country’s ASSP which operationalizes agricultural priority investments programme under the 

NDPII.  The ASSP prioritizes investment in water for production, value addition and value chains 

development, and, promotes investment in sustainable natural resource use. The Project is also 

consistent with the National Agriculture Policy (2013) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal 

Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), and the Irrigation Master Plan of the Ministry of Water and 

Environment (MoWE). Further, the project activities are also in line with the Gender Policy Brief for 

Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Uganda Forestry Policy, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 

and Uganda’s Ministry of Gender’s revised Gender Policy 2007.  

 

1.1.4 The sector and the project area face varying degrees of fragility. Food insecurity, lack of rural 

infrastructure, lack of economic opportunities for women and youth etc. are key elements of fragility. 

The project is designed to address these challenges and build resilient institutions and societies.   



 

2 

 

 

1.1.5 Regionally, the project is consistent with Pillar 2 of the NEPAD’s Comprehensive African 

Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP), which focuses on improvement of agricultural 

infrastructure and related capacities for enhanced food security; and with the Sustainable 

Development Goals. 

 

1.1.6 The Project was programmed to be financed under the ADF 14 window and the new CSP for 

Uganda (2017-2021). The Government of Uganda is committed to operationalizing its National 

Development Plan (NDP) but remains with the challenges of fully financing all activities using the 

limited budgetary resources available. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP), the Community Agricultural Infrastructure 

Improvement Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department 

of the Treasury MDB Awards the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm 

Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws 

extensively from lessons learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of completed 

Projects and from other small scale irrigation, natural resources, watershed management, and 

community driven development projects in Uganda and other countries. The most pertinent lessons 

include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects ; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building 

the capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and 

project sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project. 

 

1.2.2. With effects of climate change and the increasingly unreliable rainfall pattern, the need for 

investment in irrigation has become of paramount importance. Only about 5% of the irrigation 

potential of Uganda has been exploited so far and the GoU requested the Bank to support its renewed 

efforts to expand its irrigation investments. The GoU has developed an Irrigation Master Plan for the 

period 2010-2035 which targets to expand irrigation infrastructure to cover at least 70% of surface 

water irrigation potential by 2035. This will increase the total agricultural land under irrigation from 

the current 14,418ha to about 420,000ha by 2035. As a result, the GoU has ranked irrigation as the 

third most important infrastructural investment that will facilitate economic transformation of the 

country as envisaged under Vision 2040. 

1.2.3 The Project is in line with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) as it relates to inclusive growth 
and food security through the involvement of youth and women in skills development and 

entrepreneurship. Further, the Project is consistent with Bank’s High 5s for transforming Africa and 

the recently approved Bank Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025. The 

Project is also consistent with the Bank’s CSP (2017-2021) which aligns with the High 5s mainly in 

agricultural and industrial development. Bank interventions under this pillar will focus on the 

following three critical infrastructure sub-sectors: (i) Transport infrastructure to foster trade and 

market integration; (ii) Agricultural infrastructure to promote transformation of the agriculture sector 

in respect of improved production and productivity, value addition, and trade; (iii) Water and 

Sanitation to widen access to water and sanitation services, improve livelihoods as well as boost 



 

3 

 

value-adding and manufacturing activities, especially in small underserved towns all of which are 

well aligned to the NDPII. This Project is identified by the new CSP as one of the key investment 

projects to be supported by the Bank under its pillar mentioned above. In addition, the Project is 

aligned with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) by enhancing the regulatory framework to 

create enabling environment for women’s participation in the agriculture sector and supporting 

women’s economic empowerment along the agriculture value chains.  

1.2.4 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under FIEFOC-1 in implementation of irrigated agriculture and 

has also accumulated vast experience through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure 

projects. The first phase of FIEFOC has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and 

Agoro irrigation scheme with a total area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm 

families. It has also supported communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, 

enabled households to participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC 

project approved by the Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in 

Uganda and also increase productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will be developed under 

this proposed project. Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the 

completed and ongoing CAIIP projects.  

With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly, 

from 31.1% in 2006 to 19.7% in 2013, to which the Banks’ projects contributed in this reduction. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize synergies among projects 

implemented by the Bank. 

1.3. Donors coordination 

  
Sector or 

subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports 

Labor 

Force   

  Agricultural Sector 23.7% 57.2% 85%   

  
Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average 2010/2011 to 

2014/2015)**   

  Government Donors  
 

   

UA m UA 33.7 m UA 48.9 m 
  

          AfDB 21.5%   

% 40.8% 59.2%   IDA 21.6%  

     EC 15.2%   

     IFAD 12.9%  

      USAID 9.4%   

              Danida 5.8%   

             DfiD 5.3%  

             JICA 1.5%  

             Netherlands   3.6%  

             Italy  1.4%  

             FAO 1.8%  

  Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups Y   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches Y   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** M****   



 

4 

 

* as most appropriate; ** Years [yy1 to yy2]; *** for this sector or subsector 

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement 

 

1.3.1 The Bank is one of the major Development Partners (DPs) in Uganda, providing about 21.5% 

of development assistance in the agriculture and rural development sector. The Bank collaborates 

closely with the other Development Partners, especially the World Bank, IFAD, USAID, JICA, and 

the European Commission for agricultural related projects, within the framework of the Agriculture 

and Rural Development Donor Coordination Group. The Group has been greatly invigorated through 

the Bank’s field presence. In an effort to harmonize Development Partner intervention, the Bank has 

partnered with the other DPs under the umbrella of the Agricultural Sector Development Partners 

Group (ASDPG) to undertake development interventions in the choice of sub-sectors and activities 

where it has a comparative advantage. In regard to this Project, the Bank will work closely with JICA 

who are preparing an irrigation programme, but in particular to tap on their experiences with farmer 

groups development in irrigation activities; the IDA and USAID who are engaged in activities that 

promote agricultural input distribution  using advanced ICT methodologies that link the farmer to 

input dealers; the Netherlands Embassy on crop intensification and marketing; the EU on market 

oriented beef meet subsector development; etc.   

 

1.3.2 The ASDPG is currently chaired by the JICA. The Group is well informed about the project 

through consultations with Bank Teams at preparation/appraisal missions and also continually by 

Uganda Country Office (COUG) through monthly meetings. The Uganda Country Office is an active 

member of this group, which relates with the overall Heads of Missions’ Local Development Partners 

Group (LDPG), currently chaired and coordinated by the World Bank. 
 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project development goal:  The overall goal of the Project is to contribute to poverty reduction and 

economic growth in Uganda through enhanced productivity and commercialization of agriculture.  

 

Specific Project objective: The project objective is to improve household incomes, food security, and 

climate resilience through commercial agricultural practices, sustainable natural resources 

management and agricultural enterprise development.  

 

Project Implementation Modality: (i) The project will be implemented using a Business Service 

Provider, ICT based platform, which will be procured competitively. This model has been tried and 

tested by the Feed the Future project of the United States Agency for International Development 

(USAID).  The model will be replicated and expanded to reach our target Districts in Uganda. The 

platform has already demonstrated a private sector-led input distribution and extension ICT platform, 

that is integrated with the buyers and has successfully delivered to 301,000 farmers certified seeds, 

fertilizer, extension, and other services including mechanization, crop insurance, market, and soil 

testing services.  The ICT platform will be scaled up to reach millions of small holder farmers to raise 

their productivity while linking them to agro processors and other off-takers.  (ii) The GoU will 

nominate a Project Coordinator who will lead the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) based 

at MAAIF. The NPCU is charged with securing project implementation according to the relevant 

work- and procurement plans. The NPCU will consist of at least 4 other members (a Senior 

Procurement Officer, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation 

Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer), details are stipulated 

under 4.1 and 5.3 of this report.   

2.1. Project components 

AVCP will be implemented along a commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention 

to regulatory reforms. In agreement with government, the project will comprise of three (3) 

operational and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity 



 

5 

 

Enhancement, ii) Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and 

iv) Project Management and Coordination. The following key provisions under these components 

have been agreed for implementation under AVCP.  

Table 2.1: project components 
No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

1 Production 

and 

Productivity 

Enhancement  

14.96  Expression of Interest (EOI) for ICT companies interested in developing 
and operating an ICT platform that integrates farmers, village buyer 

agents, off-takers, seed and fertilizer suppliers, extension services and 

other service providers on a single efficient platform. 

 Supporting genetic improvement in Dairy and Beef cows through a robust 
multiplication program of using Artificial Insemination  

 The project will also support the purchase of Liquid Nitrogen containers 
to help preserve Siemen  

 Strengthening Ag Verify and the Uganda Seed Traders Association to 
increase the quantity of certified seeds required to reach millions of 

farmers 

 Support to research to increase production of breeder and foundation seeds 
in consultation with framers  

 Support the formation of Local Seed Businesses among the farmer groups 
that will partner with research institutes to increase the availability of 

quality controlled seed  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups in sustainable enterprise 
development  

 Support farmers and farmer groups to prepare seasonal action plans and 
Group Action plans  

 Link AVCP to the Technology for African Agricultural Transformation 
(TAAT) for the acquisition of improved technologies 

 Effective regulation of the quality of seeds and other inputs 

 Strengthen the National Seed Service, technical capacity development and 
provision of essential equipment 

 Strengthen the National Fertilizer Board and Bureau of Standards (UNBS) 
with the necessary support facilities,  

 Synchronization of the National policy on seed and fertilizer with that of 
Regional Economic Communities (RECs) 

 Development of leadership skills and capacity building of farmer 
organization 

 Support the ongoing consolidation of a database for Ugandan farmers 

 Deepening of efficient input distribution system based upon the ICT 
platform  

 Increase women’s participation: design strategy to integrate gender in all 
the activities under this component 

 

2 Infrastructure 

Development 

30.96 

 
 Irrigation Infrastructure Development: of Sironko gravity fed irrigation 

scheme with a gross command area of 1608ha. The works will include 

construction of head works, main canal, secondary and tertiary canals, 

drainage system, dykes, and on farm roads.   

 Access Road: construction of a bridge over Sironko River at the intake site 
to connect Bukedea and Bulambuli Districts.  In addition,  10 Km  access 

road will be provided to link the irrigation schemes with the nearest existing 

road network on both sides of the Districts; 

 Support Infrastructure: support infrastructures required within the project site 
for the operation of the scheme such as warehouse (500m2), grain storage 

(1000m2), offices buildings (800m2), workshop (400m2), rice drying yard 

(1320m2), essential O&M equipment will be provided 

 Consultancy services: The project will engage a consulting firm; (i) to review 
and update the designs, and supervise the construction of the irrigation 

infrastructure during implementation 

 Establishment of Water Users Association: formation of water Users’ 
Association (WUAs) with 40% women and youth representation. 



 

6 

 

No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

 Capacity Building: provision of capacity development for farmers, extension 
agents, and relevant government officials. 

 Watershed management: (i) Institutional strengthening through mobilization 
of local structures; (ii) Sustainable development and management of forest 

and tree resources in Mbale, Bududa, Bukedia, Bulambuli; and (iii) 

Integrated soil and water conservation technologies and measures.  
3 Market 

Development 

and Trade 

Facilitation 

13.09  Provide postharvest facilities and services and agri infrastructure to farmers  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups on post-harvest handling, 
storage and bulking of their produce  

 Network and link farmers to agro-processors and large traders,  markets 
for farmers using innovative and enduring ICT platforms, that includes 

digital payment (see ICT platform in Component 1a)  

 Develop a database of processors, large off-takers of maize, rice, and 

dairy, their village agents and associated farmers for integration onto the 

ICT platform 

 Build capacity of the network of community based village buyer agents to 
provide additional services such as SPS standards, inputs, mechanization,  

crop insurance,  market information requirements  to farmers using 

existing country extension services 

 Develop a robust market information system to inform vendors and 

farmers on commodity prices  

 Link medium to large scale processors and traders to financial institutions 

and AfDB private sector financing windows 

 Trade Facilitation and Quality Infrastructure: Build capacity of 
stakeholders to comply and conform to quality related issues with its 

exportable commodities  

 Strengthen the Sanitary, Phytosanitary (SPS) and Quality Infrastructure to 
meet the export requirements  

 Support Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) in ensuring 
standardization of quality across commodities 

  Establishment of an appropriate food safety laboratory for conformity 
assessment 

 

4 

Project 

Management 

5.40  Coordinate activities of MAAIF and other Agencies through an 
appropriate Steering Committee.  

 Coordinate Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting activities. 

 Coordinate Financial Management processes and also ensure preparations 
for External Audits. 

 Facilitate Procurement processes.  

 Mainstream Gender and also facilitate HIV/AIDS Awareness raising. 



 

7 

 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection  

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Alternative 1 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 2 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 3 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

Alternative 4 Using government 

institutions to drive the 

extension service and input 

delivery 

Government will do better supervising a 

Business Service Provider recruited to play this 

role based on realities on the ground 

2.3. Project type 

AVCP is a public sector investment project that builds on successful Bank’s investments in Uganda. 

It is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of scaling up 

production and productivity in rice, maize and dairy/beef value chain development, agribusiness 

development, risk sharing facility and capacity building activities funded by ADF 14 Loan resources. 

2.4. Project Cost and financing arrangements  

2.4.1 Project Costs: The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 64.41 Million, net of taxes, 

comprising UA 18.59 million or 34% in local costs and UA 45.82 million or 66% of the total cost in 

foreign cost. This cost is inclusive of physical and price contingencies estimated at 9%.  All project 

costs are exclusive of taxes, and therefore Government should provide budget allocation for VAT in 

each quarter of the financial year in addition to the 12% Government contribution. A summary of 

project cost estimates by components, expenditure categories, and schedule are presented in Tables 

2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes B2 Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

8 

 

Table 2.3: Summary Project Cost by Component 

 

F. E local currency Total F. E local currencyTotal

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement:       14 391             4 059         18 450       10 659          3 006       13 665 78       23         

Component 2: Infrastructure Development       29 020             9 164 38 184             21 496          6 788       28 284 76       48         

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation       11 788             4 360 16 148               8 731          3 230       11 961 73       20         

Component 4: Project Management and 

capacity building         2 066             4 599 6 665                 1 531          3 406         4 937 31       9           

Total BASELINE COSTS 57 265     22 182         79 447       42 417     16 430      58 847     72       100       

Physical Contingencies         3 169             1 113 4 282         2 347       825           3 172     74       5           

Price Contingencies         1 418             1 806 3 224         1 052     1 336                2 388 44       4           

Total PROJECT COSTS 61 852     25 101         86 953       45 816     18 591      64 407     71       109       

Components

(UA '000)

% F.E

 % Base 

costs 

(US$ '000)

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (UA '000') 

 

F.E L.C Total F.E L.C Total Total

Works 24 010        6 960          30 970        30 970        

Goods 10 509        1 078          11 587        879             2 152          3 031          14 618        

Services 7 828          3 875          11 703        2 163          729             2 892          14 595        

Operating costs 145             1 528          1 673          128             1 356          1 484          3 157          

Personnel 154             913             1 067          -             1 067          

Total 42 646        14 354        57 000        3 170          4 237          7 407          64 407        

Categories of expenditures
ADF Government

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA '000')  

 
Components Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement: 10 232           1 763            1 481            173                16                  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 8 115             17 059          2 773            180                157                

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation 2 050             3 597            3 306            1 521            1 486            
Component 4: Project management and 

capacity building 1 545             888                877                799                829                
Total base costs 21 942           23 307          8 438            2 673            2 488            

Contingencies 1 892             2 187            820                375                286                
Project total costs 23 834           25 494          9 258            3 048            2 774            

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement: ADF loan will finance 100% of the agricultural 

infrastructure development component, production and productivity component and non-training 

based component of Market Development and Trade Facilitation, and part of project management 

activities. The Government will mainly finance capacity building activities,  salaries of Government 

staff assigned to the Project both at national and local government levels, compliance certification 

by NEMA, and part of component 3 activities (conservation farming and agro-forestry, forest 

plantation and woodlots, forest resources inventory, training in use of  weather information, and 

expand community radios coverage). The Government of Uganda will also finance some recurrent 



 

9 

 

costs of the National Project Coordination Unit. The beneficiaries will be responsible for the 

operation and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation infrastructure, and the agricultural enterprises 

will operate with the principles of private sector. The breakdown of financing for the project is 

presented in the Table 2.6 

 

Table 2.6: Financing Plan of the project (UA ‘000) 

 

F.E L.C Total

ADF 41 490         15 510         57 000         88                

Government 3 973           3 434           7 407           12                

Total 45 463         18 944         64 407         

Amount
Sources of funding %

 
 

2.4.3 Counterpart Funds: The Government of Uganda counterpart contribution to the project will be 

12% of the total project cost (equivalent to USD 10.0 million); in addition to 18% VAT contribution 

on all works, goods and services. 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various District across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Locations where the Bank has developed irrigation 

schemes, and the Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, 

Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, 

Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; Rice: Sironko-Acomai irrigation 

scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and Pader. The soft 

components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity building 

would be extended to all irrigation schemes of the Bank in FIEFOC 1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, 

Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on the cattle corridor districts 

(from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara district as the 

springboard.  

 

2.5.2 The population in those districts is about 14,227,201 of which 50.1% are women and 

comprising 3,078,673 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase in yields of 

major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average of 10%. 

In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating activities 

from natural resources, capacity building and service delivery of the project would specifically target 

women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved standard of living. The project will benefit further 

300,000 households of which 20% are female headed outside of irrigation command areas, by 

introducing or improving soil conservation measures in the catchments feeding the irrigation 

schemes. Moreover, the project is expected to provide technical skills in conservation and other 

farming practices that promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural 

productivity in the proposed project area. 

 

2.6 Participatory Process/Public Consultations: Key stakeholders in the AVCP Project include; 

Government, NGOs; Civil Society,; Farmer cooperatives including women and youth groups; Private 

sector companies; All these stakeholders were consulted in the project design,  etc. Furthermore, a 

stakeholder workshop was organized on September, 2016 which was attended by more than 45 

representatives of stakeholder organizations from national to community levels. During the sessions 

the participants provided valuable input to inform the shaping of the AVCP. A wide range of issues 

were noted for follow-up including among others: access to inputs and microfinance, market 

linkages, mechanization and post-harvest handling, the need for inclusion of value addition to the 



 

10 

 

produce, operations and maintenance of irrigation facilities, strong farmers’ capacity development 

programme, establishment of demonstration centers, consideration to multi-purpose use of water, use 

of existing government structures and the need to complement community initiatives. Stakeholder 

consultation activities will continue during project implementation to ensure their maximum 

participation and ownership of Project activities.    

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

2.7.1 The Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) highlighted some lessons, including: (i) 

role played by project implementation unit in expediting project execution after delay in start-up 

when implementation was entrusted to  Ministries; (ii) lack of project designs and drawings at project 

start-up results in implementation delay; (iii) inadequate consultation with stakeholders in selection 

of sites results in poor utilization of funds and lack of ownership; (iv) weak M&E system results in 

poor project monitoring; and (v) lack of irrigation scheme management entities compromises 

sustainability. Based on said lessons, (i) AVCP will have a PIU due to inadequate technical staff 

within MAAIF, (ii) participatory M&E system will be established in PY1 which will be linked to 

MAAIF M&E system, and (iii) detail designs of the irrigation schemes will be made available before 

the end of 2017 whilst the supervision consulting firm will be brought on board in PY1 through 

advance procurement arrangement to offset the time spent in the parliamentary approval process. 

2.7.2 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under AAMP, CAIIP 1, 2 and 3; MATIP 1 and 2, FIEFOC-1 and 

2 in project implementation and in irrigated agriculture and has also accumulated vast experience 

through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure projects. The first phase of FIEFOC 

has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and Agoro irrigation scheme with a total 

area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm families. The Schemes have supported 

communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, enabled households to 

participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC project approved by the 

Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in Uganda and also increase 

productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will developed under this proposed project. 

Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the completed and 

ongoing CAIIP and MATIP projects.  

2.7.3 With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize the benefits and gainful 

employment. 

2.8. Key performance indicators   

2.8.1 The Results Based Logical Framework contains indicators pertaining to the impact, outcomes 

and outputs of the project.  It includes the Bank’s Core Sector Indicators (CSI) and other institutional 

indicators that will be used to gauge the effectiveness of project management. Monitoring and 

evaluation of the project activities and results based logical framework indicators will be conducted 

by the Monitoring and Evaluation Expert of the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU), in close 

collaboration with all the partners involved. Special emphasis will be on disaggregation of data to 

capture benefits from the project to gender and the youth. Baseline data will be collected at the 

beginning of project implementation in addition to the baseline information collected during the 

feasibility study to improve measurement of indictors of the project. An experienced M&E expert 

will be put in place from the start of the project. 

 



 

11 

 

2.8.2 The impact and outcome indicators include: (i) income level among farmers, (ii) reduction in 

people living below poverty line, (iii) increase in yield of selected commodity value chains, and (iv) 

number of livelihood activities and businesses developed,  

 

Key output indicators are: (i) area developed under irrigation; (ii) number of farmers adopting 

conservation farming practices and land area protected against erosion; (iii) involvement of women 

and youth in decision-making bodies; (iv) volume of maize, rice and dairy/beef products traded.  

 

2.8.3  Baseline data: Baseline data was collected as part of the socio-economic study and used in 

the RBLF. The baseline data will be further strengthened and gaps filled including collection of 

gender disaggregated data in PY1. Indicators will be used to compare project performance against 

the baseline situations. Various supervision missions and periodic progress reports will reflect the 

level of achievement under each of these indicators. 
 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.    Economic and financial performance  

3.1.1 The main economic benefits of the project are increase in rice and maize procutivity and 

production, improvement in livestock parameters , increase in beneficiary incomes and strengthening 

of food security and climate resilience. Other project benefits include jobs generated by business 

developed, reduction in sediment load of rivers resulting from degraded forest rehabilitation and soil 

conservation measures and, improved balance trade of agricultural products as the country exports 

more and import less rice. At farm level, the project will reach out to at least 450,000 maize growers, 

205,000 rice farmers and more than 2 million herders. The project is expected to anually generate an 

additional production of 450,000 MT of maize and 328,000 MT of rice. Support to the development 

of value addition will enhance export of rice and maize milled products. On the average, it is 

estimated that about 200 000 MT of maize and 200 000 MT of rice will be exported annually. 

 

3.1.2 The economic and financial analysis was based on the incremental net benefit arising from the 

project investment. The main assumption underlying the economic and financial analysis is an 

anticipated increase in the productivity of the main crops (maize and rice) and livestock as a result 

of the development of irrigation, increased improved seeds and fertilizer use, and capacity building. 

It is estimated that the production of the basic crops will increase by 50% on the average and 20% 

for the livestock parameters.  The production costs including milling processing costs are derived 

from the results of the similar projects implemented in the country and computed field data from 

Uganda. Prevailing 2016 market prices are used for input and output valuation. Infrastructure 

operating and maintenance costs are estimated at 15% of investment costs. Prevailing 2016 market 

prices were used for input and output valuation. Because no government interventions in terms of 

input subsidies or import restrictions are recorded and, no duty or taxes are leveraged on all 

agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, semen and agro-chemicals, the market prices are used as the 

shadow prices for tradable goods used in domestic rice and maize production. For economic analysis, 

maize and rice market prices are adjusted to reflect their economic values.  

3.1.3 The FIRR is 20% with a NPV of US$ 2.127 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The 

EIRR is 23% for a NPV of USD 3, 2 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The summary 

result is tabulated below: 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV (12%): US$ 2.127 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV (12%): US$ 3.2 million 

 

3.1.4 The economic rate of return (EIRR) and the internal rate of return (FIRR) are sensitive to 

changes in prices and costs. A 10% increase in the prices of agricultural products generates an EIRR 



 

12 

 

of 25% and a FIRR of 22%. Similarly, a 10% increase in production costs decreases the EIRR and 

the FIRR to 21% and 19% respectively. Details of financial and economic analyses are shown in in 

Appendix VI. 

 3.2.   Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: The project is classified as Environment Category 2 according to the Bank’s 

Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which implies that the potential negative 

environmental and social impacts are not major and can be mitigated with the application of measures 

specified in ESMFs. An ESMF, with a budgetary allocation of USD 500,000, was prepared and its 

Summary posted on Bank’s on 21st March 2017  to provide guidelines for the management of 

potential environmental and social aspects at all possible project sites.  

 

3.2.2 AVCP will have significant positive environmental impacts including (i) contribution to the 

restoration of forest cover that will lead to reduced soil erosion, flooding, and water pollution. The 

carbon dioxide (CO2) removed from the atmosphere is estimated at 245, 000 tons over 20 years as a 

result of tree planting by the project as shown in the details under Technical Annex C.3.1 (b) of the 

Technical Annex; (ii) restoration and enhancement of the ecosystems through re-vegetation and tree 

planting activities planned as part of the project - this  will have significant impacts on combating 

deforestation and desertification as well as mitigating the impacts of climate change; (iii) 

rehabilitation of degraded watersheds to sustain and enhance water catchment ; and (iv) improved 

farm productivity, soil fertility management and increased uptake of proper crop husbandry practices 

that will improve agricultural production and marketing, thus contributing to food security and 

improved farm incomes.  

 

3.2.3 Most of the negative impacts to the environment will be attributed to construction activities 

with minimal operation and post operation effects. Some of these impacts will pertain to (i) loss of 

vegetation due to land clearing for irrigation schemes and farm/forest roads construction that can be 

minimized by refilling of burrow pits and re-vegetation, (ii) increase in water abstraction arising from 

small-scale irrigation schemes requirement, that  could upset the existing flow patterns of the rivers, 

but will be minimized through established water management systems and environmental flow 

requirements to allow sufficient water for downstream users, and (iii) soil erosion due to loose top soil.  

 

3.2.4 Climate Change: Climate change models for Uganda suggest a projected increase in 
temperature of 0.7o C to 1.5o C by 2020. These models also predict a likely increase in the variability 

of rainfall with most areas projected to experience higher rainfall. Uganda is already experiencing 

extreme weather events including droughts, floods and landslides.  Floods and landslides have been 

linked to drained wetlands, deforestation, and compacted soil that no longer have any water-retention 

capacity. The Uganda Vision 2040- the long term development blue print for the country-recognizes 

the impacts of climate change on all sectors of Uganda’s economy, and has committed to the need 

for preparedness through adaptation and mitigation strategies to ensure the resilience of the country 

to climate change impacts. The Bank categorized the project as Category 2 in terms of Climate Risk, 

requiring the application of the Climate Adaptation Review and Evaluation Procedures (AREP).  The 

project carried out Climate Screening Score (CSS) as shown in Appendix VII. The project design 

reflects the projected climate change risks in Uganda and has embedded adaption measures based on 

the Bank’s AREP and aligned with the country’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 

priority projects including community tree planting, land degradation and water for production 

projects.  

 

3.2.5 The AVCP programme is by design part of a strategic response to the impact of climate change 

evidenced by environmental degradation, dry spells and floods in the vulnerable districts of Uganda. 

The planned interventions of AVCP project will help reduce impacts of extreme weather events 

through the development of irrigation systems and promotion of alternative livelihoods that will help 



 

13 

 

smoothen the cyclical impacts of droughts and ensure all-year income generating activities. 

Specifically, the catchment management activities under component 1 of the project will facilitate 

the reduction of land degradation and related flood impacts; thus increasing the resilience of the 

community. The irrigation infrastructure will also be designed to be climate resilient in order to 

prolong the life span of the infrastructures. The project’s ESMP further elaborates the challenges 

posed by climate risks on the project outcomes as well as proposed adaptation and mitigation 

measures.  

 

3.2.6 Involuntary resettlement: The proposed new irrigation structures will be located on 

Governments owned land and communally owned land tenure systems. It is anticipated that all 

Project activities will not lead to land acquisition as project activities will be carried out on land that 

already belongs to the Government or the beneficiary groups, therefore no land disputes are 

anticipated. Extensive consultations on access were held with beneficiary groups, district officers, 

and other government counterparts including the Uganda National Environmental Management 

Agency. There is a strong commitment from all stakeholders and  Government will provide the Bank 

with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project infrastructure is to be constructed are 

free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities and/or government agencies who have 

consented to project activities.  

  

3.2.7 Green Growth: AVCP has been designed in accordance with the Green Growth principle of 

“quality and inclusiveness of growth”. The Program design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (equitable rural development, youth unemployment, equitable 

access to food, water and clean environment) without locking resources into activities that may 

deplete the country’s natural resource capital. AVCP has been designed in a holistic manner that has 

integrated economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of the well-being 

of the communities.  

 

3.2.8 Gender and Social: In 2014, 19.79 million females accounted for 51.5% of the total population, 
while an estimated 31% of rural households were female headed. The significance of women’s role 

in community is underscored by the fact that females are normally charged with the responsibility of 

food production at household level. The low access to water for production, especially in rural areas, 

undermines agricultural productivity. While the GoU has made substantial efforts in adopting gender-
related laws and with the amendment of the Land Act (2010), and the launch of Uganda National land 

Policy (2015), significant progress has been registered in increasing female land ownership, from a low 

16% in 2010 to 39% in 2012. Despite this,   issues of limited ownership, access to land owing to cultural 

barriers and lack of access to credit continue to affect women’s agricultural production. Other 

hindrances include, lack of extension service, inadequate access to information technology and poor 

linkages to markets, post-harvest loses, and degradation of the environment which mostly affects 

women. Consequently, AVCP has been designed to address gaps in sustainable agricultural water 

management and low agricultural productivity. The project will support a minimum of 30% 

representation of women in the leadership role in water user associations, and emphasize 50% of the 

target group training on agribusiness skills in crop value chain preferred by women and youth.  The 

project will support a minimum of 30% women, and 30% youth employment in the labour intensive 

infrastructure development activities on the scheme. 

 

3.2.9 The project will support gender capacity building activities for AVCP as detailed in Annex B8 

of the Technical Annex. Furthermore, the project will adopt a gender sensitive approach to support 

implementation, to ensure capacity is built for effective gender responsiveness in all project 

components. As such, gender mainstreaming guidelines will be developed in project Y1 to prepare 

women to participate in different community committees dealing with financing (Tier 4 Microfinance 

institutions), agriculture and natural resources. The project will also promote strong institutional 

involvement of women as beneficiaries in farmer cooperatives group trainings, specifically with 



 

14 

 

regards to extension service in agronomic practices, access of financial resources, post-harvest 

handling, collective commodity bulking and marketing and the establishment to sustainable market 

linkages. A Social Development Specialist/Gender expert will be assigned from MAAIF to focus on 

implementation of these activities. The gender mainstreaming in this project is estimated at UGX 

548,900,000 for capacity building as shown in the Technical Annex page B8.9 (ii). 

 

3.2.10 Youth unemployment:  The challenges facing the youth include limited job opportunities, 

inadequate employable skills and skills mis-match, limited access to productive assets, and early 

marriages hence forcing the youth into informal agricultural practices. According to the Uganda 

statistical abstract 2014, the overall national unemployment rate increased to 9.4% (2012/13) from 

3.6% (2009/2010) and 1.9% in 2005/06. Similarly youth unemployment remains high at 78% 

(NDPII). Majority (79%) of the youth live in rural areas engaging in agriculture. The AVCP project 

will ensure the participation of youth on the irrigation scheme management and engage youth farmer 

groups in agribusiness skills trainings, value chain activities especially in income generating projects 

such as Apiary and fish farming. At least 10% youth will be employed in any labour intensive 

agricultural activities on the irrigation schemes by providing targeted training programme. The 

Empowering Novel Agri-Business-Led Employment for Youth in Uganda’s Agriculture (ENABLE 

Youth Uganda) Program being piloted in Uganda by the African Development Bank (AfDB) under 

FIEFOC.2 Project. 

 

3.2.11 HIV/AIDS: The project does not envisage the creation of farm worker camps. Notwithstanding 

this, the Project will support selected activities aimed at reduction of HIV/AIDS new infection 

especially among women and youth who present a higher rates of infection (8.3% women, 6.1% men 

and youth 3.7%). The National HIV prevalence increased from 6.4% in 2004 to 7.3% in 2011 among 

15-49 year olds (Uganda Aids Indicator Survey). The core activities to be supported include 

awareness creation on HIV/Aids among farmer and agribusiness groups to enhance their protection 

from HIV/Aids infections and also improve the living conditions of those who are already persons 

Living with Aids. The schemes will designate an HIV-AIDS coordinator from farmer groups and 

collaborate with the existing national programmes to publicize the HIV/AIDs activities in the 

schemes. The project will collaborate with such organizations like the Uganda AIDS commission; 

and with local NGOs at the project levels (for execution purposes). It is mandatory that contractors 

to have an active HIV and AIDS workplace policy (with activities for (Staff) internal awareness 

raising, prevention, tackling issues like stigma and discrimination, treatment, focal point etc.). At 

implementation level, the partners will be mandated to enhance capacity of beneficiaries to address 

issues like awareness raising, prevention, treatment; the design should include community categories 

like the youth, farmers, mothers etc., incorporate HIV and AIDS module in the proposed 

entrepreneurial training, strengthen beneficiary referral systems with the already established 

structures like hospitals (for prevention and treatment purposes); strengthen/ create community 

support structures like e.g. treatment groups etc. 

 

3.2.12 Addressing fragility and building resilience: The project will help build resilience in target 

communities by addressing the issues of food security and increasing economic opportunities through 

agribusiness. 
 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 Executing and Implementing Agencies:  The Project’s Executing Agency will be the Ministry 

of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) who will be responsible for the overall 

implementation and management of the Project. The Ministry of Water and Environment will be 

responsible for implementation of the watershed management related activities (in conjunction with 

relevant MAAIF departments) and also provide technical backup in the development and 



 

15 

 

implementation of irrigation related infrastructure. Further, MAAIF will coordinate implementation 

of activities being undertaken by other institutions, namely, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

(UNBS)/Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC); Uganda Seed Trade Association 

(USTA), Farmer Cooperatives and Associations; National Agricultural Research Organisation 

(NARO); Diary Development Authority (DDA); the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and 

Data Bank (NAGRIC&DB); and, the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) and its related 

agribusiness associations.  

 

4.1.2 A National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established to assist MAAIF in 

coordinating implementation of Project activities between the respective implementing agencies. 

MAAIF will designate a National Project Coordinator who will be the overall Project Manager.  In 

addition, to the National Project Coordinator, a Senior Procurement Officer with engineering 

background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, a 

Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer will be recruited competitively as 

core staff of the NPCU. The NPCU will also draw from the technical staff in the Ministries and 

agencies involved in the implementation of Project activities to complement its work. Each Ministry 

or Agency will assign a technical staff who will lead implementation of activities in such an 

institution and will be a member of the Project’s Technical Committee to be chaired by the National 

Project Coordinator. The technical committee will ensure a collaborated implementation of project 

activities and provide technical support. A multi-sectoral Steering Committee will be established to 

provide policy oversight of the project, approve work plans and budgets, and ensure adherence to 

relevant strategies established by Government during project implementation. The Steering 

Committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF and will comprise Permanent 

Secretaries of MoWE, MoTIC, MoFPED, and technical heads of the three agencies responsible for 

implementation of Project activities (i.e. Diary Development Authority, Uganda National Bureau of 

Standards, and the National Animal Genetics and Resources Data Bank. Other members will be 

selected from relevant private sector organizations, research institutions, and beneficiary 

organizations. The Steering Committee will meet at least twice every year.  

 

4.1.3 Furthermore, the National Project Coordination Unit will be an integral part of the Executing 

Agency under the direction and supervision the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The National Project 

Coordinator will report directly to the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The NPCU will ensure that 

Project activities are initiated and are adequately budgeted for, consolidate project records, submit 

all procurement documents to the Bank for review and approval; compile and submit all disbursement 

applications and quarterly progress reports; coordinate annual audits of all Project accounts and 

facilitate submission of audit reports to the Bank. Each District will designate a Project Support 

Officer (PSO) among its staff, who will head the District Technical Support Team as detailed in the 

Technical Annex (B3.3) to support the implementation and technical supervision of the Project, 

including sensitization of farmers, training, and monitoring and evaluation in the respective local 

governments. The PSO will also coordinate the relevant stakeholders involved in the implementation 

of the project in the district.  

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.4: “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the 

provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out 

following: 

Borrower Procurement System ( BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 

under BPS comprising Public Procurement Disposal of Public Assets Act and Regulations, using the 



 

16 

 

national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) for various group of transactions to be entailed 

under the project. Considerations shall be made to promote Government efforts on local content.  

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPP): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank 

Standard or Model Solicitation Documents SDs, for contracts that are either: (i) above the thresholds, 

or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for any category of procurement;  

Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: the assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA),   were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes 

(BPS and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the 

project. The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement 

capacity development action plan (CDAP) under the project. 

 

4.1.5 MAAIF has a Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU) that is responsible for procurement of 

goods, works and services with technical support from the directorates. The PDU is headed by a 

Principal Procurement Officer and has a total of four procurement officers as well as four contract 

staff. A Contracts Committee that approves all procurement activities is in place and functional. The 

ministry has experience in managing procurements of Bank financed projects. The resources, 

capacity, expertise and experience of MAAIF are adequate to carry out the procurement activities 

financed under this project. However, in view of the work load, the capacity of the PDU will be 

further strengthened by the recruitment of a senior procurement specialist, who will fast track the 

procurement processes on the project (see appendix VI). A delegated contracts committee will also 

be established to facilitate the Project’s procurement processes.   

 

Financial Management Arrangements 
 

4.1.6 The project will make use of the country’s PFM systems and the Assistant Commissioner, 

Accounts of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries (MAIIF) will be 

responsible for the Financial Management (FM) of the project. With the Permanent Secretary MAIIF 

being the Accounting Officer. 

 

The Ministry’s Finance and Administration department led by a Principal Accountant who has 

appointed accountants to manage the day to day financial operations of all donor funded projects 

guided by the Government of Uganda (GoU) financial regulations and procedures and the PFM Act 

2015.  The project will use a manual accounting system for the funds received from the Bank with 

the GoU’s counterpart funding managed through the Integrated Financial Management Information 

System (IFMIS). All project’s financial transactions will be captured and reported based on the 

International public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The Finance Department of the Ministry 

has sixteen accountants who will assist the NPCU in normal Ministry financial documentation 

approvals. 

 

4.1.7 Budgeting for the project will follow the GoU rules and procedures on budgeting. The total 

project budget will be included in the ministry’s annual budget and included in the GoU’s National 

budget. The project will follow the GoU financial year of 1st July to 30th June and its financial 

statements which will be prepared within three months of the end of the financial year, will be audited 

by the Office of the Auditor General or his appointee. The audit terms of reference will be agreed 

between GoU and the Bank by negotiations. The audit report, complete with a Management Letter 

and responses, will be submitted to the Bank within six months of the end of the financial year. The 

Ministry will also be required to submit quarterly Financial Reports together with the Projects 

Progress report to the Bank no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter. The format of the 

quarterly reporting will be agreed by negotiations. 

 



 

17 

 

The Government procedures regarding internal controls in place and also applied for the existing 

projects should be used by the new project. The following internal control procedures among others 

are in place: Approval of bank accounts opening, proper authorization and approval of bank 

reconciliations, segregation of duties in payments and cash management, monthly bank 

reconciliations and timely banking of receipts. To provide oversight and assist in strengthening the 

project internal control mechanism, the Ministry’s internal audit section will include the project in 

its annual audit planning and the project’s audit reports will be shared with the Bank as needed.  

 

The results of the assessment indicate that the Financial Management overall risk rating is Moderate 

after mitigating measures. In conclusion, the proposed financial management arrangements put in 

place meet the Bank’s minimum requirements for project financial management and therefore 

adequate to provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely information on the status of the 

project required by the Bank. 

 

Disbursement Arrangements 

4.1.8. The Bank’s special account and direct payment disbursement methods will be available to the 

project as prescribed in the bank’s Disbursement Handbook. All Project expenditures incurred by the 

Ministry will be paid by the PIU either from the special account or using the direct payment method.  

All activities being done by other non-governmental entities will be paid for using the direct payment 

method with documents processing done by the PIU. 

The project will open one foreign currency special account into which the proceeds of the loan will 

be deposited. A project account in UGX will also be opened. The accounts will be opened at the Bank 

of Uganda and their opening will be a condition precedent to first disbursement of the loan. An initial 

disbursement will be deposited in the project Special Account (SA) in foreign currency based on a 

six-month work program and an estimated budget of activities drawn from the agreed work plan 

approved by the Bank.  The SA will be replenished through submission of Withdrawal Applications 

when the project meets the replenishment conditions as stipulated in the Disbursement Letter and 

Handbook. The direct payment method will be used for payments of contracts for equipment, supplies 

and services (including audit-where applicable and consultancy). The Bank’s Disbursement Letter 

will be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures and requirements. To ensure adherence to 

agreed financial regulations, the special account will be monitored by AfDB supervision missions. 

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring will be an integral part of project management activities. The M&E Specialist at 

the NPCU will be responsible for the overall monitoring and evaluation of Project activities.  In using 

the performance indicators and targets specified in the Results Based Logical Framework (RBLF), 

project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected to take special note of 

changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In 

developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated along gender lines. A 

gender sensitive baseline study will be undertaken in PY1 which will be followed up with annual 

gender sensitive surveys to assess performance and impact of project activities.  

 

Table 4.1 – Implementation Monitoring Timeframe 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2018 Project Launching Supervision and Progress Report 

Q2 – 2018 Procurement of Civil Works Completed Procurement Plan/Progress Report 

Q4 – 2020 Mid-Term review Midterm Review & Progress Report 

Q4 – 2022 Substantial completion of civil works Supervision and Progress Report 



 

18 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2023 Project Completion Project Completion Report 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 International assessments show that Uganda has progressed its accountability and transparency 

ratings and indicators of Governance including corruption control, rule of law, regulatory quality and 

Government effectiveness. The 2014 Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG) ranked Uganda 

19th out of 52 African countries. The 2013 IIAG provided Uganda’s performance across four 

categories of governance namely (a) Safety & Rule of Law (25 out of 52), (b) National Security (74.5 

out of 100), (c) Gender (6th out of 52), and (d) Human Development (19th out of 52). Uganda’s 

average score was 56.1 out of 100 which was higher than the continental average of 51.5. The 2012 

World Bank Institute’s Worldwide Governance Indicators rated Uganda as follows (0=low and 

1=high): (a) voice and accountability = 0.31; (b) political stability and absence of violence = 0.20; 

(c) Government effectiveness = 0.33; (d) regulatory quality = 0.45; (e) rule of law = 0.44; and (f) 

control of corruption = 0.14. The proposed measures in terms of project implementation include: (i) 

provision of financial management manual to guide Project staff; (ii) utilization of internal audit to 

identify pre-audit transaction challenges; and (iii) regular submission of progress reports.  

4.4. Sustainability   

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations 

by the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUA) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women and youth are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs 

are expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. The 

management of support infrastructures such as storage and essential O&M equipment could be 

outsourced to business service provider on agreed terms under the overall supervision of the WUA.  

 

4.4.2 Capacity Building: Lack of qualified engineers and farmers’ experience in irrigation 

development has been identified as a serious constraint in implementation of the project. The project 

will develop a proposal to train farmers, extension agents, relevant government technicians and 

agribusiness actors including in the use of the pilot demonstration site to enhance the capabilities of 

the operation and maintenance of the irrigation schemes. Further, the project through MAAIF will 

endeavor to partner with JICA, IsDB, WB, The Netherlands Embassy, DFID and others who have 

interest in the area of farmers’ capacity development to ensure sustainability of the irrigation scheme.  

4.5. Risk management:  

4.5.1 The first risk is related to the effect that the private sector may not be willing to take advantage 

of the opportunities in developing the value chains. Provision of Business Development Support 

Services to potential SMEs actors will motivate them to participate in the project  
 

4.5.2 The second risk is associated with difficulties of managing the infrastructure that the project 

will develop. The use of Business Service Provider (BDS) with requisite experience will do this 

before handing them over to farmer groups.  

4.5.3 The third risk is that the beneficiaries may not attain the required level of Operation and 

Maintenance of the infrastructures. However, this will be mitigated by developing an Operations and 

Maintenance Manual for infrastructure facilities, which the farmers also participated in identifying.  



 

19 

 

 

4.5.4. The fifth risk would be delayed fulfillment of loan conditions. However, COUG will work and 

follow up closely with the Government  

4.6. Knowledge building 

4.6.1 A number of studies/surveys are planned to be undertaken through the project, with a view to 

generating information that will inform both the farmers, the local governments, Ministries as well 

as other stakeholders in the course of decision making. The analytical work will focus on beef value 

chain study, study on the potentials for agro-poles and Farmers’ Cooperative Formation modalities. 

All knowledge attributes and lessons generated from the project will be shared with the respective 

Government and District authorities, the Bank, development partner agencies and civic society. 

 

 V.  LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument:   

ADF Loan to the Republic of Uganda. 

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention   

 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 
subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General 

Conditions of the Bank. 

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement:  The obligations of the Bank to make the first 
disbursement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Loan Agreement in accordance 

with the immediately preceding paragraph and the fulfilment by the Borrower of the following 

conditions:  

 

(i) Provide the Bank with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project 
infrastructure is to be constructed are free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities 

and/or government agencies who have consented to project activities.   

 

5.3. Other Conditions  
 

The GoU shall,  

 

 

(i) Prior to a request for disbursement into the Special Account and local currency account, 
provide evidence of having opened one foreign currency Special Account (SA) and one 

local currency account at the Bank of Uganda for the deposit of part of the proceeds of 

the loan and for transfer of funds from the SA respectively; and 

 

(ii) Within 6 months of first disbursement, recruit a Senior Procurement Officer with 
engineering background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring 

and Evaluation Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior 

Engineer for the NPCU. 

 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies: The project complies with all applicable Bank policies 

  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 



 

20 

 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADF loan of UA57 

million to the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of implementation of Agricultural Value Chains 

Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report 



 

I 

 

APPENDIX I: COUNTRY’S COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS  

 
                

  Year Uganda Africa 
Develo-    

ping         
Countries 

Develo-       
ped  

Countries 
    

                

Basic Indicators           
 

  
 

  

Area ( '000 Km²) 2015 242 30,067 80,386 53,939     
Total Population (millions) 2015 39.0 1,184.5 5,945.0 1,401.5     
Urban Population (% of Total) 2015 16.6 39.7 47.0 80.7     
Population Density (per Km²) 2015 195.3 40.3 78.5 25.4     
GNI per Capita (US $) 2014  680 2 045 4 226 38 317     
Labor Force Participation * - Total (%) 2015 77.4 66.3 67.7 72.0     
Labor Force Participation ** - Female (%) 2015 75.6 56.5 53.0 64.5     
Gender -Related Development Index Value 2007-2013 0.896 0.801 0.506 0.792     
Human Develop. Index (Rank among 188 countries) 2014 163 ... ... ...     
Popul. Living Below $ 1.25 a  Day (% of Population) 2008-2013 37.8 39.6 17.0 ...     
        
Demographic Indicators               
Population Growth Rate   - Total (%) 2015 3.3 2.6 1.3 0.6     

Population Growth Rate   - Urban (%) 2015 5.5 3.6 2.6 0.8 
 

  
 

  

Population < 15 years  (%) 2015 48.1 41.0 28.3 17.3     
Population >= 65 years  (%) 2015 2.5 3.5 6.2 16.0     
Dependency Ratio (%) 2015 102.3 80.1 54.6 50.5     
Sex Ratio (per 100 female) 2015 99.9 100.1 102.8 97.4     
Female Population 15-49 years (% of total population) 2015 22.3 24.0 25.8 23.0     
Life Expectancy at Birth - Total (years) 2015 59.2 61.2 68.9 79.1     
Life Expectancy at Birth - Female (years) 2015 61.1 62.6 70.8 82.1     
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2015 42.5 34.8 21.0 11.6     
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2015 9.3 9.3 7.7 8.8     
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1,000) 2015 37.7 52.2 35.2 5.8     
Child Mortality Rate (per 1,000) 2015 54.6 75.5 47.3 6.8     
Total Fertility Rate (per woman) 2015 5.7 4.6 2.6 1.7     
Maternal Mortality Rate (per 100,000) 2013 360.0 411.3 230.0 22.0     
Women Using Contraception (%) 2014 28.5 35.3 62.1 ...     
                

Health & Nutrition Indicators           
 

  
 

  

Physicians (per 100,000 people) 2004-2012 11.7 46.9 118.1 308.0     
Nurses (per 100,000 people)* 2004-2012 130.6 133.4 202.9 857.4     
Births attended by Trained Health Personnel (%) 2009-2012 57.4 50.6 67.7 ...     
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 79.0 71.6 89.1 99.0     
Healthy life expectancy at birth (years) 2012 49.0 51.3 57 69     
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 19.1 39.4 60.8 96.3     
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Living with HIV/AIDS 2013 7.4 3.8 1.2 ...     
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2013 166.0 245.9 149.0 22.0     
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2013 93.0 84.1 90.0 ...     
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2013 82.0 76.0 82.7 93.9     
Underweight Children (% of children under 5 years) 2005-2013 14.1 20.8 17.0 0.9     
Daily Calorie Supply per Capita 2011 2 279 2 621 2 335 3 503     
Public Expenditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2013 4.3 2.7 3.1 7.3     
                
Education Indicators               
 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)               

      Primary School       -   Total 2011-2014 107.3 106.4 109.4 101.3 
 

  
 

  

      Primary School       -   Female 2011-2014 108.2 102.6 107.6 101.1     
      Secondary School  -   Total 2011-2014 26.9 54.6 69.0 100.2     
      Secondary School  -   Female 2011-2014 25.0 51.4 67.7 99.9     
Primary School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2012-2014 41.7 45.1 58.1 81.6     
Adult literacy Rate - Total (%) 2006-2012 73.2 61.8 80.4 99.2     
Adult literacy Rate - Male (%) 2006-2012 82.6 70.7 85.9 99.3     
Adult literacy Rate - Female (%) 2006-2012 64.6 53.4 75.2 99.0     
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2009-2012 3.3 5.3 4.3 5.5     
                
Environmental  Indicators               
Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2013 34.4 8.6 11.9 9.4     
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2013 71.9 43.2 43.4 30.0     
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2013 11.7 23.3 28.0 34.5     
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2012 0.1 1.1 3.0 11.6     

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics (2015)           
 

 

  

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500
2

0
0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
8

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

GNI Per Capita US $

Uganda Africa

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

2
0
0

0

2
0
0

5

2
0
0

9

2
0
1

0

2
0
1

1

2
0
1

2

2
0
1

3

2
0
1

4

2
0
1

5

Population Growth 
Rate (%)

Uganda Africa

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Life Expectancy at 
Birth (years)

Uganda Africa

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90

100

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
5

2
0

0
9

2
0

1
0

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

Uganda Africa



 

II 

 

APPENDIX II: STATUS OF BANK PORTFOLIO IN UGANDA 

 

1. Update on Bank’s Portfolio 

 

The Bank Group’s ongoing portfolio in Uganda comprises 14 national operations, 4 multinational 

and 3 private sector projects with a net commitment value of UA 843.73 million. The sectorial 

distribution is as shown in Figure 1 below. 

 

Figure 1: COUG 2016 PORTFOLIO DISTRIBUTION BY SECTOR 
 

 
 

 

Two Multinational operations – Lake Victoria Maritime Communication Transport Project and The 

Kapchorwa–Suam Road Project with a Net Commitment of UA 76.35 million were by the  Board in 

March  2017 respectively and are expected to commence operation soon.  If the projects become 

operational, Uganda will have a total portfolio value of UA 920.08 million. 

 

Portfolio Snapshot: There are no problem projects and ageing projects. Nonetheless, disbursement 

slowed down during the first half of 2016 due to challenges of delay in startup of operations, 

obtaining right of way for energy and transport projects, payment of compensation to project affected 

persons, bidders of road contracts refusing to accept verdicts of the Uganda National Roads Authority 

(UNRA) - the implementing agency of road transport projects in awarding road contracts to 

contractors. However, measures were taken, including getting Government of Uganda at the highest 

level to intervene in the payment of outstanding compensations to project affected persons and 

finding solutions to contractors accepting the outcome of evaluations of the bid process on road 

contracts among others, to ensure smooth and continuous implementation of projects for improved 

disbursements. The portfolio has a   potentially problematic project of 6.7% and commitment at risk 

of 8%. The average age of the portfolio stood at 3.31 years. The portfolio is rated as satisfactory with 

a score of 2.95 (on a SAP 0-4 and IPR 1-4 scale). The average size of the portfolio is UA 52 million. 

Key challenges facing the portfolio include the need to improve performance in areas such as quality 

at entry, delay in ratification of projects by the Parliament, capacity constraints of implementing 

agencies, contract management, and slow disbursement emanating from procurement challenges. 

Water & 
Sanitation

17%

Transport
16%

Agriculture
21%

Social
14%

Multinational 
16%

Energy
14%

Private Sector
2%



 

III 

 

These challenges are being addressed by GOU and the Bank through the implementation of the 

Country Portfolio Improvement Plan (CPIP). 

  
Portfolio Performance: The Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPRs)  has highlighted 
areas that needed improvement, and the following measures have been taken in this respect: (i)To 
avoid project effectiveness, Start-up and implementation delays, GoU has committed to address the 
issue of payment of compensation and obtaining land and right of way for implementation of Bank 
projects and the ratification of Projects by the Parliament that was largely responsible for the delay 
in projects becoming effective; (ii) With regard to procurement delays which still hinder effective 
implementation of projects, GoU has agreed to work through the Public Procurement and Disposal 
of Assets (PPDA) Authority established by Government to minimise the effects of the procurement 
challenges, such as the activities of whistle blowers and bidders who are dissatisfied with outcomes 
of contract award processes; (iii) Regarding  Financial Management issues, GoU is expected to 
exempt Bank funded projects from VAT/Taxes or provide the VAT/Tax deductions made to Projects 
in good time to enable contractors continue their work without complaining of lack of funds; GoU 
has further committed to making budgetary provisions for counterpart funds and release them in time, 
whereas the Bank shall routinely monitor implementation of audit recommendations ahead of 
supervision missions, and; (iv) to address the challenges relating to low disbursement, the Bank’s 
fast-tracking of effectiveness processes will mitigate low disbursement as a result of start-up and 
effectiveness delays. 
 

2. Strategic Orientation of Bank Support to the Country 

 

Alignment with H5s: A new CSP 2017-2021 is under preparation. It will have two pillars: a) 

Infrastructure Development for Industrialization, with a focus on three sub-sectors of agriculture, 

transport and logistics, and water and sanitation, b) Skills development and Capacity building. The 

three priority sectors of the new CSP are aligned to four out of the Hi-Five Priorities, including 

promoting: (i) Agricultural production; (ii) Trade and industrial development through improved 

transport infrastructure; (iii) Regional transport infrastructure connectivity, and; (iv) Improved social 

livelihood through provision of adequate water and sanitation infrastructure as well as skilling the 

youths of Uganda. 

 

Pipeline and amount of forthcoming operations: The Indicative Operations Program (IOP) for 

Uganda during the period 2017-2021 include a total of 14 operations amounting to UA 915 million 

as shown in Appendix 2. 

 

Issues to Note:  These include the following: (i) Current portfolio challenges, particularly in the 

transport and energy sectors which may lead to the deterioration of the portfolio during the next 

CSP2017-2021 period; (ii) The uncertainty of the ADF-14 replenishment levels and country 

allocation that may constrain portfolio growth; (iii) Slow payment of compensation to Project 

Affected Persons; (iv) Delays in obtaining right of way for Bank projects (Transport and Energy); 

and (v) Entry of non-traditional borrowers in financing projects in Uganda. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

IV 

 

Table 1: On-going Uganda Bank Portfolio 

 

 

1 Community Agricultural Infrustructure Improvement Programme III 03/05/2011 40.00 36.94 92.4% 31/12/2017 on going

2 Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement  II (MATIIPII) 10.12.2014 60.14 0.60 1.0% 30.06.2020 on going

3 Preparation for Strategic Plan for Climate Resilience 17.03.2016 1.11 0.20 18.0% 30.04.2018 on going

4 Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project II 20.01.2016 54.79 6.09 11.1% 30.06.2021 on going

156.04 43.83 28.1%

5 Road Sector Project 4 ( Kigumbba Masindi Rd) 135 KM 13/03/2013 72.94 9.24            12.7% 30/06/2018 ongoing

6 Road Sector Project V 28/05/2014 70.00 4.28            6.1% 31/12/2020 ongoing

142.94 13.52 9.5%

7 Kampala  Sanitation Project 16/12/2008 35.00 32.44 92.7% 31/12/2017 ongoing

8 Water Supply and sanitation program  Phase 1 5/10/2011 43.59 42.59 97.7% 31/12/2017 ongoing

9 Water Supply and sanitation program  Phase 2 3/2/2016 65.80 14.21 21.6% 30/06/2021 ongoing

10 Additional Funds to Water Supply and Sanitation Program 4/3/2015 8.37 4.77 57.0% 30/06/2018 ongoing

152.76 94.01 61.5%

11 Rehabilitation of Mulago and KCC Clinics 06/07/2011 56.00 41.25 73.7% 30.09.2018 on going

12 Education V  Project (HEST) 21/11/2012 67.00 26.86 40.1% 30.06.2018 On going

123.00 68.11 55.4%

13 Rural Electricity Access 16.09.2015 70.92 0.53 0.7% 31.12.2020 on going

14 Mbarara-Nkenda/Tororo-LiraTransmission Lines Project 16/12/08 52.50 42.48 80.9% 28/02/2018 ongoing

123.42 42.48 34.4%

698.16 261.95 37.5%

15 East Africa's Centre of Excellence for Skills 03/10/2014 22.50 1.67 7.4% 31/12/2019 on going

16 Lake Edward Integrated Fisheries & Water Resources Mgt Project 20.05.2016 5.00 0.73 14.6% 30.06.2021 on going

17 Lake Victoria Water Supply and Sanitation program phase II 17/12/2010 11.13 10.63 95.5% 31/12/2017 ongoing

18 Multinational Uganda/Rwanda-Busega -Mpigi Express Highway 22/06/2016 106.94 0.04 0.0% 31/12/2021 ongoing

145.57 13.07 9.0%

843.73 275.03 32.60

D. SOCI AL

E. ENERGY

Social - S ub Total

GRAND TOTAL I NCLUDI NG MULTI  NATI ONAL 

F. MULTI  NATI ONAL PROJECT

GRAND TOTAL FOR PUBLI C S ECTOR OPERATI ONS

Multi National Projects- S ubtotal

Energy - S ub total

Agriculture - S ub Total

B. TRANSPORT

Transport - S ub Total

W ater and S anitation - S ub totalW ater and S anitation - S ub total

C. W ATER

A. AGRI CULTURE

Approval Date
Serial 

No.
Project Description

Status (not effective & 

on-going/effective, etc)

Net 

Commitments 

(UA million)

Amount 

Disbursed 

(UA million)

Disbursed (%)

Deadline for 

Last 

Disbursement



 

V 

 

Appendix III: Map of the Project Area 

 

 

Disclaimer: This map has been drawn by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) of Uganda 

exclusively for the use of readers of the report to which it is attached. The names used and the borders shown do not imply on 

the part of the Bank and its members any judgement concerning the legal status of a territory nor any approval or acceptance 

of these borders. 

  



 

VI 

 

APPENDIX IV: PROJECT BENEFICIARY DISTRICTS 

 

 

No. District Population % of women Number of Households

1       Amolatar 147,166      49.9% 27,983                                 

2       Buhweju 422,771      49.7% 97,933                                 

3       Buikwe 323,067      50.8% 61,228                                 

4       Bukedea 436,345      50.5% 86,924                                 

5       Bulambuli 504,197      51.9% 102,672                               

6       Buyende 471,242      50.5% 105,463                               

7       Gomba 486,319      50.9% 93,998                                 

8       Gulu 105,186      50.8% 21,512                                 

9       Ibanda 694,992      51.2% 139,066                               

10     Iganga 148,218      47.9% 34,072                                 

11     Isingiro 266,197      49.8% 52,158                                 

12     Jinja 281,637      49.9% 60,161                                 

13     Kabale 456,958      49.6% 105,346                               

14     Kamuli 291,113      48.3% 64,935                                 

15     Kamwenge 488,960      51.8% 108,538                               

16     Kapchorwa 183,444      52.7% 39,816                                 

17     Kasese 328,964      48.8% 80,087                                 

18     Kiboga 596,804      50.2% 144,632                               

19     Kiruhura 197,369      45.5% 43,167                                 

20     Kiryandongo 383,644      51.0% 76,493                                 

21     Kyegegwa 178,004      51.2% 34,160                                 

22     Luwero 1,997,418   51.8% 502,089                               

23     Lyantonde 203,600      51.3% 36,304                                 

24     Masindi 174,508      50.4% 34,038                                 

25     Mayuge 436,345      50.5% 86,924                                 

26     Mbale 486,319      50.9% 93,998                                 

27     Mbarara 383,644      51.0% 76,493                                 

28     Mitooma 178,004      51.2% 34,160                                 

29     Mityana 249,625      50.8% 55,006                                 

30     Mukono 528,231      51.8% 117,854                               

31     Nakaseke 382,077      42.2% 67,224                                 

32     Nakasongola 456,958      49.6% 105,346                               

33     Ntungamo 93,753        50.0% 20,639                                 

34     Oyam 183,444      52.7% 39,816                                 

35     Pader 181,799      48.0% 36,378                                 

36     Sironko 252,597      49.7% 55,185                                 

37     Ssembabule 159,922      48.3% 101,590                               

38     Wakiso 486,360      51.3% 35,285                                 

TOTAL 14,227,201    50.1% 3,078,673                                       



 

VII 

 

 

MAIZE VALUE CHAIN

No. District Population % of women Number of Households

1           Amolatar 147,166        49.9% 27,983                             

2           Buhweju 120,720        50.9% 24,845                             

3           Buikwe 422,771        49.7% 97,933                             

4           Buyende 323,067        50.8% 61,228                             

5           Gulu 436,345        50.5% 86,924                             

6           Iganga 504,197        51.9% 102,672                           

7           Jinja 471,242        50.5% 105,463                           

8           Kamuli 486,319        50.9% 93,998                             

9           Kamwenge 414,454        51.0% 88,686                             

10         Kapchorwa 105,186        50.8% 21,512                             

11         Kasese 694,992        51.2% 139,066                           

12         Kiboga 148,218        47.9% 34,072                             

13         Kiryandongo 266,197        49.8% 52,158                             

14         Kyegegwa 281,637        49.9% 60,161                             

15         Luwero 456,958        49.6% 105,346                           

16         Masindi 291,113        48.3% 64,935                             

17         Mayuge 473,239        51.4% 108,538                           

18         Mbale 488,960        51.8% 108,538                           

19         Mitooma 183,444        52.7% 39,816                             

20         Mityana 328,964        48.8% 80,087                             

21         Mukono 596,804        50.2% 144,632                           

22         Nakaseke 197,369        45.5% 43,167                             

23         Oyam 383,644        51.0% 76,493                             

24         Pader 178,004        51.2% 34,160                             

25         Wakiso 1,997,418     51.8% 502,089                           

TOTAL 10,398,428   50.3% 2,304,502                        

RICE VALUE CHAIN

No. District Population % of women Number of Households

1           Amolatar 147,166        49.9% 27,983                             

2           Bukedea 203,600        51.3% 36,304                             

3           Bulambuli 174,508        50.4% 34,038                             

4           Gulu 436,345        50.5% 86,924                             

5           Kamuli 486,319        50.9% 93,998                             

6           Oyam 383,644        51.0% 76,493                             

7           Pader 178,004        51.2% 34,160                             

8           Sironko 242,422        50.0% 55,026                             

TOTAL 2,252,008     50.7% 444,926                           

DIARY VALUE CHAIN

No. District Population % of women Number of Households

1           Ibanda 249,625        50.8% 55,006                             

2           Kabale 528,231        51.8% 117,854                           

3           Kiruhura 382,077        42.2% 67,224                             

4           Luwero 456,958        49.6% 105,346                           

5           Lyantonde 93,753          50.0% 20,639                             

6           Mbarara 472,629        50.6% 112,849                           

7           Mitooma 183,444        52.7% 39,816                             

8           Nakasongola 181,799        48.0% 36,378                             

9           Ntungamo 483,841        51.5% 101,796                           

10         Ssembabule 252,597        49.7% 55,185                             

11         Gomba 159,922        48.3% 101,590                           

12         Isingiro 486,360        51.3% 35,285                             

TOTAL 3,931,236         49.7% 848,968                                     



 

VIII 

 

Appendix V: Key related projects financed by the Bank and other Development Partners in 

the Uganda 

PROJECT NAME COVERAGE SOURC
E of 
FUNDS 

AMOUNT 
(millions) 

STARTING ENDING PLANNED OUTPUTS 

WATER FOR PRODUCTION  

Farm Income Enhancement and Forest 
Conservation Project (FIEFOC 1) 

National AfDB UA 40.19 2006 2013 Irrigation and natural resource 
management 

Irrigation Scheme Development in 
Eastern and Central Uganda 

East and Central JICA US$10 2014 2017 Design studies for irrigation schemes 

Farm Income Enhancement and Forest 
Conservation Project (FIEFOC 2) 

National AfDB UA 55  2016 2021 Irrigation, Agri-business 
Development, and NRM 

Water for Production Kamuli, lira and 
kiruhura district 

AFD Euro 50 2015 2018 Mainly livestock structures 

Promotion of Rice Development 
project 

National JICA US$10 2011 2016 Research and Development 

AGRO-PROCESSING/ VALUE ADDITION  

Danida U-Growth Programme National Danida US$110 2014 2018 Agri-business/ Private Sector 
support 

Danida aBi Trust National Danida US63 2013 2016 Value Chain approach 

EU Small and medium Agribusiness 
Development Fund 

National EU Euro 15 2013 2017 Agricultural business finance 

USAID Livelihoods and Enterprises for 
Agric. Development 

National USAID US$35.9 2008 2014 Increased market access 

Agricultural Technology and 
Agribusiness Advisory Services 

National IDA US$127 2011 2016 Value Chain Development 

Agriculture Cluster Development 
Project 

National IDA US$108 2015 2019 Value addition and Market access 

Developing a Market - Oriented and 
Environmentally Sustainable Beef Meat 
Industry in Uganda  

National EU EUR 15.0 2017 2022 Meat Value Chain Development 

Project for Restoration of Livelihoods 
in the Northern Region (PRELNOR) 

Northern Uganda IFAD US$ 70.7 2015 2022 Livelihoods Develoment 

DISTRICT ROADS  

Area Based Agricultural Modernization 
Programme (AAMP) 

Western Uganda AfDB US$ 13.6 June 2004 March 
2009 

1100km Rehabilitated  

North West Region Small Holder 
Agricultural Development Project 
(NSADP) 

West Nile Region AfDB UA 17.6 2000 June 
2009 

205km Constructed  

Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Programme Project 1 
(CAIIP-1) 

26 District In Central 
and Eastern Uganda 

AfDB UA30 July 2007 2012 Rehabilitation of 390km and 
Maintenance of 587km of District 
roads 

Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Programme Project 2 
(CAIIP-2) 

15 Districts in 
Northern and 
Eastern Uganda 

AfDB UA45 Sept 2009 Dec 
2015 

225km of feeder roads to be 
rehabilitated 

COMMUNITY ACCESS ROADS 

Area Based Modernization Programme 
(AAMP) 

Western Uganda IFAD US$2.3 June 2004 Decemb
er 2010 

1438km Routine Manual 
Maintenance / Rehabilitation 

North West Region Small Holder 
Agricultural Development Project 
(NSADP) 

West Nile AfDB UA 17.6 2000 June 
2009 

1600km Routine Manual 
Maintenance / Rehabilitation 

Municipal Infrastructure Programme All Municipal 
Councils 

IDA US$150 2013 2017 Rehabilitation of Municipal roads 

Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Programme Project 1 
(CAIIP-1) 

26 District In Central 
and Eastern Uganda 

AfDB/ 
IFAD 

UA30 July 2007 2012 Rehabilitation of 3510Km and agri-
business development  

Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Programme Project 2 
(CAIIP-2) 

15 Districts in 
Northern and 
Eastern Uganda 

AfDB UA45 Sept 2009 Dec 
2015 

4,365km of access roads and agri-
business development 

District Livelihood Support Programme 
(DLSP) 

13 Districts West, 
North and Eastern 
Uganda 

IFAD US$27.4 2007 2014 2,400km to be rehabilitated and 
agri-business development 

 Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Project 3 (CAIIP-3) 

Western Uganda AfDB UA 40 2012 2016 4000 km roads to be rehabilitated 
and agribusiness Development 



 

IX 

 

PROJECT NAME COVERAGE SOURC
E of 
FUNDS 

AMOUNT 
(millions) 

STARTING ENDING PLANNED OUTPUTS 

MARKETS 

 North West Agricultural Sector 
Development Programme(NWASDP) 

North West Uganda AfDB Part of B.3 
above 

May 2001 June 
2009 

22 Markets; 200km access road 
Rehabilitation;340km of 
Maintenance 

Agricultural Marketing & Agro-
processing Support Programme 

All Uganda (10 
districts covered) 

IFAD US$30 2011 2015 Seeks to connect farmers to markets 
and enhance enabling environment 

District Development Support 
Programme 

5 Districts in 
Western Uganda 

IFAD US20.6 Dec. 2001 Dec. 
2006 

Agricultural extension services and 
physical infrastructure 

Community Agricultural Infrastructure 
Improvement Project - 1 (CAIIP-1) 

26 District In Central 
and Eastern Uganda 

AfDB/I
FAD 

UA30 July 2007 2012 Construction of 78 functional 
markets in 78 sub-counties within 
26 districts. 

Markets and Agricultural Trade 
Improvement Project (MATIP-1) 

Countrywide in 
Municipalities and 
Town councils 

AfDB UA38 Sept 2009 Sept 
2014 

7 urban markets 

 Markets and Agricultural Trade 
Improvement Project (MATIP-2) 

Countrywide in 
Municipalities and 
Town councils 

AfDB UA55 Dec 2014 Sept 
202019 

11 urban markets 

ENERGY 

Energy for Rural Transformation 
Project (ERT) (1&2) 

All Uganda IDA US$140 2007 2016 Facilitates investments in 
commercially oriented rural 
electrification projects 

 

 

 

 

  



 

X 

 

Appendix VI: Procurement Plan 

 

Country/Organisation: Uganda  

Project/Programme Description Agriculture Value Chain Development Project  

Project/Programme SAP Identification # P-UG-AAZ-003 

Loan #:   

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

Approval Date of Procurement Plan: 18 May 2017 

Date of General Procurement Notice:   

Advance Contracting  Yes 

Period Covered by these Proc. Plans: July 2017 to June 2022 

 

1. G O O D S 

   Package/ lot description  

Estimated 

Amount      

UA' 000 

 Procurement 

Method  

 Pre or      

Post 

Qualification  

 Dom/Reg. 

Preference 

(Y/N)  

 Prior 

or Post 

Review  

 SPN/IFP Publication 

Date   
 Start Date   Comments  

1.1 

Procurement of HPLC(150,000$), 

CHAM-II  immono-assay equipment 

(100,000) /d 

      185.19  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Aug-18 6-Jan-19   

1.2 
Office equipment: laptops, computers, 

printers, hand cameras and projector  
        49.63  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jul-18 24-Nov-18   

1.3 
Production and multiplication of maize 

breeder seed 
          0.74  

Direct 

Procurement 
Post N Prior 15-Jan-18 15-Apr-18 

Use of advance 

contracting 

1.4 
Production and multiplication of rice 

breeder seed 
          5.19  

Direct 

Procurement 
Post N Prior 15-Jan-18 15-Apr-18 

Use of advance 

contracting 

1.5 
Production and multiplication of maize 

foundation seed 
      102.96  

Direct 

Procurement 

Post 

 

 

N Prior 12-Oct-18 10-Jan-19   

1.6 
Production and multiplication of rice 

foundation seed 
        61.48  

Direct 

Procurement 
Post N Prior 12-Oct-18 10-Jan-19   

1.7 Purchase of certified rice seeds    1,481.48  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Sep-18 25-Jan-19   



 

XI 

 

1.8 Purchase of certified maize seeds    1,481.48  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 6-Feb-19   

1.9 

Purchase of motorcycles, pick-ups, station 

wagons, truck, backhoe, conveyor belt, 

rammer, tractor, forklift, cold chain 

   1,294.41  Shopping Post N 
Prior/ 

Post 
15-Sep-18 25-Jan-19   

1.10 Purchase of fertilizers    5,925.93  
OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Sep-18 25-Jan-19   

1.11 Livestock watering       177.78  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Oct-18 8-Mar-19   

1.12 Mobil laboratory for DDA       118.52  Shopping Post N Prior 15-Oct-18 24-Feb-19   

1.13 
Procurement of office computers and 

printers for the 5 DLGs 
        20.74  Shopping Post N Post 15-Oct-18 24-Feb-19   

1.14 

Upgrade and introduce improved 

packaging for small medium milk 

processors 

        22.22  Shopping Post N Post 15-Nov-18 27-Mar-19   

1.15 
IT Equipment (servers, laptops, printers, 

etc) for NSCS HQ at Kawanda  
        92.59  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

1.16 
Solar systems to support the semen cold 

chain 
        47.41  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jan-19 27-May-19   

1.17 Laboratory consumables for one year         37.04  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jan-19 27-May-19   

1.18 Conveyor belt and rammer         35.56  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jan-19 27-May-19   

1.19 
Procurement rapid testing kits for 

mycotoxin (25 kits x 5 years) 
        18.52  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jan-19 27-May-19   

1.20 Laboratory equipment       259.26  OCB National Post N Post 15-Jul-19 6-Dec-19   

1.21 
Hand tools for operation and maintenance 

of the schemes 
        22.22  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jul-19 24-Nov-19   

1.22 

Ice boxes, assorted field disease 

surveillance equipment, freezers for 

vaccine cold chain 

          0.26  Shopping Post N Post 15-Jul-19 24-Nov-19   

1.23 Office furniture and GPS machines         25.93  Shopping Post N Post 15-Aug-19 25-Dec-19   

1.24 
Equipment for two zonal animal disease 

control centres 
      303.70  

OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jan-20 7-Jun-20   

1.25 
Restocking of high quality dairy and beef 

breeding animals and semen 
      555.56  

OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jan-20 7-Jun-20   

  Total Cost  12,325.78                

2. WORKS 



 

XII 

 

 No.  Package/ lot description 

Estimated 

Amount          

UA' 000 

Procurement 

Method 

Pre-or Post 

Qualification 

Dom/Reg. 

Preference 

(Y/N) 

Prior 

or Post 

Review 

SPN/IFP Publication 

Date  
Start Date Comments 

2.1 
Construction of Achomai Irrigation 

Scheme 
   14,467.41  

OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jul-18 6-Dec-18 

Use of advance 

contracting 

2.2 Construction of bridge      5,065.93  
OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jul-18 6-Dec-18 

Use of advance 

contracting 

2.3 Construction of access road         111.11  
OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jul-18 6-Dec-18 

Use of advance 

contracting 

2.4 
Small scale demo irrigation 

technologies/infrastructure 
        555.56  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Oct-18 8-Mar-19   

2.5 Land improvement for seed production           37.04  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Oct-18 8-Mar-19   

2.6 
Construction of UNBS Laboratory 

building 
     3,925.93  

OCB 

International 
Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.7 
Construction of administrative building 

(office, and training/ workshop facilities) 
     2,592.59  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.8 
Construction of storage facility (Dry yard, 

storage and grain store) 
        825.93  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.9 Rehabilitation of mini irrigation system           21.48  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.10 

Rehabilitate and equip 2 existing milk 

collection centers with coolers and 

generators 

        118.52  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.11 Rehabilitation of semen laboratory         144.44  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jan-19 8-Jun-19   

2.12 
Construction  of 2 zonal animal disease 

control centres 
        370.37  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Mar-19 6-Aug-19   

2.13 Rehabilitation of NSCS HQ at Kawanda            81.48  OCB National Post N Prior 15-Jul-19 6-Dec-19   

  Total Cost   28,317.78                

3. CONSULTANTS 



 

XIII 

 

No. Description Selection Method 
Lump sum or 

Time-Based 

Estimated 

Amount in 

UA' 000 

Prior/Post 

Review 

EOI 

Publication 

Date 

Contract Start Date 

3.1 

Technical Assistance: Food safety, SPS 

and quality; project  assistant; project 

coordinator; financial management; 

monitoring and evaluation; value chain 

development, procurement and accountant 

CQS Lumpsum 994.07 Prior 1-Sep-17 30-Jan-18 

3.2 Digital Platform development QCBS Lumpsum 740.74 Prior 1-Mar-18 30-Sep-18 

3.3 Technical studies (infrastructure design) QCBS Lumpsum 1,563.70 Prior 1-Jul-18 30-Jan-19 

3.4 Integrated Soil and Water Conservation QCBS Lumpsum 203.70 Prior 1-Jul-18 30-Jan-19 

3.5 M&E study QCBS Lumpsum 148.15 Prior 1-Jul-18 30-Jan-19 

3.6 Management Information System (MIS) QCBS Lumpsum 20.74 Prior 1-Jul-18 30-Jan-19 

3.7 
Recruitment of chief technical advisor and 

environmental audit consultant 
CQS Lumpsum 200.00 Prior 1-Sep-18 2-Apr-19 

3.8 Audit LCS Lumpsum 44.44 Prior 1-Sep-18 2-Apr-19 

3.9 Conduct baseline survey QCBS Lumpsum 51.85 Prior 1-Sep-18 2-Apr-19 

3.10 

Design and or supervision of civil works 

fro various buildings, irrigation scheme 

and demos 

QCBS Lumpsum 2,215.19 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.11 
Building seed certification data 

management capacity 
QCBS Lumpsum 92.59 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.12 

Sustainable development and management 

of forests/ tree resources in the catchment 

areas 

QCBS Lumpsum 588.89 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.13 

Development of protocols and training 

manuals  for technical and financial 

procedures of seed certification 

QCBS Lumpsum 111.11 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.14 
Breeding guidelines and artificial 

insemination  regulation 
QCBS Lumpsum 51.85 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.15 
Development of training manuals and 

protocols for TOTs  
QCBS Lumpsum 74.07 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.16 
Development of manuals and training on 

SOP maize and rice processing  
QCBS Lumpsum 29.63 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 



 

XIV 

 

3.17 Review the existing regulation QCBS Lumpsum 25.19 Prior 1-Oct-18 2-May-19 

3.18 
Recruitment of a consultant for onsite 

training towards ISO 17025 accreditation 
QCBS Lumpsum 103.70 Prior 1-Jan-19 2-Aug-19 

3.19 
Capacity building: planning, work plan 

preparation, learning exchanges, etc 
QCBS Lumpsum 74.07 Prior 1-Jan-19 2-Aug-19 

3.20 

Capacity building for compliance along 

the value chain: farmers/ primary 

processors, SME-medium scale 

processors, traders 

QCBS Lumpsum 37.04 Prior 1-Jan-19 2-Aug-19 

3.21 Technical studies/ surveys QCBS Lumpsum 44.44 Prior 1-Jan-19 2-Aug-19 

3.22 
Livestock value chain feasibility analysis 

and business concept development 
QCBS Lumpsum 111.11 Prior 1-Mar-19 30-Sep-19 

3.23 Temporary inspectors CQS Lumpsum 74.07 Prior 1-Jul-19 30-Jan-20 

3.24 ToT events on food safety for MCC QCBS Lumpsum 148.15 Prior 1-Jul-19 30-Jan-20 

3.25 

Livestock Value Chain Feasibility 

Analysis and Business Concept 

Development 

QCBS Lumpsum 111.11 Prior 1-Jul-19 30-Jan-20 

3.26 

Harmonization of labs protocol: 

international baseline study expert, 

coordination of labs workshops, develops 

manuals and onsite events 

QCBS Lumpsum 92.59 Prior 1-Jul-19 30-Jan-20 

3.27 
Recruitment of a food technologist (part-

time) 
CQS Lumpsum 44.44 Prior 1-Sep-19 1-Apr-20 

3.28 Provision for ESMP QCBS Lumpsum 195.56 Prior 1-Sep-19 1-Apr-20 

3.29 

Recruit and operate a value chain 

governance service platform (business 

service provider) 

QCBS Lumpsum 3,703.70 Prior 1-Sep-19 1-Apr-20 

3.30 

On-site training of staff for inspection and 

testing activities (DDA, UNBS, Animal 

Health) 

QCBS Lumpsum 41.48 Prior 1-Oct-19 1-May-20 

3.31 

Support UNBS to improve licensing of 

importers of agrochemicals and evaluation 

of agrochemicals 

QCBS Lumpsum 37.04 Prior 1-Oct-19 1-May-20 

3.32 
Support to  tsetse control surveillance 

activities 
QCBS Lumpsum 3.70 Prior 1-Oct-19 1-May-20 



 

XV 

 

3.33 
SME grading and packaging training  on 

post-harvest handling, storing 
QCBS Lumpsum 29.63 Prior 1-Jan-20 1-Aug-20 

3.34 
UNBS Q mark for qualified cottage/ micro 

- scale dairy processors 
QCBS Lumpsum 37.04 Prior 1-Jan-20 1-Aug-20 

3.35 Mid Term Review QCBS Lumpsum 51.85 Prior 3-Jan-20 3-Aug-20 

3.36 
Quick assessment of SPS management and 

control in maize and rice sectors 
QCBS Lumpsum 18.52 Prior 1-Mar-20 30-Sep-20 

3.37 

Feasibility study and preparation of a 

master plan and business case for an agro 

industrial zone (Agro Pole) in Mbale area 

QCBS Lumpsum 181.48 Prior 1-Oct-20 2-May-21 

3.38 
Preparation of the Project Completion 

Report 
QCBS Lumpsum 29.63 Prior 1-Jul-22 30-Jan-23 

  Total Cost     12,326.30       

 

 


















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Mohamed Abdelgadir
Country Programme Manager
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2627
e-mail: m.abdelgadir@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb@ifad.org

Executive Board — 122nd Session
Rome, 11-12 December 2017

For: Approval

Document: EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

E
Agenda: 6(e)(v)

Date: 11 December 2017

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification
and Modernization Project



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-

COSOP 1
II. Project description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 2
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Project implementation 3
Approach 3A.

B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 4
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 6

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 7
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 8
D. Sustainability 8
E. Risk identification and mitigation 8

V. Corporate considerations 9
Compliance with IFAD policies 9A.
Alignment and harmonization 9B.
Innovations and scaling up 10C.
Policy engagement 10D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 10
VII. Recommendation 10

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ADB Asian Development Bank
M&E monitoring and evaluation
PFI participating financial institution
PMU project management unit
RRA Rural Restructuring Agency
UZS Uzbek sum
WCA water consumer association



E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

iii

M
a
p

 o
f th

e
 p

ro
je

ct a
re

a



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Republic of Uzbekistan

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Uzbekistan

Executing agency: Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA)

Total project cost: US$159.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$46.2 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$300,000

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years
starting from the date of approval by the Executive
Board, with a fixed interest rate equal to 1.25 per cent
per annum and a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Financing gap: US$47 million

Cofinanciers: Beneficiaries, Government and PFIs

Contribution of borrower: US$27.0 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$19.5 million

Contribution of participating financial
institutions (PFIs):

US$19.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification and
Modernization Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Uzbekistan
for the Agriculture Diversification and Modernization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Uzbekistan is a 447,400 km2 landlocked country in Central Asia bordering

Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. It had a
population of 31.8 million in 2016, of which approximately 60 per cent is rural.
With a per capita gross domestic product of US$2,130 in 2015, Uzbekistan is a
lower-middle-income country. Data suggest that its economic growth has been
broad based and inclusive.

2. Agriculture provides approximately 25 per cent of the country’s employment and
its share of the gross domestic product was estimated at 17.6 per cent in 2014.
Approximately 40 per cent of Uzbekistan’s rural population is directly engaged in
agriculture-related activities. Food imports meet the country’s growing demand and
the population’s enhanced purchasing capacity is increasingly applied to high-value
goods, particularly meat and dairy products. In 2015, Uzbekistan’s agricultural
imports totalled 11.5 per cent of the country’s total imports (US$1.3 billion)
according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.

3. Poverty declined from 27.5 per cent in 2001 to 14 per cent in 2015. This was
attributed to rapid economic growth, creation of new small businesses and
employment, public investments in education, health and infrastructure, increases
in public-sector salaries and increased remittances. In 2015, the poverty rate in
rural areas was 17 per cent compared with 11 per cent among the urban
population. The country’s low agricultural productivity, high tax burden among the
rural population, high dependency within households, regional disparities and lack
of formal rural labour markets are drivers of rural poverty. A lack of access to
productive assets, infrastructure, energy, land and water, technical and financial
services contribute to poverty and limited productivity, especially among rural
women and young people. Other vulnerable groups include families with many
children, people with disabilities, unemployed people and those with lower
education levels.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Diversification, modernization and import substitution of agricultural production is a
government policy priority as stipulated in Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, and the Welfare
Improvement Strategy (2013-2015). Diversification of products, particularly
horticultural crops, livestock and related sub-sectors is expected to enhance rural
families’ incomes and reduce the number of low-income households. IFAD’s
experience with the value chain approach in the region suggests that private-sector
actors are crucial for smallholder producers to participate in value chains. Traders,
buyers, aggregators, processors, exporters and other private players shape how



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

value chains perform. From the viewpoint of smallholder producers (Dekhan and
small private farmers), conducive partnerships with the private sector present a
major opportunity for sustained income generation. The project integrates
private-sector operators willing to invest time and resources to increase value
chain competitiveness in a way that enhances the benefits for smallholder
producers and supports their efforts to strengthen their businesses. This also
makes value chains more inclusive of smallholder producers.

5. The project will work with selected value chains, providing holistic and coordinated
support to all actors in order to improve their performance. Agribusinesses and
other qualified entities will be invited to take the role of leading entity, with a focus
on those willing to develop sound business models through productive partnerships
with their suppliers. Smallholder producers, who are the project’s primary target
group, will be targeted in each selected value chain in order to enhance their
inclusiveness and improve their returns from agriculture. The project’s targeting
strategy will therefore incorporate the principles of smallholder inclusiveness.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Geographical target. The project will be implemented in the Fergana Valley in the

regions of Andijan, Fergana and Namangan. The country strategic opportunities
programme highlights the challenges experienced in the Fergana Valley due to high
population density; Namangan registers the second lowest per capita gross
domestic product in the country. Women make up half the population, with
women-headed households comprising 18 per cent of the total. Approximately
20 per cent of youth are unemployed.

7. Target groups. The project’s main target groups are: (i) rural low-income
households on Dekhan farms, who are striving to increase income from agriculture
through active participation in project-supported value chains; (ii) small private
horticulture and livestock farmers with a farm size of up to 5 hectares; (iii)
agribusinesses with existing or potential linkages with groups (i) and (ii); and
(iv) rural youth. Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of
women-headed Dekhan and private farming households, and young women.

8. Beneficiaries. The project is expected to directly reach 75,000 households and
approximately 21,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 11,000 households
benefitting of loans and training, and approximately 54,000 incremental suppliers
of the leading entities benefitting from project loans. In addition, 10,000 full-time
jobs will be created by the leading entities’ incremental economic activities. In its
first phase, the project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000 households, and
about 10,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5,000, households benefitting
from loans and training, plus approximately 20,000 incremental suppliers of the
leading entities (LEs) benefitting from ADMP loans, and some 4,000 ful-time
equivalent incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

B. Project development objective
9. The project’s goal is to improve the incomes and livelihoods of rural people in the

target area. Its development objective is to increase the inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access
and improved natural resource management.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
10. The project will have three interrelated components; a fourth component will

support project management and implementation. The components are:
(i) inclusive value chain development; (ii) inclusive rural finance; (iii) climate-
resilient rural infrastructure; and (iv) project management.

11. Component 1: Inclusive value chain development. The outcome of this
component will be enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of
targeted stakeholders, and an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains, with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers.
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of farmers and other
stakeholders in targeted value chains. Three activities will be implemented to
create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses: (i) value chain
mapping exercises based on rapid market assessment results for small ruminants,
fisheries, sericulture and honey prepared during the design; (ii) rapid market
assessments of additional sub-sectors; and (iii) preparation of value chain
development plans, which will be roadmaps for LEs.

12. Component 2: Inclusive rural finance. The outcome of this component will be
increased productivity and efficiency among targeted smallholders, enabling value
chain actors to increase their investments in profitable value chains. The project
will support the State Fund for Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial
Activity in providing credit guarantees to smallholders and rural entrepreneurs who
lack acceptable collateral by offering partial coverage of lending risks. It will also
work with banks interested in lending to farmers in the target regions (and that
meet the project’s eligibility criteria) to facilitate farmers’ and agricultural
businesses’ access to financing. Finally, this component will establish a credit
window for youth who lack access to affordable and flexible lending products.
Banks will be free to set their own interest rates, allowing them to serve project
beneficiaries in a sustainable manner. These banks will be selected through a
competitive process to ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.
The outcome will be measured by the following indicator: PFIs’ portfolio risk is
below 5 per cent.

13. Component 3: Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. This component aims to
remove bottlenecks to a reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit Dekhans and
small farmers from enhancing the diversification and efficiency of agriculture in the
selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of the inter-
farm irrigation network operated by water consumer associations (WCAs). It will
enable targeted farmers’ groups to: (i) diversify agricultural production from low-
value to high-value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address the
challenges of drought due to climate change; and (iv) increase the capacity of
WCAs and the Basin Irrigation System Administration in efficient water resource
management and irrigation system operation and maintenance. The outcome of
this component will be improved farmland productivity resulting from modernized
irrigation infrastructure, as measured by the following indicator: at least 1,000
farmers report improved supply of irrigation water and increased productivity.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project will promote a demand-driven value chain approach. This approach will
focus on analysing each step of the value chain and investing in those needs that
have the potential to improve the productivity, profitability and competitiveness of
value chain players, especially Dekhan farmers.

15. The project will promote the upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various
points in the value chain to increase future productive capacity and



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

competitiveness. The leading entities with successful value chain development
plans prepared through component 1 will be considered for receiving loans from
PFIs through component 2. While loan applications will be assessed individually,
the project will provide support to their business operations through the provision
of technical assistance and training to farmer suppliers and other actors, and
access to improved infrastructure under component 3 to enhance value chains’
competitiveness and efficiency. The project will also promote coordination with
projects funded by other donors, especially those managed by the Rural
Restructuring Agency (RRA) – based on smooth information flow and open dialogue
– in order to ensure synergies and avoid duplication of efforts.

B. Organizational framework
16. The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources will have overall responsibility for

managing the project on behalf of the Government. Daily oversight will rest with a
project management unit (PMU) under the RRA, a state entity within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Water Resources. Overall management oversight will rest with an
inter-agency council for cooperation with international financial institutions, foreign
governments and donor countries implementing large-scale investment projects.
This council will provide guidance and direction to the project implementing
agency; the project manager will act as secretary to the council.

17. The PMU will be led by a project manager and be composed of: a chief accountant;
procurement officer; rural finance/youth officer; administrative
assistant/translator; and driver. The project will utilize legal staff from the Dairy
Value Chains Development Project. In addition, the project will rely on the services
of national and international specialists in various fields. A project implementation
team will be established in one of the project regions in year 1 (the region will be
determined by the Government, but will most likely be Namangan). The team will
comprise a: regional coordinator (value chain and business specialist); three rural
finance and youth officers; engineer; a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist
and a driver. Regional coordinators will be recruited to coordinate project activities
in the remaining regions. The project implementation team will be responsible for
daily implementation of all aspects of the project, except for financial
administration and procurement, which will be managed by the PMU within RRA.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. The project results framework will form the basis for the results-based M&E
system, including performance monitoring and impact assessment. The PMU/M&E
officer will be responsible for all internal M&E of the project. The PMU will submit
progress reports in English to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, the
Ministry of Finance and IFAD. A mid-term review will be carried out towards the
end of the project’s third year. During the final year of project implementation, as
part of the preparation of the project completion report and impact assessment
required by IFAD, the M&E data collected over the project implementation period
will be used in a thorough assessment of project achievements. This assessment
will focus on changes in beneficiaries’ livelihoods as a result of project activities,
and the sharing of lessons learned and experiences.

19. Learning and knowledge management. To ensure that the experiences gained
are captured, comprehensive provisions have been made for M&E. The project’s
knowledge management programme will be an essential tool for meeting project
objectives. Two approaches will be used: (i) a knowledge management programme
for supporting within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a broader
knowledge management programme aimed at informing government decision
makers and influencing policies. The project will also support efforts to broaden
information dissemination through: development of farmer networks (to share
knowledge on successful adaptation); farmer-to-farmer extension approaches



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

(to facilitate technology transfer); development of private technical services
(e.g. private veterinarians); and strengthening linkages among universities,
research and development institutions, and farmer networks to ensure the
relevance of the technology.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a financial management assessment was

undertaken. The inherent risk was assessed as high. In order to mitigate this risk,
a stand-alone PMU will be established within RRA with separate financial
management arrangements. This system is already in place for ongoing IFAD
projects and some World Bank projects, and the quality of financial management
has been largely assessed as satisfactory. As a result, the new project will be able
to draw on the capacities already established and working satisfactorily as part of
the ongoing IFAD projects. The ongoing IFAD project, the Horticultural Support
Project, has also shown strong disbursement rates with regards to credit lines.

21. Financial Management. The PMU, with support from the RRA finance unit, will be
responsible for the financial management of the project, including budgeting,
accounting, preparing withdrawal applications, monitoring implementing partners,
preparing consolidated financial reports and internal and external audit
arrangements.

22. Accounting and financial reporting arrangements. The accounting, financial
reporting and audit arrangements have already been established under the ongoing
IFAD projects. Accordingly, all project transactions will be recorded in customized
accounting and financial software on a cash basis in accordance with International
Public Sector Accounting Standards, and quarterly financial reports will be prepared
in formats agreed with IFAD. The project's consolidated financial statements will be
audited annually by an independent audit firm in accordance with internationally
accepted auditing standards and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

23. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified in the
programme implementation manual and letter to the borrower. Two separate
designated accounts denominated in United States dollars (US$) will be opened for
the IFAD loan and grant in a commercial bank, and will not be mingled with other
funds. From the designated accounts, the funds will flow to the project account
denominated in Uzbek sum (UZS) to finance eligible project expenditures. From the
designated loan account and the project loan account, funds (US$ or UZS) will be
transferred to incremental credit accounts (one account in US$ and one in UZS)
maintained by the PFIs in the form of credit to finance sub-projects undertaken by
beneficiaries. Transfers to the rural guarantee facility will be made using the direct-
payment method to a separate account maintained in US$ in a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds. Specific conditions for
disbursement will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper
safeguards are in place before transferring any funds to the PFIs and the
Guarantee Facility and remedies will be applied in case of non-compliance.

24. Procurement. As part of the detailed project design, IFAD assessed the public
procurement systems and institutions in Uzbekistan for the purpose of identifying
an entity to handle procurement. Despite recent efforts to modernize and
strengthen Uzbekistan’s public procurement system, there are critical gaps in
compatibility with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and procedures. However, the
capacity of RRA to conduct procurement was found to be in line with IFAD
procurement regulations and procedures.

25. Anti-corruption policy. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed through its loans and
grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy and whistleblowing procedures will be included
in the project implementation manual.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
26. Supervision and implementation support. A supervision plan covering the

period until the mid-term review will be agreed at project start-up. The project will
be supervised directly by IFAD. This will include annual risk-based financial
management supervision by a financial management specialist and operational
reviews covering a random sample of project activities, to be carried out in project
years 2 and 4 by independent auditors and under terms of reference acceptable to
IFAD. Details of financial management supervision are provided in appendix 7 of
the project design document. The timely completion of a baseline survey in line
with the project’s outcome and output indicators is fundamental to effective project
supervision.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs, estimated project

costs and financing plan are that: (i) project costs are based on September 2017
prices; (ii) the project will be financed over a six-year period; and (iii) the official
annual inflation rate of 5.7 per cent is taken as constant for the duration of the
project period (2018-2023). The international inflation rate is set at 2 per cent per
year in line with medium- to long-term projections of the Economist Intelligence
Unit and the World Bank Group (Commodity Market Outlook, January 2017) for the
United States dollars. Further to the devaluation of the UZS on 5 September 2017,
the base exchange rate for this analysis was set at UZS 8,092 to US$1 as the
official exchange rate prevailing at the end of the final design mission. Project costs
are presented in both UZS and US$; conversions from current US$ values into UZS
use constant purchasing power exchange rates. A 20 per cent value-added tax will
be levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services. For directly
recruited local staff, the project will cover the social insurance rate of 25 per cent.

28. Project costs. The total investment and incremental recurrent project costs,
including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at approximately
US$159.6 million (UZS 1,291 billion). Physical and price contingencies are 1 per
cent of the total project cost. This is largely due to the fact that investments
associated with rural finance (lump sum with no contingency) comprise
approximately 88 per cent of the total project costs. The foreign-exchange
component is estimated at US$112.4 million or 70 per cent of the total project
cost. This is due to the fact that most of the project financing is in the form of
credit lines which will be used by the beneficiaries to purchase assets for local
production and also for financing the export of their produce. The Government's
contribution, mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost,
or US$27.0 million. The project management cost is approximately 1.4 per cent of
the total project cost (US$2.2 million). Table 1 provides a summary of the project
financing plan by component.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Inclusive Value Chains
Development
1.1 Enabling business
environment for inclusive value
chains 52 14.8 82 23.3 159 45.2 59 16.7 - - - - 352 0.2
1.2 Capacity development for
value chain stakeholders 3 918 37.4 125 1.2 4 519 43.1 1 911 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 480 6.6
Subtotal 1. Inclusive value chain
development 3 970 36.7 207 1.9 4 678 43.2 1 969 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 831 0.1
2. Inclusive rural finance
2.1 Rural guarantee facility 1 000 10.1 - - 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 - - - - 9 935 6.2
2.2 Agriculture diversification and
modernization credit lines 33 712 28.3 93 0.1 26 538 22.3 19 869 16.7 19 543 16.4 19 466 16.3 119 214 74.7
2.3 Credit line for youth 5 000 41.7 - - 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 - - - - 12 000 7.5
Subtotal 2. Inclusive rural finance 39 712 28.1 93 0.1 38 473 27.3 23 869 16.9 19 543 13.8 19 466 13.8 141 149 88.5
3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure
3.1 Modernization of irrigation
systems 1 109 21.2 - - 3 260 62.2 874 16.7 - - - - 5 243 3.3
3.2 Increasing capacities of WCAs 37 37.3 - - 46 46.0 17 16.7 100 0.1
Subtotal 3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure 1 146 21.5 - - 3 305 61.9 890 16.7 - - - - 5 342 3.3
4. Project management
4.1 Project management unit 800 62.9 - - 275 21.6 198 15.5 1 273 0.8
4.2 Project implementation team 572 59.9 - - 269 28.2 114 11.9 955 0.6
Subtotal 4. Project management 1 372 61.6 - - 544 24.4 312 14.0 2 228 1.4

Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29.1 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 466 12.2 159 550 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed through multiple sources, including an IFAD loan, an

IFAD grant, the Government, beneficiaries and PFIs. The IFAD loan from the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) totalling US$46.2 million
will cover 29 per cent of project costs, contributing to: 37 per cent of the inclusive
value chains development component (component 1, totalling US$10.8 million);
28 per cent of the inclusive rural finance component (component 2,
US$141.8 million); 21 per cent of the climate-resilient rural infrastructure
component (component 3, US$5.3 million); and 62 per cent of the project
management component (component 4, US$ 2.2 million). In addition, IFAD will
provide a grant of US$300,000 to cover part of the international technical
assistance and training provided under component 1, and technical assistance to
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources under component 2. The Government
will waive all taxes related to project expenditures, including all those associated
with goods and services procured with the loans generated by the project’s funded
credit lines, and the social fund associated with personnel. The Government's
contribution,  mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost
or US$27.0 million. PFIs are expected to contribute US$19.5 million to match the
funds made available by the project. Beneficiaries will contribute at least
US$19.5 million. The financing gap of US$47 million may be sourced by
subsequent PBAS cycles (under financing terms to be determined and subject to
internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval), or by cofinancing
identified during implementation.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total

Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and goods 2 448 39.4 - - 2 718 43.8 1 035 16.7 - 7 0.1 6 208 3.9

2. Civil works 1 513 26.0 3 192 54.8 1 123 19.3 - - - 5 828 3.7

3. Vehicles 82 75.0 27 25.0 109 0.1

4. Technical assistance

International TA 494 43.0 46 4.0 418 36.4 192 16.7 - - 1 150 0.7

National TA 600 20.5 254 8.7 1 486 50.8 500 17.1 85 2.9 2 925 1.8
Subtotal Technical Assistance
and Studies 1 094 26.8 300 7.4 1 904 46.7 692 17.0 85 2.1 4 075 2.6

5. Training 251 36.8 317 46.5 114 16.7 682 0.4

6. Inclusive value chain financing

Guarantee Finance 1 000 10.1 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 9 935 6.2

Credit Line for AMD 33 712 28.4 26 444 22.2 19 815 16.7 19 458 16.4 19 458 16.4 118 888 74.5

Credit Line for Youth 5 000 41.7 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 12 000 7.5
Subtotal Inclusive Value Chain
Financing 39 712 28.2 38 379 27.3 23 815 16.9 19458 13.8 19458 13.8 140 823 88.3

Total Investment Costs 45 100 28.6 300 0.2 46 510 29.5 26 805 17.0 19 543 12.4 19458 12.3 157 725 98.9

7. Salaries 746 68.9 337 31.1 1 084 0.7

Operations & Maintenance 111 54.8 58 28.6 34 16.7 203 0.1

Operating Costs 243 45.0 95 17.6 202 37.4 539 0.3

Total Recurrent Costs 1 100 60.3 490 26.8 235 12.9 1825 1.1
Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 465 12.2 159 550 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farming

households, Dekhan farmers, commercial farmers, agri-firms and rural
entrepreneurs. These include: (i) at least 80 per cent of project beneficiaries
reporting at least a 20 per cent increase in income; (ii) at least 75,000 households
receiving services promoted or supported by the project; (iii) at least 10,000
full-time jobs (or equivalent) created; and (iv) at least 70 per cent of supported
smallholder producers, including Dekhans, reporting a 20 per cent increase in sales
along their value chains

31. Economic rate of return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the economic
analysis of the project indicates that the total investment gains are significant and
robust in economic terms. The analysis results in an internal economic rate of
return of 16.5 per cent and a net present value of US$33.7 million over 20 years
based on quantifiable benefits that relate directly to the activities undertaken by
the project.

D. Sustainability
32. The sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) the value chain-champion

business and technical capacity-building activities to be promoted; (ii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iii) the preparation of value chain
development plans as the basis for all investments, which should lead to inclusive
and more equitable and profitable value chains. The project’s sustainability is also
based on an exit strategy that comprises: (i) ensuring the ownership by
beneficiaries of the financed activities; (ii) the participatory development of
demand-driven technology; (iii) integration along value chains, including input



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

suppliers and service providers; and (iv) limited project operational, staff and
recurrent costs.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The major risks are: (i) a distortive policy environment; (ii) a lack of stakeholder

participation; (iii) market-related risks including potential exchange rate
fluctuations; (iv) a failure of communication; (v) deteriorating financial
performance of some PFIs; and (vi) the outbreak of transboundary animal disease,
(vii) complex flow of funds, as well as (viii) relatively large financing gap. Mitigation
measures include: regular supervision, and preparation of a detailed project
implementation manual; separate US$ accounts for IFAD financing and procedures
to manage foreign exchange risks, in-depth, participatory analysis of production
and business opportunities; intensive training for farmers on how to position their
products; establishment of proper contracts; training on business management;
regular project monitoring; annual assessment of banks against minimum eligibility
requirements; upgrading critical competencies in active disease surveillance and
reporting from the field; and ensuring that there are veterinary field staff capable
of sharing information and specimens with the Government’s veterinary disease
diagnostic laboratories. Moreover, specific conditions related to disbursement and
audit will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper safeguards
are in place with regards to funds being transferred to the PFIs and the guarantee
facility. The PFIs also will also be subject to strict monitoring measures, as well as
compliance based disbursement procedures. As the financing gap will mainly
finance credit lines, the project will still be able to function, even if the additional
financing does not materialize.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The project design is aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies,
including the: (i) Strategic Framework (2016-2025); (ii) Policy on Targeting;
(iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance
Policy; (v) Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy; and
(viii) Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. Given the nature
and extent of the likely environmental impacts, the project is classified as a
category B in line with IFAD’s environmental assessment procedures. The potential
negative environmental impacts are assessed to be within controllable limits.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. The project is closely aligned with and supports the Government’s priorities for

diversification and modernization of the agriculture sector, as expressed in the
Welfare Improvement Strategy (2013-2015) and Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, which stresses the
need to gradually shift from cotton and wheat to value-added commodities, and
introduce resource-saving technologies.

36. Seeking to avoid the duplication of efforts and foster complementarities while
taking advantage of business-related best practices and technological innovations,
the intervention strategy will be based on: (i) building partnerships with the
country’s private commercial sector, and related stakeholders; (ii) local research
institutions and industry associations, particularly for expanding technical
assistance services and market channels; (iii) harmonization with the initiatives of
development partners present in the country such as ADB, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Bank; and (iv) the
principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

10

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The project has two main innovative features. First, it will introduce a rural

guarantee facility that will leverage up to five times the value of the facility; the
US$9.9 million invested will help to attract US$49.5 million into Uzbekistan’s
agricultural sector. IFAD will be a pioneer among international financial institutions
by investing in the State Fund, and will document and disseminate its experiences
among other funders to attract more resources to the State Fund. In addition, the
adoption of the specialized automated Cash-flow Linked Agri-Risk Assessment tool
for loan analysis and management will build the capacity of participating banks to
lend to the agricultural sector and manage their agricultural loan portfolios more
efficiently.

Policy engagementD.
38. Successful policy engagement will depend on the capacity to generate analytical

evidence at the outcome and impact levels. To capture experience gained, two
approaches are envisaged: (i) a knowledge management programme within the
project to support within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a
broader programme of knowledge management aimed at informing government
decision-makers and influencing policy. Considering the relatively recent IFAD
experience in the country and collaboration with the ADB and the World Bank, IFAD
is transitioning to a more integrated, strategic, and programmatic dialogue to
identify barriers to a conducive business environment.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Uzbekistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

40. The Republic of Uzbekistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to of forty-six million two hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$46,200,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$300,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

(Negotiations concluded on 22 November 2017)

Loan Number: _______
Grant Number: _______

Project Title: Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project (“ADMP” or “the
Project”)

The Republic of Uzbekistan (the “Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

hereby agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2), and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a Loan and a Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is forty-six million and two hundred thousand United
States dollars (USD 46 200 000).

B. The amount of the Grant is three hundred thousand dollars (USD 300 000).

2. The Loan is granted on blend terms, and shall be subject to interest on the principal
amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent and in addition a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum payable semiannually in the Loan Service Payment Currency
and shall have a maturity period of twenty five (25) years, including a grace period of
five (5) years, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the United States dollar (USD).

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

5. Payments of principal, interest and service charge shall be payable on each 15 May
and 15 November.

6. There shall be two Designed Accounts in USD, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the IFAD grant for the benefit of the Project in a commercial bank. The IFAD funds shall
not be mingled with other funds. In addition, there shall be two project accounts in UZS
to receive the Financing from the respective Designated Accounts in a commercial bank.

7. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide as its contribution to the Project counterpart
financing in sufficient amount to cover taxes and custom duties associated with the
implementation of the Project.

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources
(MAWR).

2. The following are designated an additional Project Party: Rural Restructuring
Agency (RRA).

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

Section D

The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension of this
Agreement:

(a) The Project Implementation Manual ("PIM") referred to in Paragraph 19,
Section II of Schedule 1 hereto, or any provision thereof, has been waived,
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension,
termination, amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a
material adverse effect on the Project.

2. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) A Presidential Decree confirming the Rural Restructuring Agency as the
agency responsible for the management of the Project shall have been issued;

(b) Key Staff, including a Project Manager, a Chief Accountant and a Procurement
Officer with qualifications and experience acceptable to the Fund have been
duly appointed;

(c) A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) containing the Financial
Administration and Accounting procedures, has been cleared by the Fund;



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Batir Asadillaevich Khodjaev
Minister for Finance of the Republic of Uzbekistan
Ministry of Finance
5, Mustaqillik Square
10000-8 Tashkent

For the Fund:

The President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy

This Agreement, dated _______, has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

____________________
(Authorized Representative)
(Name and title)

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Project Area. The Project will be implemented in Fergana Valley, in the regions of
Andijan, Fergana and Namangan.

2. Target Population. The main target groups of the Project are: (i) rural households
of dehkan farms, who strive to increase income from agriculture through active
participation in the Project supported value chains; (ii) small farmers engaged/interested
in horticulture and livestock (with farm size of up to 5 ha); (iii) agribusinesses with
existing or potential linkages with (i) and (ii); and (iv) youth living in the Project regions.
Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of female-headed households
both in dehkan and small farmers, as well as to reach out female youth.

3. In its first phase, the Project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000
households, and about 10 000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5 000, households
benefitting from loans and training, plus approximately 20 000 incremental suppliers of
the Leading Entities (LEs) benefitting of ADMP loans, and some 4 000 full time equivalent
incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

4. Goal. The development goal of the Project to improve the incomes and livelihoods of
rural people in the Project area.

5. Objective. The Project’s Development Objective is to increase inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access and
improved natural resources.

6. Components. The Project will have three principal inter-related components as well
as another one to support Project management and implementation:

7. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chains Development: The outcome of this
component is enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of targeted
stakeholders and aimed to create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains (VC) with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers; and
to strengthen the capacities of the farmers and other stakeholders of those VCs. Three
activities will be implemented under this component: (i) Value Chain Mapping exercises
based on Rapid Market Assessment results for small ruminants, fisheries, sericulture and
honey prepared during the design; (ii) Rapid Market Assessments of additional
sub-sectors; and (iii) Preparation of VC development Roadmaps for LEs.

8. Component 2: Inclusive Rural Finance: The outcome of this component is
increased productivity and efficiency along targeted smallholder-inclusive value chains to
enable value chain actors to increase investment in profitable value chains through the
provision of credit and a guarantee facility. The Project will support (i) the State Fund for
the Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial Activity (SFSDEA) to render credit
guarantees to smallholders and other rural enterprises who lack acceptable collateral by
offering the partial coverage of lending risks; (ii) work with banks interested in lending to
agriculture in the target regions and meeting the Project’s eligibility criteria to facilitate
farmers and agricultural businesses’ access to finance; and (iii) establish credit window for
youth who are underserved by financial services with affordable lending products. Banks
will be free to set their own interest rates allowing serving the Project beneficiaries in a
sustainable manner; however the banks will be selected through a competitive process to
ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.

9. Component 3: Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure: This component aims at
removing bottlenecks for reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit increasing
participation for dehkans and small farmers in enhanced diversification and efficiency of



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

agriculture for the selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of
inter-farm irrigation network operated by Water Consumer Associations (WCAs) and will
provide conditions for targeted farmers’ group to: (i) diversify agricultural production from
low to high value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address challenges of drought
due to climate change; and (iv) increase capacity of WCAs and Basin Administration of
Irrigation System (BAIS) in efficient water resource management and irrigation system
operation and maintenance.

II. Implementation Arrangements

10. Approach. The Project will promote a demand driven value chain approach. The
value chain approach will focus on analyzing each step of the value chain and investment
on those needs which have the potential for improving productivity, profitability and
competitiveness of the value chain players, particularly focusing on dehkan farmers.

11. The Project will promote upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various points in
the value chain to increase future productive capacity and competitiveness. The LEs with
successful Value Chain Roadmaps prepared under Component 1 will be favourably
considered for receiving loans from PFIs under Component 2. While loan applications will
be assessed individually, the Project will provide complementary support to enhance their
business operations through provision of technical assistance and training to farmer
suppliers and other actors as well as access to improved infrastructure under Component
3 to enhance overall competitiveness and efficiency of the value chains. The ADMP will
promote close coordination with projects funded by other donors organizations especially
with those projects also under the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA).

12. Organizational framework. The MAWR will have the overall responsibility for
management of the Project on behalf of the Borrower/Recipient. Day-to-day oversight of
the ADMP’s management will rest with a Project Management Unit (PMU) under the RRA.
The overall management oversight of the Project will rest with an Inter-agency Council
(IC). The IC is an inter-governmental institutions agency for Cooperation with
International Financial Institutions, Foreign Government Agencies and Donor Countries in
Implementation of Large-scale and Strategically Important Investment Projects.

13. The PMU for the ADMP will be headed by a Project Manager and be composed of
(preliminary): a Chief Accountant; Procurement Officer; Rural Finance /Youth Officer;
Administrative Assistant; and a Driver. The ADMP will use Horticultural Support Project
/Dairy Value Chains Development Project legal staff. In addition, the Project will count on
the services of national and international specialists in various fields. A Project
Implementation Team (PIT, RRA regional representation) will be established in one of the
regions of the Project area in PY1. The PIT would comprise a: Regional Coordinator
(Value Chain and Business Specialist), three Rural Finance Officer/gender/youth,
Engineer, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E Specialist) and a driver. The PIT will be
responsible for day-to-day implementation in the field of all aspects of the Project, with
the exception of financial administration and procurement, which will be managed
entirely by the relevant personnel of the RRA/ADMP PMU at central level.

14. The PMU/PIT shall coordinate the work of consultants and participating financial
institutions (PFIs) that will interact with VC actors on planning and financial matters.

15. The MOF shall make the Subsidiary Loans available to the PFIs under Subsidiary
Loan Agreements (SLAs) to be entered into between the Borrower/Recipient, the RRA
and each PFI. The SLAs shall be under terms and conditions cleared by the Fund and in
adherence with the Investment Guidelines. Except as the Fund shall otherwise agree,
the MOF shall not assign, amend, abrogate or waive any SLA or any of its provisions. The
project monitoring and evaluation system and processes will be established and managed
in accordance with established IFAD procedures by the PMU with support from IFAD. The



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

Logical Framework provides indicators for implementation along with their corresponding
means of verification. These will form the basis on which the M&E system will be built.

16. At the start of the Project and no later than 90 days after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement, the PMU shall manage a comprehensive baseline survey which
will be updated on annual basis to track the different Project indicators over time,
including for the mid-term review. During the Project’s final year, a completion survey
will be conducted. Results will be compared against the baseline survey results to assess
project impact.

17. Supervision. The Project will be directly supervised by IFAD. The IFAD country
team shall provide continuous implementation support to the Project and shall undertake
supervision missions on an annual basis to assess overall management arrangements
and performance including financial and procurement aspects and monitoring and
evaluation. The supervision shall be carried out jointly with the Borrower  representatives
and IFAD.

18. Mid-Term Review. A mid-term review shall be carried out towards the end of third
Project year. The review shall be undertaken in accordance with IFAD-MTR guidelines in
consultation with the Borrower  representatives.

19. Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The RRA/PMU shall prepare a draft PIM
acceptable to the Fund and submit it to the Fund for no objection. The PIM may be
amended when necessary with the approval of the Fund in order to introduce clarification
in procedures, eliminating constraints for project implementation and for facilitating
access of producers to the project services.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Loan and Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories
of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the allocation of the
amounts of the Loan and the Grant to each Category and the percentages of expenditures
for items to be financed in each Category:

Category

Loan Amount
Allocated

(expressed in
USD)

Grant
Amount
Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

Percentage net of
Taxes, Government

contribution,
Co-financing and

beneficiary
contribution

I. Civil Works 1 490 000 100%

II. Equipment and Materials (including
Vehicles)

2 420 000
100%

III. Consultancies (including Technical
Assistance and training)

1 170 000 300 000 100%

IV. Credit and Guarantee Funds:

(a) Guarantee Finance 1 000 000 100%

(b) Credit line for AMD 33 710 000 100%

(c) Credit line for Youth 5 000 000 100%

V. Operating cost (Salaries and
recurrent cost) 1 040 000 100%

Unallocated (1%) 370 000

TOTAL 46 200 000 300 000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

Category II "Equipment and Materials" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Goods, Equipment and Materials as well as Vehicles.

Category III "Consultancies" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Consultancies, Technical Assistance, Trainings and Workshops.

Category V "Operating cost" means Eligible Expenditures related to Salaries
and Allowances, operating cost of the PMU/PIU and other recurrent cost.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

2. Start-up Costs. To facilitate a prompt start-up, a withdrawal up to USD 200 000
may be made to incur expenditures related to the Project start-up activities before the
satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal. The start-up activities may
include inter alia: (i) establishment of the PMU and salaries of key staff, (ii) Formulating
of the Project Implementation Manual; (iii) Preparation of the first AWPB and
procurement plan; (iv) Organization of a start-up workshop, (v) Prepare specifications for
the accounting software; (vi) Finalization of Investment Guidelines, Value Chain
Development Roadmaps, and templates for Subsidiary loan agreements.

3. Specific Conditions of withdrawal. In addition to the general conditions precedent to
withdrawal listed in Section E, the following specific conditions for first withdrawal will
apply.

I. No funds will be transferred to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs)
before the following conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The first three Value Chain Roadmaps have been prepared and received
the Fund's no-objection.

(b) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) for the use of PFI loan
proceeds, including the operating modalities including the eligibility
criteria for the PFIs and end-borrowers for each credit window
(agricultural diversification and modernization window or youth window)
has received the Fund's no-objection.

(c) The Subsidiary Loan agreements (SLA) for providing credit to PFI received
the Fund's no-objection

(d) The PFI has opened an account to receive IFAD loan funds and a revolving
account for credit reflows.

II. No funds will be transferred as part of the guarantee finance before the following
conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The SFSDEA has become operational and a due diligence assessment
including an assessment of its Financial Management capacity has been
conducted and shared with the Fund.

(b) An agreement, specifying all the necessary modalities for the guarantee
finance, between the RRA  (or other entity as agreed with the Fund) and
the SFSDEA has been duly formalized and received the Fund’s no-
objection.

(c) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) and operating modalities
including the eligibility criteria for issuing guarantee finance have received
IFAD's no-objection.

(d) A separate account for the IFAD loan funds in the SFSDEA has been duly
opened.

(e) The template for a sub agreement for providing guarantees to financial
institution/smallholder/rural business has received IFAD's no-objection.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

Schedule 3

Special Covenants

In accordance with Section 12.01(a)(xxiii) of the General Conditions, the Fund may
suspend, in whole or in part, the right of the Borrower/Recipient to request withdrawals
from the Loan Account and the Grant Account if the Borrower/Recipient has defaulted in
the performance of any covenant set forth below, and the Fund has determined that such
default has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the Project:

1. Guarantee Financing. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that funds transferred for
the guarantee financing are deposited in a separate bank account and will not be mingled
with other funds. At all times the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the funds are used
for the intended purpose and made available in a timely manner in order not to adversely
affect the development impact of the activity. In addition the Borrower/Recipient shall
ensure that the SFSDEA (i) keeps records of all the transactions related to the Project in
accordance with international accounting standards, and (ii) issues timely periodic
financial reports on the use of the Project funds to the PMU to satisfy their reporting
requirements.

2. Audit arrangements. The Borrower/Recipient, through the RRA, will appoint
independent auditors acceptable to IFAD, under the terms of reference cleared by IFAD,
and in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Project Audits. An audited annual financial
statement for the entire Project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six (6) months of
the fiscal year end. Moreover, the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the IFAD funds
transferred to the SFSDEA are part of the audit and that the auditors are granted full
access to all documentation as may be required.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
0

Logical framework

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term
End

Target Source Frequency
Responsibi

lity

Goal

Improved incomes and
livelihoods of rural people in the
Project area

Percentage of project beneficiaries
reporting at least 20% increase in
income1

Impact2 0% 30%
80% (30%

women) Baseline, mid-term and impactsurveys
Specialized (qualitative /
quantitative) thematic studies
Household income surveys

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
Annually

PMU M&E
unit

Overall political
and economic
situation remains
stable
Stability of prices
in agricultural
commodities

Number of HHs receiving services
promoted or supported by the project

Outreach 0 15,000
75,000
(30%

women)

Project development objective

Increased inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value
chains through enhanced
productivity and market access
and improved natural resources

Number of full-time job (or equivalent)
created3 2.2.1 0 2,000

10,000
(30%

women)

Baseline, mid-term and impact
surveys
Annual outcome surveys
Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report
Uzagroexport,4 plus reports from
participating agri-firms
(processor/aggregator) on access
to foreign markets

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion

PMU M&E
unit

Macro-economic
conditions remains
stablePercentage of supported smallholder

producers including dekhans reporting
20% increase in sales along the value
chains

2.2.5 0 30% 70% (30%
women)

Component 1. Inclusive Value Chains Development

Outcome 1: Enhanced capacity
for sustainable and efficient
performance of targeted
stakeholder

Percentage of supported
smallholder/dekhan farmers engaged
in partnerships/ commercial
agreements5 with LEs

0% 30%
70%
(30%

women)

Annual surveys

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report

Percentage of smallholder producers
reporting adoption of new / improved
technologies or practices6

1.2.2 0% 30%
80%
(30%

women)

Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 1.1

Enabled business environment
for inclusive value chains

Number of LEs supported in the
preparation of a Value Chain
Development Plan

0 800
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 1.2
Strengthened value chains
stakeholders

Number of value chain stakeholders
receiving training on better agronomic, 0 6,500

10,000
(30% Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

1
This indicator is inspired by the RIMS Impact-level indicator “Number of people experiencing economic mobility”, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2, but taking into account the specific aspect of income, where ADMP is expected to generate an impact. These

project’s direct beneficiaries are estimated around 75,000 households. These include stakeholders benefitting of credit lines supported by the ADMP, as well as of trainings/other supports provided by the project and by the project’s supported LEs, or from FFS
curricula and guided exposure to technological demonstration plots.
2 RIMS impact level indicator, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2.
3 The target corresponding to some 80% of the number of full-time equivalent jobs created through ADMP interventions (see Appendix 10, Economic and Financial Analysis).
4 Uzagroexport is a state enterprise that monitors the export. There is a branch in each region of Fergana Valley.
5 Including, but not limited to, formal contracts with traders / aggregators / processors. LEs will specify those linkages in their Strategic Plans / Roadmaps, developed by LEs within sub-comp. 1.1.
6

The outreach is mostly determined by sub-component 1.2’s interventions. Beneficiaries include 1,200 LE representatives (also benefitting of support under sub-component 1.1 for their roadmap; about 5,000 LE suppliers,
benefitting from inclusive workshops/ trainings; about 600 Mahalla leaders (community mobilization and TOT); about 1,000 additional Mahalla members; 3,200 producers benefitting of demo plots (10 farmers at least for each demo
plot established); 2,250 FFS members. Adoption rate is about 80%.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
1

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term End
Target

Source Frequency Responsibi
lity

livestock and business practices7 women)
Component 2. Inclusive Rural Finance

Outcome 2: Productivity and
efficiency along targeted
smallholder-inclusive value
chains increased

Number of incremental suppliers
generated by investment along the
selected value chains

0 10,000
50,000
(40%

women)

Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report;

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Micro-economic
conditions are
supportive for
doing business

Participating Financial Institutions
and Central Bank
Project M&E records and report

Output 2.1
Operational Rural Guarantee
Facility

Value of loans guaranteed by the Rural
Guarantee Facility8

0 15.0 m US$ 49.5 m
US$

Project records Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.2

Increased access to credits by
rural residents

Number of value chain stakeholders
(Leading Entities) in the project areas
accessing financial services9

1.1.5 0 500
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records Continuousl

y
PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.3

Increased access to credits by
youth

Number of youth involved in the
selected value chains accessing to the
financial services10

0 250
1,000
(50%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Component 3. Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure

Outcome 3: Improved farmland
productivity resulting from
modernized irrigation
infrastructure

Number of HHs reporting increase in
production as a result of the adoption
of modern irrigation techniques11

1.2.4 0 200
1,000
(30%

women)

Annual outcome surveys

Annually PMU M&Eunit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report
Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 3.1
Enhanced access by smallholder
farmers to modernized irrigation
systems

Number of hectares under upgraded
irrigation 0 2,000 3,500 Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 3.2

Strengthened WCAs Number of WCA representativestrained 0 20 30 Project records
Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

7 Adapted from the RIMS CI 1.1.4: “Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies”.
8 The Rural Guarantee Facility (US$ 9.9m) would allow mobilizing a five-fold amount of loans. With an average loan size of US$ 20,000 (assumed also for other credit lines within ADMP’s scope, this implies some 2,475 loans.
9 ADMP’s funded credit lines (US$ 54.8m) would generate some 1,200 loans with average size of US$ 45,000. The target is expected to be achieved faster than the Rural Guarantee Facility as the credit lines are expected to be
immediately operational.
10 Under the assumption that youth would borrow an average of U$$ 10,000, the Youth Fund (US$ 10.0m) would be able to generate some 1,000 loans, one fourth by mid-term.
11 The modernization of the tertiary irrigation would benefit some 3,500 ha in the three regions, with 3.5 ha average land size / farm it implies some 1,000 households.
















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Tarek Kotb
Country Programme Manager
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2965
e-mail: t.kotb@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2017/LOT/P.11

E
Date: 3 August 2017

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report on a proposed loan and
grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and

RB-COSOP 1
II. Project description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 2
C. Components/outcomes 2

III. Project implementation 3
A. Approach 3
B. Organizational framework 3
C. Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management 4
D. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance 5
E. Supervision 6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 7
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 7
D. Sustainability 8
E. Risk identification and mitigation 8

V. Corporate considerations 9
A. Compliance with IFAD policies 9
B. Alignment and harmonization 9
C. Innovations and scaling up 9
D. Policy engagement 10

VI. Legal instruments and authority 10
VII. Recommendation 10

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

AWP/B annual workplan and budget
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FARMS Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability
FMD Financial Management Department
HALEPP Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and Processing
LCRP Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
M&E monitoring and evaluation
MoA Ministry of Agriculture
NPTP National Poverty Targeting Programme
PMU project management unit
PSC Project Steering Committee



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

iii

Map of the project area



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Lebanese Republic

Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and
Processing

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lebanese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$12.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$4.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate equal to
the reference interest rate per annum as
determined by the Fund semi-annually.

Amount of financing gap: Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced
Displacement and Rural Stability: US$5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$1.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Lebanese Republic for Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing, as specified in paragraph 64.

Proposed loan and grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production
and Processing

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country rural development and poverty context
1. Real GDP growth in Lebanon for 2016 was estimated at 1.8 per cent, reflecting the

impact of regional turmoil.

2. According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Syrian refugees are concentrated in specific
pockets: 87 per cent of persons displaced from the Syrian Arab Republic and
67 per cent of the poorest Lebanese live in 251 out of a total of 1,653 cadastral
zones in the country.

3. Nearly 95 per cent of Syrian refugees are food insecure, 71 per cent are living
below the minimum poverty line of US$2.4 per day, and 41 per cent have
inadequate shelter.

4. Using these poverty lines, 28.6 per cent of Lebanese households were found to be
poor; and, of these, 8 per cent were considered extremely poor or below the lower
poverty threshold.

5. Currently, the Ministry of Social Affairs claims that the highest poverty rates are in
Mount Lebanon, North Lebanon and Bekaa; and these zones account for about
77 per cent of all poor people in the country. In 2014, 12 per cent of Lebanon's
population was estimated to be rural.

6. Compared to Lebanon's overall poverty rate of 8 per cent, over 20 per cent of
households engaged in agriculture are living below the low poverty threshold.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

7. The IFAD country strategy note for Lebanon (October 2016) identified the following
two strategic objectives (SOs) for IFAD’s short-term engagement: (i) SO1:
increase opportunities and improve living conditions for communities that depend
on dairy livestock, through improved production, capacity development, access to
veterinary services, and policy dialogue; and (ii) SO2: support rural enterprise
development for dairy processing through small and medium-sized enterprises and
community-based organizations, including cooperatives, producer associations and
private-sector entities.

8. On this basis, IFAD’s short-term engagement in Lebanon includes contributions
towards: (i) assisting the Government of Lebanon to strengthen the livestock
sector; (ii) supporting rural communities hosting Syrian refugees by promoting
initiatives that generate income and employment opportunities; and (iii) triggering
grant resources upon government request to urgently respond to the influx of
refugees into the region.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

2

9. The priorities of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) strategy match those of the IFAD
Strategic Framework 2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s strategic partnership with
Lebanon. Both frameworks relate to supporting smallholder agriculture and rural
development programmes, thus building the capacity, productivity and market
participation of poor rural people.

10. Theory of change. There is strong demand for good-quality dairy products
obtained through small-scale processing of fresh milk. Consumers are willing to pay
a premium price for quality. Small dairy producers are currently unable to
penetrate this rewarding market, however. Not only do they pay a high price for
animal feed, but they also produce and process low-quality milk and dairy
products. Reducing the cost of animal feed and improving animal health, together
with higher productivity per head and hygienic processing to add value to good-
quality raw milk, would sustainably increase incomes among smallholder dairy
producers and processors and enhance food security both at the household level
and countrywide. This would make the Lebanese dairy sector far more profitable at
the smallholder level and lift smallholder dairy farmers and processors out of
poverty. The same theory of change would apply to the Syrian refugees engaged in
dairy production and on-farm processing, whether now as refugees in Lebanon or
when they eventually return to the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. The Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and Processing (HALEPP)

project would be national in scope and cover seven governorates: Mount Lebanon,
North Lebanon, Akkar, Bekaa, Baalbek-Hermel, Nabatieh and South Lebanon. It
would mainly target the Lebanese communities who are among the poorest and the
most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees, as well as the refugees themselves,
by implementing its actions in the 251 poorest of a total of 1,653 cadastral zones
in the country. The 251 cadastral zones are home to 67 per cent of the poorest
Lebanese people and 87 per cent of the Syrian refugees.

12. The project would target about: (i) 2,400 smallholder cattle farmers and 1,600
small ruminant farmers. It is estimated that this would encompass nearly
30 per cent of all farmers owning up to seven cows, and 21 per cent of all small
ruminant farmers with herds of up to 200; (ii) 1,500 smallholder on-farm
processors, mostly women; (iii) 80 small-to-medium off-farm processors; and
(iv) 500 young Lebanese in host communities affected by the Syrian crisis, and
Syrian refugees, seeking employment in agriculture and agroprocessing and rural
infrastructure. All project interventions would have a strong focus on women, who
represent a specific IFAD target given their traditional importance in livestock
production, their growing social and economic responsibility, and their vulnerable
position in societies. Up to 30 per cent of the project target population would be
Syrian refugees.

B. Project development objective
13. The project’s overall goal is to contribute to the reduction of rural poverty among

resource-poor Lebanese rural households, including Lebanese host communities
affected by the Syrian crisis and the Syrian refugees living in these areas.

14. The development objectives are to: (i) increase the income of smallholder dairy
producers and processors; and (ii) increase employment opportunities for young
Lebanese in communities affected by the Syrian crisis and for young Syrian
refugees living in these communities.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will have three core components that display a number of

complementarities between initiatives and subcomponents.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

3

16. Component 1: Enhancing the competitiveness of smallholder dairy
producers. The expected outcomes of this component are enhanced smallholder
dairy farming productivity and an increased supply of quality milk; this will be
achieved through outputs delivered under two activities:

(i) Improving the capacities of targeted smallholder dairy farmers; and

(ii) Improving animal management and productivity in cattle dairy herds and
small ruminant flocks.

17. Component 2: Improving small-scale value addition and market access.
The expected outcome of this component is better nutrition, resulting from higher
consumption of dairy products, better-quality dairy products at the household level,
strengthened and competitive small and mid-size dairy processors, and reduced
post-harvest milk losses. This will be achieved mainly by training producers and
processors in best practices. The outputs will be structured under three
subcomponents:

(i) Supporting aggregation and value addition. A training program will be
designed to raise awareness on issues of milk hygiene, handling and
processing, targeting women household members in charge of milking
animals and milk processing at home. The focus will be on the introduction
and use of simple innovations and technologies that result in higher yields
and better-quality products;

(ii) Improving access to finance. Subcomponent outcomes include increased
formal financial-sector lending to the smallholder dairy sector. The objective
of the subcomponent is to demonstrate the viability of sustainable inclusive
finance in the rural smallholder dairy market; and

(iii) Supporting a dairy stakeholder platform for inclusive policy dialogue.
This activity will have three main outcomes: [a] an inclusive national policy
dialogue platform is established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy
role on behalf of the smallholder dairy sector; [b] seven regional innovations
platforms are established, addressing technical constraints at the local level
and ensuring an upward flow of information; and [c] consensus based
self-regulation mechanisms (for quality, price, etc.) are established.

18. The third component involves project management and support.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. Based on previous and ongoing experience with the implementation of

IFAD-supported projects, and given the limited capacity in the MoA, HALEPP
implementation would combine making use of relevant MoA directorates and
outsourcing to qualified institutions (universities and international organizations,
NGOs and private service providers). The latters’ involvement would be arranged
through calls for proposals and performance-based memoranda of understanding.
Many NGOs have been active in supporting smallholder farmers and rural women in
technology transfer, agricultural extension and access to markets.

B. Organizational framework
20. A specially created project management unit (PMU) with competitively recruited

and qualified staff will coordinate the project. The PMU office will be physically
located in the MoA, reporting directly to the Office of the Minister. The PMU’s core
staff will include a full-time project director and full-time professional and support
staff to oversee the day-to-day operations of the project, namely: financial
manager, procurement officer, accountant, monitoring and knowledge management
and community mobilization-targeting/gender officer, administrative assistant, and
two drivers. In addition, the relevant staff from the Animal Resources Directorate



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

4

and Education and Extension Service will be involved in management of the project
part-time.

21. In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Lebanon, a project steering
committee (PSC) will be set up to provide policy direction for the project; review
and approve annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs); and oversee the project
management team to ensure its effectiveness. Membership of the PSC will include:
representatives of MoA, the General Directorate of Cooperatives, Ministry of Social
Affairs, Office of the Ministry of State for Displaced Persons’ Affairs, microfinance
institutions, etc.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
22. A key planning instrument will be the AWP/B, the first of which will be prepared as

part of the final design report, together with the procurement plan for the first 18
months of the project; and it will be presented for discussion during the start-up
workshop for submission for IFAD’s no objection. The subsequent AWP/Bs should
be prepared, discussed and approved no later than sixty days before the fiscal
year-end. If required, the PMU, through the PSC, can propose adjustments in the
AWP/B during the relevant project year, which will become effective upon IFAD
clearance.

23. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is designed to offer comprehensive
and reliable information to improve planning and decision-making for results-based
management. The monitoring and evaluation of HALEPP achievements and
knowledge management will be the responsibility of the PMU. An M&E specialist will
be responsible for collecting relevant data on activities, outputs and outcomes.

24. The logical framework will be used for results-based M&E and will include an initial
list of indicators to track progress and achievements. This will be done through
accounting for progress against AWP/B targets, routine and periodic assessments
of movement towards beneficiary impact. The project’s draft M&E matrix will be
prepared in a participatory manner as part of the start-up activities in line with the
logical framework. Several studies/surveys will be conducted as part of the M&E
system.

25. Baseline study. The project’s baseline is a critical element in its M&E system. It
will include the target group and a control group which will be essential for
attributing results to project activities. At the start of implementation, a baseline
survey will be conducted in selected locations to assess the physical and
socioeconomic status of the target group and define its benchmark status.

26. Midterm review. An external evaluation will be performed towards the middle of
the HALEPP implementation period, i.e. in year 3. It will assess operational aspects
such as project management and the implementation of activities, as well as the
extent to which the objectives are being fulfilled. It will also identify the corrective
actions needed for the project to achieve its impact.

27. Project completion survey (impact evaluation). This will include the same set
of questionnaires used for the baseline, to enable comparison against baseline
results. In addition, a panel of households will be interviewed to provide a thorough
analysis of the project’s impact. Analysis will also be conducted by type of
beneficiary, region and gender of household head.

28. The Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), developed by IFAD
since 2004, will be fully incorporated into the project’s M&E system. A systematic
methodology will be used, together with a set of common indicators across
programmes and regions, to measure and report on the performance and impact of
projects. The RIMS report for the level 1 and level 2 indicators will be prepared at
each fiscal year-end and reported to IFAD before 31 January.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

5

29. Georeferencing. All HALEPP activities will be georeferenced at the village level.
This will permit monitoring of the coverage of project actions and the concentration
of certain activities in specific areas. All extension sites, processing facilities
supported by HALEPP and microfinance institutions participating in the project will
be georeferenced.

30. Beneficiary database. The database will be developed for all project
beneficiaries. Details on each beneficiary to be contained in the database include:
physical address, national identification, age, sex, and activities participated in. The
database will make it possible to track beneficiaries and activities, and provide a
sampling vehicle for data collection and visits during supervision missions.

31. The learning process will be part of the regular M&E activities. Lessons learned will
be prepared and reported for all component activities. The learning and knowledge
management activities will include regular monitoring mechanisms, progress
reports, midterm review, and an impact assessment evaluation at the end of the
project. There will be a special focus on preparing a learning note on dairy
extension and dairy product labelling, which are innovations in the Lebanese
context.

32. As part of the preparation of the IFAD-required project completion report/impact
assessment during the final year of HALEPP implementation, the M&E data
collected over the implementation period will be used to make a thorough
assessment of its achievements. In particular, it will compare changes in the
livelihoods of beneficiaries, which are attributed to HALEPP, relative to the baseline
situation. Innovations and best practices at the village level will be documented for
future replication and scaling up.

33. The Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability
(FARMS) specific results and achievements will be mainstreamed into IFAD's M&E
systems. The results achieved by the Facility will be reported as per current IFAD
reporting practice, coupled with a separate annual meeting on FARMS results and
progress to be organized for donors and key stakeholders. Knowledge management
and learning will aim to generate lessons learned and best practices, which can
feed back into the activities of the Facility and IFAD's broader portfolio.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
34. The PMU, under the MoA, will assume overall responsibility for managing the

projects' fiduciary performance and all financial management activities.

35. A financial management assessment has been made as part of the project design.
The country’s inherent risk is rated as high, as also is the project’s initial risk
rating. However, following implementation of the identified mitigation actions, the
risk rating is expected to drop to medium during the first or second year of
implementation.

36. The PMU will conduct a competitive selection process to hire a qualified finance
manager and a project accountant. The PMU will keep its accounts in accordance
with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-based
accounting. The project transactions will be recorded in an accounting software to
be procured as part of the project start-up and kept by the PMU.

37. As regards the flow of funds, government procedures will be applied to IFAD
funding in the same way as to other donors including the World Bank. Accordingly,
IFAD financing will be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal applications,
through the Borrower's treasury accounts to two separate designated accounts,
denominated in US dollars and held at the Central Bank of Lebanon. There will also
be a separate counterparty account for the government contribution. The Ministry
of Agriculture, through the PMU, will appoint an independent private audit firm,
acceptable to IFAD and under terms of reference cleared by it, to audit the project
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD Guidelines for



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

6

Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project, together with a management letter setting out audit observations on
internal controls, will be submitted to the Fund within six months of the fiscal
year-end.

38. The assessment undertaken by IFAD showed that the Ministry is observing the
procurement rules and regulations currently applicable in the country. Nonetheless,
due to the aforementioned weaknesses in the current system, goods, works and
services procurement financed by the IFAD loan and grant and FARMS funds will
abide by IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. Any changes that may occur during
implementation will be agreed upon with IFAD.

39. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize procurement efficiency will be specified
in the letter to the borrower and in the approved procurement plan. Whenever
possible, goods and works procurement will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to
attract adequate competition, thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient
procurement. The procurement packages that are envisaged vary between low and
high value items with procedures to be implemented using international or
competitive bidding and a large number of requests for quotations.

40. As part of the PMU, a Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively and hired
on a performance-based contract. In order to establish a sound procurement
management system in the project, and given the current country experience,
intensive capacity development will be needed for PMU staff. Two Procurement
Assistants seconded by the Government will join the PMU during the first two years
of the project, to assist in the daily procurement activities which are expected to be
enormous, based on the initial 18-month procurement plan developed for the
project.

E. Supervision
41. IFAD will directly supervise the project at least once a year and focus on fiduciary

and implementation support functions in collaboration with the country programme
management team. A financial management specialist will participate in annual
missions to supervise and provide implementation support to the project and follow
up the identified risks and mitigation actions. In addition, and given the difficult
political situation currently prevailing, compounded by institutions with limited
capacity and the heavy presence of Syrian refugees, close technical supervision
and implementation support missions will be jointly carried out by IFAD and the
donor of the FARMS grant, at least once a year but also on demand.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
42. The total cost of the project, over a six-year period, is estimated at

US$12.5 million. All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing in
Lebanon in April 2017. The base cost amounts to US$11.8 million (90 per cent of
total costs). Investment costs represent 76 per cent of total costs and recurrent
costs 24 per cent. Physical and price contingencies account for about 9.5 per cent
of total costs.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Enhancing the
competitiveness of
smallholder dairy producers 1 800 30.8 - - 3 100 55.1 - - 800 14.1 5 700

2. Improving small-scale value
addition and market access 1 900 52.1 300 8.4 1 300 35.4 200 4.1 - - 3 700

3. Project management and
support 1 200 40.2 300 8.7 600 19.2 - - 1 000 31.9 3 000

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

B. Project financing
43. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$4.9 million (covering

39.4 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of US$600,000 (4.6 per cent). It is
anticipated that a FARMS grant of US$5 million (40.5. per cent) will also be
provided from supplementary funds. The Government will contribute US$1.8 million
(14.2 per cent) and beneficiaries US$200,000.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Vehicles 300 65.2 - - - - - 200 34.8 500
2. Equipment and

materials 700 28.8 - 1 500 64.8 200 6.4 - - 2 400
3. Technical

assistance 1 200 29.6 - 2 700 70.4 - - - - 3 900
5. Studies and

workshops 600 49.0 600 51.0 - - - - - - 1 100

6. Training 800 53.0 - 700 47.0 - - - - 1 600

7. Salaries 900 40.6 - - - - - 1 400 59.4 2 300

8. Incentives 200 100.0 - -- - - - - 200
9. Operation and

maintenance 300 53.4 - - - - 200 46.6 500

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) on the investments made in the

HALEPP project area over a 15-year period is estimated at 15.6 per cent. The
project’s net present value (NPV) is positive (US$27.9 million) and the benefit-cost
ratio is 3.7. The economic analysis suggests that the HALEPP project is feasible.
With an opportunity cost of capital of 9 per cent, these indicators establish the
project’s economic feasibility. Profitability sensitivity tests suggest that the project
is robust and worthwhile.

45. Eleven models relating to dairy farming and support for dairy value-chain activity
models have been considered in the analysis. The livestock models included
encompass sheep, goat, and cow models, as well as models combining cattle and
small ruminants.

46. Eleven models reflecting different agroecological conditions in Lebanon are
analysed. Six models deal specifically with producers who pay a rent for accessing
rangelands and sell milk directly to Hallab (milk collectors) while four are
processing unit models.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

8

47. The models show an increase in net annual income per animal of around
50 per cent from production and processing. Good financial performances in terms
of financial internal rate of return (FIRR) and financial net present value (FNPV) are
achieved despite the relatively high cost of inputs, including the feed cost per
animal and labour costs.

48. The IRRs for the two small ruminant models are 14.7 per cent and 19.8 per cent
respectively; and the dairy processing models report an average FIRR of
15.2 per cent. Employment opportunities created in the livestock and processing
unit models show that around 12,600 jobs will be created with 85 per cent in the
livestock farming system (models M1 to M7), while 25 per cent will be created
through processing models (models M8 to 11).

49. Models M2, M3, M5, and M10 are the most influential models in HALEPP. Livestock
fertility and lactation are the most influential parameters in the project; and
greater attention should be paid to them to ensure its profitability.

D. Sustainability
50. The various vocational and extension training activities for dairy production and

processing and for other skill improvement will be designed to be relevant for
women, youth and smallholders for job creation, self-employment and upgrading
agriculture and dairy production and processing. All investments in dairy
processing will be based on a clear plan for their ownership, operation and
management.

51. The creation of a stakeholder platform with participation by smallholder dairy
producers and processors will provide a good opportunity for this group to voice
their concerns vis-à-vis the dairy industry and regulatory processes.

52. The project will seek to connect the target group to the formal financial sector for
dairy sector financing. A product will be developed and tested by three to five
competitively selected financial institutions, with technical support from the
project.

53. Project support to innovative renewable energy sources and dairy farm waste
treatment (biogas production) will contribute to lower production costs and
pollution abatement.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
54. The main risks include the possibility that Syrians may lose their refugee status

(which allows them to work in the agricultural sector) and “fall out” of ongoing
project activities; potential delays in project implementation, uncontrolled dairy
imports from the Syrian Arab Republic; a continuation of the influx of Syrian
refugees into rural communities thereby forcing up dairy product prices, leading to
unregulated importation of cheaper milk products; disease outbreaks
(foot-and-mouth disease and ovine rinderpest, etc.); and the effect of climate
change on natural resources.

55. HALEPP will adopt mitigation measures starting with policy dialogue with
government authorities to prevent beneficiaries from dropping out; avert delays in
project implementation and ensure intensive training for PMU staff and the use of
NGOs and service providers. The project will assist the Government of Lebanon to
improve rural infrastructure and increase milk productivity. The project will partner
with international and national institutions and NGOs to leverage support for the
communities hosting Syrian refugees and control the unregulated importation of
cheaper milk products. The project will support the MoA's initiative to ensure
regular frequency in the organization of fora for smallholder farmers and
small-scale processors, and facilitate participation by targeted stakeholders. The
project will assist in building national capacity to mitigate disease risks. The project
will educate participating dairy farmers on forage conservation techniques, as well



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

9

as investment in pasture improvement and conservation at farm level. The project
is expected to promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-harvesting procedures, drying/cooling, processing and value addition, to
reduce product losses and increase incomes among farmers and rural laborers.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
56. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, the country

strategic note for Lebanon, and IFAD policies. The project’s activities,
implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance
with the IFAD Targeting Policy and IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; and they are aligned with the approaches outlined in the
Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD’s operations. The project is designed
to be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy,
its Rural Finance Policy and the associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) report
confirmed the project’s environmental and social classification as B; and it rated
climate risk as “Moderate”, given that the project approach will promote the use of
climate-resilient technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas technologies), along
with improved management of animal husbandry and dairy processing. Last but
not least, the HALEPP project is fully aligned to the FARMS policy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. HALEPP is consistent with the Government’s 2015–2019 agricultural development

strategy (ADS), the National Poverty Targeting Programme (2011) (NPTP) and the
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan (LCRP). The ADS aims to develop institutional
capacities and increase MoA preparedness to meet agricultural-sector challenges
through partnerships and collaboration between relevant stakeholders. It defines
eight courses of action: improve food safety and enhance the quality of locally
produced and imported products; increase the productivity and competitiveness of
Lebanese agricultural products; improve governance and the sustainable use of
resources; strengthen agricultural extension and education; strengthen agricultural
research and laboratories; develop the cooperative sector and mutual funds;
develop MoA capacities; and mitigate the impacts of climate change. The strategy
identifies several targets, including: increasing the share of agriculture to 6 per
cent of GDP from the existing 4 per cent; reducing the current agriculture trade
deficit by 15 percentage points; raising the value of agricultural production by
30 percentage points: in addition to increasing public spending in the sector,
raising farming household incomes and creating jobs in agriculture.

58. The development objective of the NPTP for Lebanon is to expand the coverage and
enhance the NPTP social assistance package for Lebanese people affected by the
Syrian crisis and all Lebanese households living below the extreme poverty line.
Actions in the LCRP are aligned to national policies and strategies, and seek to
complement and build on other international assistance in the country. The LCRP is
organized around seven strategic sectors, including one on food security. The MoA
leads the food security sector along with the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme.

C. Innovations and scaling up
59. To assist the target group in reducing energy costs and explore opportunities for

private-sector engagement in renewable energy, the project will support three pilot
models using renewable energy in the dairy sector, for later scaling up:
(i) solar-powered on-farm milk cooling technology; (ii) solar-powered water
heating for milk processing; and (iii) biogas production from dairy cattle dung.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

10

D. Policy engagement
60. The project will have three main outcomes in terms of policy dialogue and

engagement: (i) an inclusive national policy dialogue platform is
established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy role on behalf of the
smallholder dairy sector; (ii) seven regional innovation platforms are set up, to
address technical constraints at the local level and ensure an upward flow of
information; and (iii) consensus-based self-regulation mechanisms (for quality,
price, etc.) are established.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A project financing agreement between the Lebanese Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

62. The Lebanese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Lebanese Republic in an amount equivalent to four million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$4,900,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Lebanese
Republic in an amount equivalent to six hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$600,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

1

Negotiated financing agreement: "Harmonised Actions
for Livestock Enhanced Production and Processing
(HALEPP)"

(Negotiations concluded on 27 July 2017)

Loan Number: ______________
Grant Number: _____________

Project Title: Harmonised Actions for Livestock Enhanced Production and Processing
(HALEPP) (“the Project”)

The Lebanese Republic (the “Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

WHEREAS the Borrower/Recipient has requested a Loan and a Grant from the Fund to
partially finance the Project, and

WHEREAS the Fund will endeavor to obtain additional financing for the Project from a
donor or donors through the IFAD Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement
and Rural Stability (FARMS), to cover the financing gap of approximately USD 5 million
and enable the Project to reach the Project targets and especially those related to host
communities/Syrian refugees.

NOW, THEREFORE, the Parties hereby agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), the Allocation Table
(Schedule 2).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a loan and a grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is four million nine hundred thousand United States
dollars (USD 4 900 000).

B. The amount of the Grant is six hundred thousand United States dollars
(USD 600 000)



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

2

2. The Loan is granted on ordinary terms, and shall be subject to interest on the
principal amount of the Loan outstanding at a rate equal to the IFAD Reference Interest
Rate, payable semi-annually in the Loan Service Payment Currency, and shall have a
maturity period of eighteen (18) years, including a grace period of three (3) years
starting from the date that the Fund has determined that all general conditions precedent
to withdrawal have been fulfilled in accordance with Section 4.02(b) of the General
Conditions.

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the United States dollar (USD).

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.

5. Payments of principal and interest shall be payable on each 1 June and 1
December.

6. There shall be two Designated Accounts for the benefit of Project denominated in
USD and maintained in the Central Bank of Lebanon:

A. Designated Account A will receive the proceeds of the Loan through the
Ministry of Finance's pooled treasury account for loans.

B. Designated Accounts B will receive the proceeds of the Grant through the
Ministry of Finance's pooled treasury accounts for grants and donations.

7. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide counterpart contribution in kind for the Project
in an amount equivalent to one million eight hundred thousand of United States dollars
(USD 1 800 000).

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA).

2. The following are designated as additional Project Parties: participating NGOs, and
Universities.

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

Section D

The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following are designated as additional (general/specific) conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) Key Staff, including a Project Director, Financial Manager and a Procurement
Officer, have been duly appointed;

(b) A draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) including the Financial
Administration and Accounting Manual, has been approved by IFAD; and

2. This Agreement is subject to ratification by the Borrower/Recipient.



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

3

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Minister of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Bir Hassan, Ambassador Street
Lebanon

For the Fund:

The President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy

This Agreement, dated ___________ has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient.

THE LEBANESE REPUBLIC

____________________

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Project area. The Project shall be national in scope and cover all 7 governorates:
Mount Lebanon, North Lebanon, Akkar, Bekaa, Baalbek-Hermel, Nabatieh and South
Lebanon. The project shall largely focus on the Lebanese communities who are among
the poorest and the most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees, as well as Syrian
refugees by implementing its interventions in the poorest cadasters out of a total of
1,653 cadasters in the country. About 15% of these cadasters are home to 67% of the
most deprived Lebanese and 87% of Syrian refugees.

2. Target population.  The major target groups shall be as follows:

 Poor and smallholder dairy cattle farmers.

 Poor and smallholder semi-extensive farmers with small ruminants.

 On-farm and off-farm small scale to medium processors.

 Syrian Refugees engaged in dairy production and processing.

 Youth engaged in dairy production and processing.

3. Goal. The overall goal of the Project is to contribute to the reduction of rural
poverty of resource-poor Lebanese rural households and Syrian refugees.

4. Objectives. The development objectives of the Project are: (i) to increase the
income of smallholder dairy producers and processors; and (ii) to increase employment
opportunities of young Lebanese in communities affected by the Syrian crisis and young
Syrian refugees living in these communities.

5. Components. The Project will have three core components that envisage a number
of complementarities between initiatives and subcomponents.

5.1 Component 1. Enhancing competitiveness of smallholder dairy producers.

The expected outcome of this component is to enhance smallholder dairy farming
productivity and supply of quality milk; this will be achieved through outputs delivered
under two activities.

(a) improving capacities of targeted smallholder dairy farmers; and

(b) Improving animal management, health and productivity of cattle dairy herds
and small ruminants’ flocks in the project area.

5.2 Component 2. Improving small-scale value addition and access to market.

The expected outcome of this component is improved nutrition through increased
consumption of dairy products, better quality dairy products at the household level,
strengthened and competitive small and mid-size dairy processors, and reduced post-
harvest losses of milk. This will be achieved mostly through training of producers and
processors in best practice. The outputs will be structured under three subcomponents:



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

5

5.2.1 Supporting aggregation and value addition. A training program will be designed to
increase awareness on milk hygiene, handling and processing focusing on women
household members in charge of milking animals and milk processing at home. The focus
will be on the introduction and use of simple innovations and technologies that results in
higher yield and improved quality products.

5.2.2 Improving access to finance. Subcomponent outcomes are to increase formal
financial sector lending in the smallholder dairy sector. The objective of this
subcomponent is to demonstrate the viability of sustainable inclusive finance in the rural
smallholder dairy market.

5.2.3 Supporting a dairy stakeholder platform for inclusive policy dialogue. This activity
will have three main outcomes: (i) an inclusive national policy dialogue platform is
established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy role for the interest of the
smallholder dairy sector; (ii) regional innovations platforms are established, address
technical constraints at local level and ensure upward flow of information; and
(iii) consensus based self-regulation mechanisms (for quality, price, etc.) are established.

5.3 Project management and support. This is the third component.

II. Implementation Arrangements

6. The Lead Project Agency.

6.1 The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). Project
implementation shall combine making use of relevant directorates within the MoA and
outsourcing to qualified institutions (universities and international organisations), NGOs
and private service providers. Their involvement would be through call for proposals and
performance- based MoUs.

6.2 A specially created Project Management Unit (PMU) with qualified staff recruited on
a competitive basis will coordinate the Project. The PMU will be under MoA, reporting to
the Minister through the Animal Recourses Directorate. The PMU core staff will include a
full time Project Director and professional and support staff to oversee the day-to-day
operations of the project, namely: Financial Manager, Procurement Officer, Accountant,
Monitoring and Knowledge Management and Community Mobilization-Targeting/Gender
Officer. In addition, the relevant staff from the Animal Resources Directorate and
Education and Extension Service will be involved in the project management on a part
time basis.  Appointment and removal of these key staff members shall be subject to
IFAD's non-objection.

6.3 In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Lebanon, a Project Steering
Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy direction for the project; review
and approve annual work plans and budgets; and provide oversight to the project
management team to ensure effectiveness. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of
Agriculture. Membership of the PSC will include: representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture, General Cooperatives Directorate, Ministry of Social Affairs, Office of the
Ministry of State Displaced Affairs, and Ministry of Industry.

7. Financial Management. To facilitate the efficient management of the financial
management system, the Borrower/Recipient shall, through the Ministry of Finance
(MoF), channel the proceeds of the Loan from the loan treasury account in the Loan
Service Payment Currency at the Banque de Liban to the Designated Account of the
Project by a letter signed by both the Head of Treasury and the Central Treasury Cashier
of the MoF. Upon each withdrawal of the proceeds of the Loan the Borrower shall,
through MoF, open Additional Budget Lines (budget classification numbers: 1-14-1-421-
12-9-2; 1-14-1-421-16-9-9; 1-14-2-4214-11-4-2; 1-14-2-4214-11-6-4; 2-14-1-421-
226-2-1; 2-14-1-421-226-3-1; 2-14-1-421-226-4-1; and 2-14-1-421-228-8-1)



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

6

equivalent to the amount of such withdrawal of the Loan proceeds, provided that the
total amount allocated to all such budget lines during the life of the Project up until the
financing closing date shall not exceed the amount of the Loan. For the purposes of the
Loan, the said Additional Budget Lines could be opened in the budget of a specific year
up until 31 January of the following year and those contracted or not contracted are
carried forward per the request of the MoA.

8. For the purposes of the Loan, transfer of funds between different budget lines shall
be carried out and approved by both the Minister of Finance and the Minister of
Agriculture.

9. The Borrower/Recipient shall, through MoF, open an account for the Loan in its
Chart of Accounts to record all disbursement amounts that are channeled to the
Designated Account mentioned in Section B Paragraph 6 A above. The said account shall
be settled periodically based on expenditures statements in the Loan currency signed by
the Minister of Agriculture and provided to MoF before end of each fiscal year for
expenditures incurred up to October 31st of said Fiscal Year, and before end of January
31st of the following year for expenditures incurred in November and December for the
previous Fiscal Year

10. Mid-term Review. The Fund shall carry out a review of project implementation no
later than the end of the project’s third year. The review shall assess operational aspects
such as project management and implementation of activities as well as the extent to
which the objectives are being fulfilled. It will focus on corrective actions needed for the
project to achieve impact.

11. Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PMU shall prepare a draft PIM acceptable
to the Fund and submit it for approval to the Project Steering Committee (PSC). When
approved, a copy of the approved PIM shall be provided by the PMU to the Fund.  The
PIM may be amended with IFAD's non-objection when necessary to introduce clarification
in procedures, eliminating constraints for project implementation and for facilitating
access of producers to the project services.



Appendix I EB 2017/LOT/P.11

7

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Loan and Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories
of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the allocation of the
amounts of the Loan and the Grant to each Category and the percentages of expenditures
for items to be financed in each Category.  All amounts are net of tax, government and
beneficiary contribution.

Category

Loan Amount
Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

Grant Amount
Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

I. Equipment & Materials (including vehicles) 945 000

II. Consultancies (Including technical
assistance, and studies)

1 620 000 600 000

III. Training 800 000

IV. Salaries and Allowances (including
incentives)

1 040 000

V. Operating costs 250 000

Unallocated (5%) 245 000

TOTAL 4 900 000 600 000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

Category IV "Salaries and Allowances" means Eligible Expenditures related to
salaries and allowances of the PMU staff and other Ministry of Agriculture staff
under component three as defined in the AWPB.

Category V "Operating costs" means Eligible Expenditures related to recurrent
costs incurred by the PMU or other entity as defined in the AWPB under the
Project.

2. Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs incurred
before the satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal shall not exceed
an aggregate amount equivalent to USD 200 000.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

1
7
/LO

T
/P.1

1

8

Logical framework

Results Hierarchy

Indicators (indicators will be disaggregated by age and gender. Up to
30% of beneficiaries will be Syrian refugees). Baseline figures will be

updated after baseline survey in year one
Means of Verification

Assumptions
and Risks

Name Baseline Mid-Term End Target Source
Frequen
cy

Responsibilit
y

Goal: contribution to
reduction of rural
poverty of resource-
poor Lebanese rural
households and Syrian
refugees.

 % of people experiencing
economic mobility (RIMS 3 CI1,
SDG target 1.1 & 1.2

- %

- %

producers
200 USD
/cow,
processor
500ltrs
12,000
USD

- %

500
LBP/liter
- %

3,750 cow
45 sheep
113 goat
0%
600
-

20% 50% RIMS
baseline
and impact
survey

Baseline
and
Completio
n

PMU, M&E
officer

 Security setback
due to
unpredictable
situation in
Lebanon and
neighbouring
countries (R)

 Stable
macroeconomic
context (A)

 % of people with improved food
security

30% 60%

Development
Objectives:
(i) to increase the
income of smallholder
dairy producers and
processors, and (ii)
increase in
employment
opportunities of young
Lebanese in
communities affected
by the Syrian crisis and
young Syrians living in
these communities

 % increase in smallholder dairy
producers and processors incomes
(RIMS 3)

10% 20% Project
Monitoring
reports

Annually M&E officer

 Number of FTE employment
opportunities created (RIMS2, CI
2.5.1)

1,000 3,000 Project
Monitoring
reports

Baseline
and
Completio
n

M&E officer

 Percentage of persons /
households reporting positive
integration with host communities

15% 30% Project
Monitoring
reports

Baseline
and
Completio
n

M&E officer

Outcome 1: milk
production improved in
quality and yield

 % decrease in cost of production
per litre of milk (RIMS2, CI 2.2.2)
 % increase in milk productivity

(liter per animal (RIMS 2)

 % of disease outbreaks reduction
(RIMS2)

10%

10%

30%

30%

25%

50%

Trade
statistics
and Project
M&E system

Baseline
and
Completio
n

M&E officer Agents and
collectors opposed
to direct linkages
between producers
and processors (R)



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

1
7
/LO

T
/P.1

1

9

Results Hierarchy

Indicators (indicators will be disaggregated by age and gender. Up to
30% of beneficiaries will be Syrian refugees). Baseline figures will be

updated after baseline survey in year one
Means of Verification

Assumptions
and Risks

Name Baseline Mid-Term End Target Source
Frequen
cy

Responsibilit
y

Outputs:
1.1 Technical
knowledge and skills of
smallholder farmers are
improved

1.2 Animal health
status of the dairy herd
and flock is improved

 No. of Smallholder farmers
benefitting from extension
(RIMS1)

 National Animal Disease
Information System revamped
(RIMS2)

1,500

1

4,000

1

Project
Monitoring
reports

Quarterly M&E officer

-%

-%

-

-

-
-

Outcome 2: quality,
diversification and sale
of dairy products
improved for on-farm
and off-farm dairy
processing

 % increase in dairy products for
supported processors (RIMS 2, CI
3) – SDG target 2.3 & 10.2)
 % increase in sales of dairy

products (Leben, Lebnah, Cheese)
(RIMS2, CI 2.1.2)

20%

10%

30%

20%

Project M&E
system

Baseline,
mid-term
and
Completio
n

M&E officer  Commercial
banks not
interested in
financing rural
activities (R)

 Various dairy
value chain
actors are
willing to
participate in the
programme (A)

 Government
enforcement of
quality control of
imported dairy
products (A)

Outputs:
2.1 technical
knowledge and
managerial capacities
of dairy processors are
improved
2.2 Improved access to
finance
2.3 stakeholder
platform for inclusive
policy dialogue is
supported.

 # of processors and cooperatives
trained in dairy processing and
marketing (RIMS2, CI 2.1.3)
 # of units accessing renewable

energy (RIMS 2, CI 3.1.3)
 #of persons/households reporting

using rural financial services
(RIMS 2, CI 2.3.1)
 # of representatives of small

producers and processors in
platform (RIMS2, CI P2)

300

200

1,000

70

1580

500

2,000

70

Project
Monitoring
reports

Quarterly M&E officer



