









COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA16622

Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Djibouti Project ID: P157282
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P117355

Project Name: DJ- Second Additional Financing for the Rural Community Development and 
Water Mobilization Project (PRODERMO) (P157282)

Parent Project 
Name:

DJ-Rural Community Development and Water Mobilization Project 
(PRODERMO) (P117355)

Region: MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

21-Mar-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-May-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Animal production (30%), Irrigation and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension 
and research (30%), Flood protection (10%)

Theme(s): Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (30%), 
Climate change (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Economy and Finance in Charge of Planning and Industry
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic Resources 
(MAEPERH)

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.50
International Development Association (IDA) 7.00
Total Project Cost 7.50

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:



Page 2 of 8

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Djibouti is extremely water scarce with conditions set to be exacerbated by population growth and 
climate change. As a consequence, access to safe drinking water is a daily challenge for the 
majority of the population, particularly for people living in rural areas. Poverty and food 
insecurity affect more or less the entire country and both are recognized to be highly correlated 
with water access issues. The extreme aspect of the geo-climatic profile leads to low erratic 
annual rainfall that averages hardly 150 mm, to the absence of perennial surface freshwater flow, 
and to the slow renewing of its aquifers. The current situation shows that more than 70 percent of 
the rural population and its herds do not have access to water within a reasonable distance. During 
the three-to four-month dry season, pastoral households are subject to the lack of access to water 
that represents a major constraint to human and livestock mobility, and to the proper use of the 
limited and sparsely distributed agro-pastoral resources.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Climate change impacts are projected to exacerbate these already precarious water resource 
challenges. Climate change is expected to induce an increase of the temperatures by 1.7-2.1 C by 
2050, while precipitation is set to decrease by 4-11 percent . This could lead to an increase of both 
severity of dry spells and intensity of wet extremes, thus accelerating land degradation, floods and 
erosion. Sea level rise is also projected to further exacerbate these impacts through saltwater 
intrusion of coastal aquifers. 
 
The Government of Djibouti (GoD) considers securing access to water and energy as the foremost 
major challenges that are prerequisites to reducing poverty and ensuring a nation-wide sustainable 
socio-economic development. To tackle the country’s structural gap in water resources demand 
and supply, the GoD is in quest of support from key partners for the development of non-
conventional water resources mobilization facilities including desalination plants, sewage water 
treatment plants and transboundary water transfer from Ethiopia.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to increase access of rural communities to water and enhance their 
capacity to manage water and agro-pastoral resources in the project areas using a participatory 
approach to community-based development.

Key Results 
� Increase in the number of rural households with access to drinking water within a 
reasonable travel time (two hours round trip) in the project areas   
� Increase in the number of heads of livestock with access to water within a reasonable 
distance (20 km radius) in the project areas; 
� Increase in available grazing biomass  in the targeted rangelands in the project areas.  
� Communities in the project areas are organized in community-based structures (CPLs, 
CGEPs and women/fishermen associations) that actively prepare and implement SAAHPs 



Page 3 of 8

� Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflect their needs

D.  Project Description

The AF-2 investments will aim to upscale up activities under the parent project to surrounding 
naturally and socially linked pastoral areas, including (i) Community investments (water 
mobilization and soil conservation; agriculture, livestock and Fisheries development; and income-
generating activities), (ii) capacity building and technical assistance and (iii) Project management 
and coordination.

Component Name
Priority Community Investment Subprojects
Comments (optional)
The proposed AF-2 would finance US$4.0 million (57%), to scale-up existing activities, e.g. 
priority community investment sub-projects. The funding covers consultant services for carrying 
out the detailed design and supervision, as well as goods and civil works for the implementation 
and the operation of the community sub-projects. Community investments will be demand-driven 
and will comprise the following sub-projects: (i) water mobilization and soil conservation; (ii) 
agriculture, livestock and Fisheries; and (iii) income-generating activities.

Component Name
Capacity Building and  Provision of Technical Assistance
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.6 million (23%) will be allocated to scale-up existing activities, e.g. capacity-
building activities and the provision of technical assistance. the AF-2 will finance capacity-
building activities for the PMU, the grassroots organizations such as Water Users Associations 
(WUA) and community groups to support the formulation and the implementation of 
participatory schemes, while improving local contingency planning to better face the impact and 
challenges in the aftermath of extreme events. The component will sensitize and mobilize 
beneficiary communities and other stakeholders to facilitate effective involvement in the planning 
and the project implementation process as well as their awareness on nutrition, sanitary and water 
quality issues. The use of ICT.

Component Name
Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)
A total of US$1.1 million (15.7%) will be allocated to further support project coordination and 
management activities. This component will support the PMU through the provision of goods, 
works, consultant services, training and incremental operating costs associated with project 
management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and audits. Incremental costs to be 
financed include incremental contractual staff costs, office rehabilitation works, equipment and 
operations, transportation equipment and operations, and domestic travel, to name a few.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The geographic targeting principles of the proposed AF-2 area of interventions consist mainly in 
scaling-up the activities of the parent project in the neighbor pastoral areas and new fishing areas, 



Page 4 of 8

while consolidating current achievements in the already covered areas. The unit of project 
intervention is based on traditionally recognized local communal grazing areas or "parcours", 
shared by a particular group of localities and communities who possess traditional grazing rights 
over a common area of rangeland. In total, the project area will cover in addition to the 12 
"parcours" already covered by the parent project, six additional with the AF-2 financing: three in 
Obock, (Fididiss-Allaylou, Moulhoulé-Andoli, and Saday-Waddi), one in Tadjoura (Garabtissam-
Balho) and two in Dikhil (Kori-Gagadé and Dawdaya-Der Ela). Two additional fisheries sites will 
also be included in the project areas, e.g. Goubet and Arta-Plage. The extension of PRODERMO 
project activities to the socially linked neighbor pastoral routes  and new fishing areas through 
additional financing will not require additional environmental assessment beyond that which is 
already provided in the current Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework 
(ESIAF) prepared for PRODERMO. The existing Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be updated to address issues related to agricultural inputs, to ensure 
proper management and minimize any adverse impacts.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Fatou Fall (GSU05)
Ishanlosen Odiaua (GEN05)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
No changes are introduced to the institutional, implementation, procurement, or financial 
management arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Halieutic 
Resources (MAEPERH) through its existing PMU will continue to be the implementing agency 
responsible for the AF-2 implementation. As indicated previously, the PMU’s Regional Office 
located in Obock, Tadjourah and Dikhil will be reinforced with Staff and vehicles in order to support 
the implementation of the AF-2 activities in the new and additional project area. The other entities 
involved in the AF-2 implementation include the beneficiary communities organized into 
Community Management Committees (CGEPs); the Local Development Committee (CPLs); and 
other community groups, as well as the existing National Steering Committee which was established 
under the original project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The current ESMF was updated to include the 
extended areas supported by the PRODERMO-AF-2 
and to address issues related to agricultural inputs, 
ensure proper management, and minimize any 
adverse impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No
Forests OP/BP 4.36 No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No Similarly to the parent project and the AF-1 

operations, PRODERMO-AF2 will not finance any 
activities which will require the procurement of 
pesticides.



Page 5 of 8

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

No The policy is not triggered. The project will not 
finance any activities requiring involuntary land 
acquisition resulting in: 
a. involuntary resettlement of people and/or 
loss of (or access to) assets, means of livelihoods or 
resources; and 
b. involuntary restriction of access to legally 
designated parks and protected areas resulting in 
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced 
persons. 
 
The choice and mobilization of land parcels for the 
purposes of the specific project activities requiring 
land use will be achieved in a participatory manner 
and documented.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project might not have significant or irreversible negative impacts, the main risks can be 
controlled by the design and the operation of sub-projects. Groundwater depletion through 
increased used of boreholes can be mitigated through close groundwater monitoring and strict 
adherence to defined recharge regimes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no expected long-term negative social impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Under the parent project and the AF-1, the recipient has satisfactorily implemented the 
requirements of the existing ESMF. The project has designated focal points for the Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) implementation in the regions where the project is being 



Page 6 of 8

implemented. Beneficiary communities have also received training on Environmental and Social 
requirements in order to ensure that implementation continues along the various levels of the 
project. Environmental and social screening is carried out regularly with the requisite 
documentation. The PMU prepares monthly reports on the implementation of the Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) requirements and shares these with the Bank for 
review. 
 
The project triggers OP/BP 4.01. To meet the requirements of the policy, the recipient has 
prepared an ESMF. The ESMF outlines the screening procedures for the sub-projects, as well as 
the institutional implementation arrangements. 
The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12. For the parent and the AF-1 operations, the recipient 
prepared documentation tools to ensure that choice and mobilization of land parcels are voluntary 
and participatory.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The revised ESMF was consulted upon in 18 localities, one for each pasture, including women.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 16-Mar-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 16-Mar-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
n/a



























































World Bank Document



PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA61676

Project Name Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Kyrgyz Republic
Sector(s) Animal production (70%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-

industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and 

institutions (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (25%), 
Micro, S mall and Medium Enterprise support (15%), Climate 
change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P155412
Borrower(s) Kyrgyz Republic
Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 11-Apr-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Apr-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

08-Apr-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

02-Jun-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
With GNI per capita of US$1,269 (2014), the Kyrgyz Republic is one of the low income economies 
of the Europe and Central Asia Region. In 2014, approximately 30.6% of the population lived 
below the poverty line, with the incidence of poverty slightly higher in rural area than in urban 
areas (32.6% vs. 26.9%). Economic growth in the country has been quite volatile. GDP growth was 
6% in 2011 but contracted to 0.9% in 2012, owing to a sharp drop in gold output. In 2013, the 
economy grew at a whopping 10.9%, but slowed to 3.6% in 2014 and remained at 3.5% at the end 
of 2015. The narrow export base is dominated by gold, with agricultural products representing on 
average 16% of total exports from 2009 to 2013. The economy is highly vulnerable to external 
shocks, in particular many households depend on remittances from the energy-based economies of 
Russia and Kazakhstan. It is partially dependent on wheat imports from Kazakhstan and the past 
global food price shocks quickly transmitted to the country. The official unemployment rate in the 
country has hovered below 10% for the past decade, however mostly on account of significant 
outmigration of labor force (predominantly men, a majority from rural areas) to Russia and 
Kazakhstan. The recent economic difficulties of Russia and the strong devaluation of the ruble have 
negatively affected the earnings of the migrants and their remittances to their families in 
Kyrgyzstan.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is an important sector for the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy and livestock production is a 
major livelihood support system for rural people. Agriculture represents about 15% of GDP, and it 
is still a major employer, providing more than a third of jobs. The sector’s growth rate in 2015 was 
a relatively high 6.2%. Agriculture is a key priority for the government because of its contribution 
to poverty reduction and rural employment. Livestock production, which accounts for about 50% of 
the agricultural GDP, is dominated by household and small farm production. It is important for 
rural household food security, nutrition, regular income generation, and acts as a social safety net 
with animals sold in times of hardship and economic distress. The primary land use of the country 
is native pasture production (87% of the total land is under pastures), which provides an advantage 
for livestock-based livelihood and food security for the rural population.  
 
With the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU), the country’s 
agriculture sector is facing new challenges, and also new opportunities. The Kyrgyz Republic 
became a full member of the EAEU in May 2015. The EAEU includes Russia and Kazakhstan, 
which are the Kyrgyz Republic’s main export markets. However, since 2012, a partial dairy export 
ban has been in force, limiting the number of dairy exporters to seven (more information in 
paragraph 7 below). The Kyrgyz dairy producers and processors may be unable to capitalize on new 
market opportunities due to their inability to meet the animal health, food safety and quality 
standards of the EAEU. However, Kyrgyz dairy products benefit from a reputation of better taste 
due to the production model based on natural pastures. Addressing current constraints in the Kyrgyz 
dairy sector would allow to capitalize on new market opportunities, as well as on the achievements 
and initiatives of the previous and ongoing projects in the agriculture sector.  
 
Market opportunities for Kyrgyz milk and dairy products. The demand for Kyrgyz dairy products, 
in particular in Kazakhstan, is significant. Even though the border is closed to most of the official 
dairy exports (only seven companies can export dairy products to Kazakhstan), informal trade is 
booming. While the official value of exports of milk/dairy products in 2012 was US$30 million 
(equivalent to 4% of the annual milk production volume), the unofficial export revenues were 
closer to US$ 100 million (14% of the milk production volume). Russia is also considered a 
potentially large export market for dairy products (in particular, cheese). Once milk quality is 
upgraded, exporting to other countries (such as China, Afghanistan and Pakistan) should be 
possible.  
 
The Kyrgyz dairy sector is primarily dependent on smallholder private dairy units with an average 
herd size of 3-5 heads of cattle. Around 60% of the rural population own livestock, but the average 
herd size tends to be small. Milk is an important part of the diet and around 90% of the population 
consume dairy products regularly. In value terms, milk is one of the top five agricultural products of 
the country. Per capita availability of milk is around 193 kg and 25% of the milk produced is 
surplus, for processing and export. It should be noted, however, that farmers who keep animals do 
not consider themselves dairy farmers (animals are rather considered a subsistence livelihood 
source), and the animal breeding and management practices are poor, which accounts for low dairy 
sector productivity. 
 
Livestock productivity is low compared to countries with similar production conditions. 
Furthermore, productivity has been declining from 2,041 kg in 2009, to 2023 kg in 2012 and 2, 013 
kg in 2013.  Many factors cause this low productivity at the farm level: inadequate on-farm animal 
health management, poorly equipped laboratories and disease diagnostic services, irregular and 
incomplete vaccinations, low breed stock (genetic) quality, absence of sustainable breeding policies 
and practices, inadequate feeding, improper shed maintenance, and farm hygiene issues, overall 
poor knowledge of animal husbandry techniques, low level of investments into production and 
marketing infrastructure. Addressing these issues can significantly increase both the productivity 
and total output of milk, which would contribute to increasing producers’ incomes and help address 
the sourcing problems faced by dairy processors. Processors experience a shortage of clean and 
high quality milk, and as a result underutilize their processing capacities and forego additional 
incomes that could come from exporting to other countries, and primarily, to the neighboring 
Kazakhstan. Export bans have a multiplier effect, as they affect not only the processors but also the 
milk-selling farmers and households and other players in the value chain.  
 
The Kyrgyz Dairy Sector Development Program (KDSDP) was initiated with support from IFC’s 
advisory program in 2015, to help the country capitalize on market opportunities presented by the 
EAEU. The Program is designed to help ensure steady milk exports to Kazakhstan (and other 
countries) through a dairy value chain approach, which would enable farmers to receive steady and 
increased incomes for the milk. It has already started working by supporting dairy processors in 
Issyk-kul Region. However, issues related to animal health and low productivity continue to persist. 
To make value chain development successful, it is imperative that on-farm improvements as well as 
necessary public sector investments are supported to ensure high quality and increased volume of 
milk. Thus, the KDSDP has grown into a comprehensive program addressing the various 
bottlenecks affecting the dairy value chain. The program covers all aspects of the dairy value chain: 
cattle breed improvement, animal feed improvement, improvements of animal productivity and 
milk quality, extension education and outreach services, animal health and hygiene, milk collection 
upgrades, laboratory, disease diagnosis and testing capacity (animal disease control, food safety and 
milk quality) upgrades, processing capacity upgrades, food safety standard upgrades, enabling 
regulatory framework, and export promotion.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality 
on beneficiary farms.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector
Comments (optional)
This component would contribute to the program development objective by improving the public-
private dialogue on private sector development issues, and by supporting the improvements in the 
breed stock (genetic quality) of the dairy cows. This component would focus on the following 
activities: (i) Improving the Public-Private Dialogue; (ii) cattle identification and registration in 
Issyk-kul Region; (iii) Establishment of a World Organization for Animal Health-certified Zone 


Free of Animal Diseases (with a focus on Foot and Mouth Disease in close collaboration with the 
Islamic Development Bank); and (iv) Support to Artificial Insemination (AI) Service Providers.
Component Name
Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement
Comments (optional)
During Phase I, the Model Dairy Village (MDV) concept would be introduced, determining the 
locations of the MDV service points, and providing the initial support to these services. The 
component would start with the most-needed services (which could be a veterinarian, an AI office, a 
milking center, a milk collection point, etc.). It would work predominantly with groups of 
beneficiaries. It would provide training, demonstrations and advice to farmers on good animal 
breeding practices, including: (i) fodder production and feeding management; (ii) animal husbandry 
and farm management, including (a) animal housing, general management and handling; (b) animal 
health, farm hygiene & clean milk production; (c) breeding management; and (d) manure 
management; and (iii) milk cooling and handling.

Component Name
Component 3: Farm-level Investments
Comments (optional)
Phase I would finance: (i) a US$ 1.2 million Revolving Fund to facilitate access to finance for small 
farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity 
building to project beneficiaries to enable them to access existing financing programs.

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
The component would cover the costs associated with project management, including Monitoring 
and Evaluation for the project implementation, as well as the establishment and maintenance of the 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 5.00 Total Bank Financing: 5.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 2.75
IDA Grant 2.25
Total 5.00

V. Implementation
The Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration (MOAM) and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) would 
be the Implementing Agencies for the project. Both Ministries have prior extensive experience with 
implementation of Bank-financed projects.  
 
The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) reporting to MOAM, and the Credit Line 
Management Unit (CLMU) at MOF would be responsible for implementation of the technical 
assistance and credit line activities, respectively. Both implementing units have extensive 

experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. The technical assistance activities 
(Components 1 and 2) would be implemented through the ABCC, which has been successfully 
implementing technical assistance activities in the agriculture sector in three Bank-financed projects 
(Agribusiness and Marketing Project, Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project, and the JSDF-
financed Support to the Community Seed Funds Project). The Revolving Fund for farmers, farmer 
associations, agro-processors and traders would be managed by the CLMU which has successfully 
managed credit lines in three previous Bank-financed projects (Rural Finance II Project, 
Agribusiness and Marketing Project, and Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project).  Similar to 
the previous projects, procurement functions for the proposed project would be carried out by 
ABCC and the overall Financial Management would be the responsibility of CLMU. Safeguards 
support would be the responsibility of the ABCC. ABCC would also open a regional office in Issyk-
kul, where the technical staff and Environmental Specialist would be located. Both PMUs, but, in 
particular, ABCC would closely liaise with the other projects under the KDSDP, to ensure that all 
necessary activities are implemented, and no duplications occur.  
 
A Steering Committee would be set up to provide strategic guidance for project implementation, as 
well as ensure that key issues that need to be resolved are brought to the attention of the 
Government and their resolution facilitated. The Steering Committee would consist of 
representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, MOAM, Ministry of Economic Regulation, MOF, 
Issyk-kul Oblast Governor’s Office, and private sector representatives. 
 
A consulting firm with international experience in dairy sector development, in particular, in 
working with farmers to improve on-farm productivity and milk quality, would be contracted under 
the project to support project implementation. The consultants would have the following main 
responsibilities: (i) identify the locations for the service points for the Dairy Model Villages 
(Component 2); (ii) provide training-of-trainers to local consulting companies that would train 
farmers in the project area (Component 2); (iii) provide advisory services to individual larger 
farmers; or groups of farmers, on specific areas related to the improvement of milk quality and 
quantity on beneficiary farms (Component 2); and (iv) assist ABCC in coordinating the project 
activities with other activities of the program, in particular, those financed by IsDB and other donors 
(Component 1 and Component 4).  
 
In addition, local consulting companies and/or NGOs would be hired under the project to ensure 
outreach to farmers, training and advisory services on the ground (under Component 2).  
 
Finally, a local consulting company or NGO experienced in group mobilization and group lending 
arrangements would be hired under the project to provide the necessary training to the groups of 
beneficiaries of the Revolving Fund, as well as help with ensuring collection of repayments due to 
the Revolving Fund (Component 3).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE  

    November 4, 2016 

Report No.: 110125 

 

Operation Name Second Development Policy Operation 

Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 

Country Moldova 

Sector General public administration sector (30%); Banking (20%); 

Public administration- Industry and trade (20%); General 

finance sector (20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (10%) 

Operation ID P149555 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Financing 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF FINANCE 

Date PID Prepared November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 16, 2016 

Corporate Review Decision October 21, 2016 

 

 Country and Sector Background 

Moldova has experienced rapid growth and poverty reduction over the past decade, 

although deterioration in external conditions and increased governance challenges since 

2014 have led to slower growth. Since the early 2000s, the economy has expanded by an 

average of 5 percent a year. Poverty declined substantially to 11 percent in 2014 from 26 

percent in 2007 (using the national poverty line) and from much higher levels earlier in the 

decade. Consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent of the population w as consistently 

higher than average consumption growth. Since 2014, however, external conditions have 

deteriorated significantly with the slowdown in the European Union (EU) and the Russian 

Federation on which Moldova is dependent for trade and remittances. This, together with a 

series of summer droughts and increased governance challenges, particularly in the financial 

sector, have resulted in slower growth in Moldova. The economy contracted by 0.5 percent in 

2015 and public and guaranteed debt increased to 46.6 percent of gross domestic product 

(GDP) from 38.2 percent a year earlier. A rebound in agriculture, in 2016, together with recent 

reforms are helping Moldova respond to adversity. Growth is projected to improve modestly to 

2.2 percent in 2016. 

Progress in poverty reduction has been driven largely by remittances and pensions, with 

the reform program supported by DPO-2 taking initial steps toward addressing the 

medium-term challenge of shifting toward greater sustainability. Remittances have made a 

significant contribution to domestic income, which has fueled private consumption and, 

together with exports, driven economic growth. Remittances, mainly going to rural areas where 

many of the poor are, have also contributed to poverty reduction and the welfa re improvement 

of the bottom 40. Pensions have also played an important role in raising incomes among the 
population, although mainly in urban areas. At the same time, employment has declined, led by 

falling labor force participation rates among both men and women which have reached very 

low levels compared to other countries. This declining labor supply is largely explained by a 

combination of greater emigration flows, the segment of the inactive labor force who have 

future migration plans, and informal workers who drop out of the labor force, all symptoms of 

low labor demand and limited availability of productive jobs. In fact, the lack of jobs and the 

wage differential with richer neighboring countries continue to motivate emigration. Going 

forward, the reforms to improve the business climate, enhance financial sector stability, and 

improve expenditure efficiency should help Moldova move toward a more sustainable model 

of growth and poverty reduction driven by private sector job creation. 

European integration has anchored the government’s policy reform agenda since 2009, 

but political instability and governance challenges have slowed the pace of reform.  
Negotiations between Moldova and the EU on an Association Agreement and a Deep and 

Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement began in 2010 and were concluded on June 27, 2014, 

with the signing of both documents. Visa-free access for Moldovan citizens travelling to the 

Schengen area went into effect in April 2014. However, periodic breakdowns in pro -European 

coalitions made progress uneven. Governance challenges have continued to take the center 

stage, as exemplified by the banking fraud revealed in 2014 that involved the loss of the 

equivalent of over 10 percent of the country’s GDP. After a period of short -lived governments, 

the Government of Mr. Filip was appointed in January 2016, dedicating policy efforts on 

stabilizing the macroeconomic situation, increasing transparency, and addressing identified 

weaknesses in the financial sector. 

The proposed operation supports the efforts of the Moldovan authorities to address key 

constraints to inclusive and sustainable growth by consolidating reform efforts in three 

areas. Accordingly, the proposed operation is built around three pillars, which are also the 

program development objectives. The first pillar of the operation seeks to strengthen the 

regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, fac ilitate 

competition, and reduce regulatory compliance costs. The second pillar aims at strengthening 

financial sector stability, promoting transparency of shareholding, and easing conditions for 

access to finance. The third pillar, focusing on the quality of public spending, seeks to improve 

the public investment management (PIM) framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture 

more efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance 

programs. The reform program builds on strong complementarity with other World Bank 

Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and analytical and advisory 

activities. In addition, although not a formal continuation of the previous program, the first two 

pillars of this series support the implementation of select laws supported by the 

Competitiveness DPO (approved in FY2013). 

 Operation Objectives 

The proposed DPL series supports the Government of Moldova's to improve the business 

climate, promote financial sector stability and development, and improve the equity and 

efficiency of public expenditure. The proposed operation is the second in a planned 

programmatic series of two single-tranche operations supporting key policy and institutional 

reforms with three development objectives: 



 Pillar A: Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business 
environment, facilitate competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs. 

 Pillar B: Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease 
conditions for access to finance. 

 Pillar C: Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies 
in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improve the coverage of well-targeted social 

assistance programs. 

The Pillar A seeks to improve the business environment facing Moldovan companies and 

farms. Supported measures aim to reduce the burden of regulatory and compliance costs of state 

inspections and to enhance competition and to set up an institutional mechanism for information 

collection on all state aid to increase transparency on how state aid is granted and contribute to a 

more efficient use of state budget resources. 

The objective of the Pillar B is to support the Moldovan authorities to build a more 

sustainable, resilient, and transparent financial sector that can prudently expand access 

to financial services. The policy actions address priority reforms in the areas of the corporate 

shares registry, the integrity of shareholders’ ownership rights, corporate gover nance 

standards, shareholder transparency, and proper supervision by NBM and NCFM. Reforms 

under this pillar are also aimed at enhancing access to finance, which continues to constrain 

private sector development, especially for SMEs and entrepreneurs. 

Pillar C focuses on improving the public investment management framework, making 

investment subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improving the 

coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs. Existing inefficiencies and inequities 

in the allocation and implementation of public investment resources, including in the 

agriculture sector, and the erosion of coverage in well-targeted social assistance programs 

reduce the effectiveness of public spending for reaching national strategic objec tives, poverty 

reduction and promoting shared prosperity. Transforming the economy will require significant 

upgrades in infrastructure through public investments. Moreover, adequate appraisal of 

investment projects ensures cost effectiveness. Agricultural support to small or individual 

farmers is still modest, and does not reflect their current and potential role in high -value 

agricultural production. 

 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

This operation (second in a programmatic series of two) supports efforts of the 

Government to improve the business climate, promote financial sector stability and 

development, and improve the equity and efficiency of public expenditure, and is aligned 

with the National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020” (NDS). The three pillars of the 

operation directly support three of the eight national priorities in the NDS: “improving the 

business climate” (supported by Pillar A), “reducing financing costs” (supported by Pillar B), 

and “ensuring competitiveness of agro-food products” (supported by Pillar A and C). In 

addition, improving the public investment management framework is expected to contribute to 

efficiency of public spending, and ultimately, to growth. Increasing the coverage of well -

targeted social assistance programs is expected to contribute to poverty reduction and to 

increase shared prosperity, while maintaining fiscal sustainability. The reforms supported in 

this DPL series are informed by substantial technical assistance and analytical work. This 



includes both recently completed and ongoing activities, with strong collaboration with other 

development partners. 

This operation is a key component of the CPS for FY14-17. The CPS discussed by the 

Board in September 2013 includes three pillars: (i) Increasing competitiveness; (ii) En hancing 

human capital and minimizing social risks; (iii) Promoting a green, clean, and resilient 

Moldova. The DPO operation will directly support the first pillar of the CPS, improving 

economic competitiveness. It will also contribute to the second pillar (minimizing social risks) 

by strengthening the efficiency of the social assistance system. In addition, reforms aiming at 

making public expenditure more efficient and equitable support the cross -cutting governance 

theme of the CPS. 

 Tentative financing 

Source: ($m.) 

Borrower/Recipient 0 

International Development Association  17.8 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 27.2 

 Total 45 

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The reform program supported by this operation builds on strong complementarily with 

other World Bank Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and 

analytical and advisory activities. The operation is complemented in each area by technical 

assistance and investment lending. TA in investment climate reform and competition policy 

has strongly informed the policy reforms in these areas. On the investment side, the 

Competitiveness Enhancement Project II, complements the DPO series with Regulatory 

Reform, SME Development and Access to Finance components. The World Bank Group’s 

Competition Policy Team provided technical assistance to the Competition Council to help 

implement the state aid registry. Reforms in the financial sector are also supported by the 

programmatic technical assistance. Reforms in public investment management are supported 

by technical assistance under the programmatic Public Expenditure Review and the Trust Fund 

for Strengthening Public Investment Management. In social assistance, the DPO complements 

the on-going Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net results-based SIL.  

 Risks and Risk Mitigation 

The overall risks to this operation are substantial. Key risks are: (i) political and 

governance; (ii) macroeconomic; (iii) sector policies and institutions and (iv) institutional 

capacity for implementation and sustainability. The overall risk rating level of the proposed 

DPO is substantial. To partially mitigate these risks, the Bank team has consulted with 

Parliamentarians as many proposed policy measures require parliamentary passage. In 

addition, the policy actions across all three pillars of this operation help increase transparency 

and promote good governance. Finally, development partners, including the International 

Monetary Fund and the European Commission remain engaged in policy dialogue, technical 

assistance, awareness campaigns and financing (including three-year IMF EEF program  

 Poverty and Social Impacts (PSI) and Environmental Aspects 

The policies and reforms supported by the operation are expected to have positive 

distributional and gender impacts and thus help reduce poverty and promote shared 



prosperity. Pillar C will make fiscal policy more equitable and efficient and therefore have a 

direct effect on poverty reduction and the promotion of shared prosperity. Pillars A and B will 

contribute to the twin goals indirectly by helping provide opportunities for business growth, 

supporting fair and transparent institutions and improving the functioning of financial markets, 

thereby enabling higher growth. No measure is expected to have negative distributional or 

gender impacts. Measures under pillar A are expected to promote employment growth in 

sectors that have a high share of women’s employment such as agriculture (which accounts for 

27.3 percent of women’s employment) and services, where the largest share of employed 

women works. 

Among the measures expected to have a direct positive impact on poverty, the measures 

to increase the inclusion of small farms in the agriculture support program are expected 

to be pro-poor and to contribute to strengthen the livelihoods of the rural poor.  According 

to the 2011 agricultural census overall most corporate subsidy recipients are large farms, with 

30 percent of all corporate farms receiving subsidies against 7 percent of individual farms. For 

both individual and corporate farms, the share of subsidy recipients is slightly lower among 

female-headed than male-headed farms. Redirecting resources to small farmers is the more 

important considering the high incidence of poverty in rural areas vis a vis urban ones (14.5 

percent versus 1 percent in big cities and 5.7 percent in small towns), and the particularly high 

incidence of poverty among farmers and agricultural workers (12.5 and 13.9 percent 

respectively).  

The measures aimed at facilitating the use of movable collateral, based on international 

experience, can be expected to benefit smaller firms in the service sector which have 

limited fixed assets, and therefore have a positive (if small) distributional impact.  The 

cogency of the constraints faced by smaller firms in accessing credit is illustrated by the 20 13 

Enterprise Survey which indicates that over a third of firms with fewer than 20 employees, and 

in particular those managed by women, that applied for a loan were rejected. To the extent that 

these measures extent to agricultural enterprises the poverty reducing impact of these measures 

will be amplified (about 6.5 percent of the poor lives in households engaged in entrepreneurial 

activities outside of agriculture, but the share rises to 23 percent when agriculture is included). 

The parametric changes in the Ajutor Social social assistance program of last resort have 

explicit positive pro-poor and gender impact. Indeed, the rationale for the changes is to stop 

the erosion of the potential beneficiary base of the program. By directly supporting the income 

of a significant proportion of the poorest households in the country, these measures were 

estimated to reduce poverty by as much as 0.5 percentage points, with additional 

improvements in the livelihoods of the poor not captured by a decrease in poverty incidence  

(but in lower depth and severity of poverty). The proposed policy action is not expected to 

substantially modify the gender incidence of these programs, but as 57 percent of adult 

recipients of Ajutor social in 2015 were women, this measure is expected to have a positive 

gender impact.  

The withdrawal of the licenses from BEM, Banca Sociala, and Unibank and their 

liquidation has affected negatively the workers who lost their jobs and were not absorbed 

by other banks. The country’s regime of severance packages (growing with years of tenure in 

the job so that for example it would provide 9.6 weeks of salary for those employed for one 

year, and 18.6 weeks of salary for those with 10 years of tenure) was applied to cushion the 

shock on those who lost their job. Given wage levels in the banking sector (almost twice as 



high as the average for the economy) those severance packages were quite generous (the 

equivalent of 6.3 times the poverty line for those with one year of tenure in the job and of 27 

times the poverty line for those with ten years of tenure). In addition, because of their higher 

than average wages, workers in this group were not among the most poor and vulnerable (in 

2015 only 9 percent of workers in the financial sector were among the bottom 40 percent). 

Finally, there is at least anecdotal evidence that several employees from the banks that were 

liquidated were reabsorbed elsewhere in the sector. Other negative impacts of the bank 

liquidations, such as the losses for the depositors were fully compensated for during the 

liquidation process. 

The DPO environmental assessment (EA) and of the proposed priority actions shows most 

of them are either neutral or beneficial for the environment (see Annex 4). Measures in 

Pillar C to improve the public investment management framework and make investment 

subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable would eventually lead to better natural 

resource management, promotion of organic agriculture, energy efficiency and climate change 

adaptation technologies. Existing EA legal and administrative frameworks in the country is 

overall well developed and in compliance with good international practices. The PIM regulation 

requires environmental assessment for projects, and as such would help mitigate the potential 

environmental impacts. 


























































World Bank Document


 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0101994  

 

Program Name Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3  
Additional Financing 

Region Africa 

Country Rwanda 

Sector Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P161000 

Parent Program ID P148927 

Recipient Republic of Rwanda 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 

Date PID Prepared December 6, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

December 23, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

February 28, 2017 

 

 

 Country Context 
 

Rwanda is a small (26,000 km2) landlocked country with few natural resources and a population 

of 10.7 million (2012) and projected population of 13 million by 2020.  Its hilly terrain covers 85 

percent of the land mass and the country has the highest population density in Africa with 416 

people per square kilometer, with 53 percent of them female. Rwanda has made a remarkable 

transition from genocide to peace and development. Between 2000 and 2012, GDP growth 

averaged 8.1 percent per year. Development efforts and results have been significant. Rwanda 

experienced 14 percentage points reduction in the poverty headcount, from 59 percent in 2001 to 

45 percent in 2011 and with the remaining poor on average much closer to the poverty line in 

2011 than in 2001. Developments in agriculture were key drivers of this poverty reduction 

accounting for more than 45 percent in total due to increased agriculture production (35 percent) 

and increased agriculture commercialization (10 percent). Self-employment in small off-farm 

non-agriculture business accounted for an additional 13 percent of poverty reduction. Part of this 

self-employment was associated with agriculture value chain employment. 

 

Despite this impressive performance in the last decade and particularly in the last 5 years, 

significant challenges remain. While improving, Rwanda remains a low income country with 

annual per capita income of US$644 in 2012 (with more than 45 percent below the national 

poverty line). About one in four rural households live in extreme poverty. Poverty is still mostly 

a rural phenomenon with 49 percent of the poor in rural areas compared to 22 percent in urban 

areas. Poverty is highest (76.6 percent) among households (often landless) who obtain more than 

half of their income from working on other people’s farms. The land distribution is skewed – 36 

percent of households own 6 percent of farm land, with an average of 0.1 ha per household 

(compared to the national average of .33 ha per household). Women are more likely to fall into 

this category.  In addition, women provide the bulk of labor in the crop sector, but function 

mainly at subsistence level with insufficient skills, access to markets and control over land and 

other agricultural services. If Rwanda is to achieve its targets to reduce the number of people 

living below the national poverty line to less than 20 percent and eliminate extreme poverty by 

the year 2020, continuation of the past strong growth performance will not be sufficient. A 

further acceleration of inclusive growth would be needed, on top of further reductions in 

inequality. 

 

The strategy for stimulating rapid and sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty is 

articulated in Rwanda’s Vision 2020. Vision 2020 is the national vision and policy framework 

which articulates key priorities for the country’s development by the year 2020. This vision is 

further laid out in the Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 

(EDPRS 2) which delineates the agriculture sector as a key sector and a significant engine of 

inclusive growth for the country. Likewise, in the recent report Rwanda Economic Update, 

Maintaining Momentum it states that increasing agriculture productivity is the main driver of 

poverty reduction in Rwanda. Agricultural transformation, especially through competitive value 

chain development, is expected to boost growth in both the formal and informal sectors, with the 

effect of reducing the proportion of the population dependent on agriculture from the present 73 

percent (2009) to less than 50 percent in 2020. In addition, while agricultural productivity is 

increasing, there is considerable potential to accelerate and continue to raise productivity, 

increase commercialization of agriculture production, increase self-employment in small on and 

off-farm business and achieve significant poverty reduction, income gains and increased 

prosperity.  Gender equity and equality has also been highlighted as a foundational and cross-

cutting issue under EDPRS 2 and the Third Phase of the Transformation of Agriculture Sector 

Program (known by its French acronym, PSTA 3) building on a solid foundation with the highest 

percent of women in parliament in the world at 64 percent and 32 percent women's participation 

in all decision-making local government bodies. Accordingly, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 

has made a strong commitment to continue to increase gender equity and equality particularly at 

the local level, and is determined to see it well integrated in government policies and programs at 

all levels. 
 

 

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context 
 

Accounting for 32.7 percent of the GDP (2015), agriculture is a critical driver of economic 

growth (7.6 percent, 2000-15) and poverty reduction, contributing to 35 percent of the total 

decline in poverty rates over the past decade. A well-established policy framework, facilitating 

enhanced access to better agricultural inputs, has greatly contributed to the positive agriculture 

sector performance.  As a result, the total production of cassava and maize, as well as milk, meat, 

fish and eggs, more than doubled between 2005 and 2015. 

 

Despite these positive developments, Rwanda has yet to meet its production potential. Although 

key agricultural yields have greatly increased since 2000 (e.g. cereal and cassava yields have 

trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled etc.), they reached a plateau in 2011. At their current 

levels, they are estimated to be at 40-50 percent of their productivity potential, resulting from 

suboptimal use of production factors. Similarly, livestock yields have remained consistently low 

over time. 

 

A contributing factor is small farm size – a rural household, on average, cultivates 0.6 ha, and 


has 2-5 animals – and 96 percent of rural households are directly reliant on agriculture as their 

main or only source of income. The projected increase in the rural population, an estimated 

additional 2.5-3.5 million people by 2032, is likely to add more pressure on land resources and 

farm incomes, unless alternative employment opportunities become available. 

 

In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition, with a stunting rate of 37.9 percent, 

while its food security index lies below the average of the Sub-Saharan African countries. Some 

20 percent (2015) of Rwandan households remain food insecure, and most of them are located in 

the western and northern parts of the country. 

 

 

 Program Scope 
 

The proposed operation supports the Government of Rwanda’s strategic objectives of the 

Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program Phase 3 with aims to enhance food security and 

nutrition contributing to a reduction in poverty and inclusive economic growth. The operation 

supports four broad program areas: (i) agriculture and animal resource intensification; (ii) 

research, technology transfer and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value chain development 

and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional development and agricultural cross-cutting 

issues. 
 

 

 Program Development Objective(s) 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to increase and intensify the productivity of the 

Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and expand the development of value chains. 
 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Additional Financing (AF) will introduce a new disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) on the 

development of an updated National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and increase several of the 

existing DLI targets. Increasing the DLI targets and incorporating a new DLI will support GoR’s 

on-going efforts to maximize the productivity of the agriculture sector while transforming the 

overarching policy environment. 

 

The updated NAP will provide an overarching vision for the agriculture sector. It will place 

significant emphasis on sustainable production and food security. However, the policy will not 

include specific policy instruments. Individual policy instruments for all sub sectors will be 

reviewed, revised, or developed. All policies will need to be compliant with the principles 

outlined in the NAP (including those of protecting the environment while maintain food 

security). This approach ensures that sustainable practices will be mainstreamed throughout all 

sub sectoral policies. 

 

The assessment of these adjustments to the Program is as follows: 

 

a) DLIs that are focused on improving the productivity of land and increasing the 
productivity of key crops (DLI 1, 2, 3 and 4) will not induce new environmental and 


 

social risks but may request to pay more attention to potential direct, indirect or 

cumulative risk generated from activities such as expansion of irrigation, as some 

irrigation structures will include canals, as well as small dams. As with any irrigation 

structure, these dams may have safety-related risks, which were effectively managed by 

the GoR during RSSP investment projects. Other potential impacts include water quality 

and quantity degradation (both surface and ground water), surface water sedimentation, 

and spread of waterborne diseases. 

b) Inclusion of DLI 8 focusing on the production of an updated NAP which will integrate 
new initiatives, such as the climate smart Agriculture and Information Communication 

Strategy, which could benefit environmental management.  

 

The level of risk remains moderate and can be addressed through: (i) the existing GoR 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) including the small dam safety 

guidelines and the Environmental and Social Implementation Manual (ESIM). The process for 

rolling out the ESIM to all Districts is part of the on-going decentralization process. The rollout 

to 30 Districts is expected to be concluded by September 2017; and (ii) exclusion of high-risk 

interventions which include activities that are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts 

on the environment and/or affected people. Among these high-risks interventions are dam 

construction/irrigation or drainage infrastructures on transboundary water resources. 

 

While the existing ESMS is adequate, it will be strengthened to further benefit and improve the 

GoR’s understanding of social issues in the following areas by: 

 

 Strengthening measures to enhance GoR’s capacity to implement the ESMS Program. As 
a result, this new action includes a “capacity building program based on the ESIM, and 

the small dam safety guidelines” to benefit the District officers. This program will ensure 

that: (a) the ESIM has sufficient guidelines on small dams; and (b) all relevant staff are 

trained in the ESIM. The manual and training program will be prepared by involving the 

relevant MINAGRI SPIU teams which are already conversant with the safeguards 

policies; and implemented before the end of the Program. 

 

 The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) database will be fully functional (including 
relevant staff training) within MINAGRI by July, 2017. This will be supported by the 

development of a communication strategy (included in the updated PAP) to ensure there 

is awareness of the database and that the outcomes of grievances are made public. 

 

 

 Financing 
 

The updated financing table for PSTA3 (see Table below) reflects original commitments from 

2013, as well as actual (to June 30, 2016) and projected contributions (to June 30, 2018).  

Table: Updated PSTA Financing to June 2018
1
 (US$ Millions) 

                                                 
1
 The PAD for the original PforR operation indicated that the PforR represented 12 percent of PSTA financing from the World 
Bank, USAID, and other DPs exploring the viability of providing co-financing as part of ensuring aligned donor support to the 

sector. The PAD clarified that co-financing would not change the overall budget envelope and would not bring additional 



5 

 

Source 

Original 

Commitment 

to PSTA 3  

Actual 

contribution as 

of June 30, 2016  

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2016/17 

Projected 

Contribution 

to FY 

2017/18 

Total 

(Actual + 

Projected) 

Government  300.0 132 60.0 60.0 252.0 

IDA (Agriculture PforR)  100.0 66.3 22.7 0.0 89.0 

EU  160.0 52.0 37.0 37.0 126.0 

IDA (LWH, RSSP, FRDP)  194.0 106.4 31.9 31.9 170.2 

USAID 138.0 121.0 28.5 25.0 174.5 

IFAD 120.0 43.0 21.0 21.0 85.0 

DFID  39.4 20.3 2.8 2.7 25.8 

MDTF (DFID) 50.6 29.1 15.4 6.1 50.6 

Netherlands  10.0 8.6 1.4 0.0 10.0 

Swiss  6.0 6.0 
 

 6.0 

Japan/JICA  32.0 20.7 11.0 8.0 39.7 

AfDB  20.0 56.6 
  

56.6 

FAO  30.0 18.0 8.0 10.0 36.0 

Sub-total 1200.0 680.0 239.7 201.7 1121.4 

Financing Gap     78.6 

(-) IDA (Ag PforR AF)   23.0 23.0 46.0 

(-) MDTF (Ag PforR AF)    5.0 5.0 10.0 

Revised Financing Gap     22.6 

Total 1200.0 680.0 267.7 229.7 1177.4 

 

Foreign exchange rate losses have resulted in a total financing gap of US$78.6 million from both 

GoR and IDA-financed programs. Included in the above projected contribution for 2016/2017 

and 2017/2018 is the proposed AF from the IDA Credit (US $46 million) and the MDTF Grant 

(US$10 million) totaling US$56 million. The combined proposed AF would reduce the financing 

gap to US$22.6 million. 

 

 

 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The Public Sector 

 

The lead government ministry for the agriculture sector is MINAGRI.  Organizationally, it is 

composed of four main entities as follows: 

 

MINAGRI Central guides policy, strategy and key programs for the Ministry. It comprises the 

Minister and Principal Secretary, and four departments/directorates: Planning, Inspection, Crop 

Production, and Animal Resources. 

 

Rwanda Agricultural Board (RAB) is a semi-autonomous implementation agency of MINAGRI 

that is responsible for promoting food crop production. It has a national network of research 

stations, projects and staff that focus on improved production and yields of food staple crops. It 

has agronomists based in four zones corresponding to the four provinces, and who are 

responsible for expanding farmer access to enhanced extension services. The RAB is also 

responsible for all research and certification of seeds and houses two Task Forces (Irrigation and 

Post-Harvest Infrastructure) which will be assimilated within MINAGRI’s structure as of July 1, 

                                                                                                                                                             
resources, but would mean switching modalities from either sector budget support or project financing to programmatic 

financing (PforR). Apart from DfID, no other donors are providing programmatic support through co-financing of the PforR or 

participation in the MDTF. 



6 

 

2014 as they have completed their mandates; 

 

National Agricultural Export Board (NAEB) is similarly a semi-autonomous implementation 

agency of MINAGRI that is responsible for export crop production. It has concentrated in the 

past on coffee and tea, but is broadening its mandate to cover and expand horticulture and non-

traditional export crops. It also has a national network of projects and staff focusing on improved 

production, yields and competitiveness of export crops. It also has agronomists based in some 

districts and on plantations responsible for expanding farmer access to improved extension 

services in support of increasing export crops. 

 

Single Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) were established to ensure efficient and timely 

implementation of a large portfolio of donor funded projects and are headquartered at MINAGRI 

Central.  Most of the projects being implemented by the SPIUs cover most of the 24 SPs. Three 

SPIUs are responsible for managing projects/operations funded by three key DPs: (i) IFAD 

funded projects: the Kirehe District Water Management Programme; Project for Rural Income 

Through Exports; Climate Resilent Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP); (ii) 

AfDB-funded Projects: Bugesera Natural Rural Region Infrastructure Support Project; Livestock 

Infrastructure Support Project; and (iii) World Bank funded projects: LWH (basket fund), RSSP 

3, and the FRDP. 

 

In addition to MINAGRI, six additional government ministries have significant responsibilities 

in the agriculture sector, as follows: 

 

The Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) is responsible for 30 Districts, which in turn, 

are responsible for expanding local level service delivery. They promote agriculture development 

as part of their responsibility for local economic development. Funds are earmarked in District 

budgets for implementation of MINAGRI priorities as defined in PSTA 3 (currently 10 percent 

of MINAGRI’s total budget). Although these resources pass directly to the Districts from 

MINECOFIN, they form part of MINAGRI’s overall budget ceiling and programs. Each District 

and sector has an agronomist that is responsible for local level implementation of agriculture 

activities. These agronomists work closely with RAB and NAEB agronomists who work in the 

Districts. The on-going local government restructuring exercise is expected to further expand 

fiscal decentralization, including expanded earmarking of funds from MINAGRI and other 

central ministries, and strengthen local government implementation capacities. The 

implementation of the ASIP, as well as PforR program will involve expanded roles of the local 

government actors, while also restructuring central government organizational and staffing 

structures to be more supportive of these decentralization changes/reforms. MINALOC also 

collaborates on implementation of the National Nutrition policy with MINAGRI, ensuring 

community training and service provisions to improve nutrition outcomes. 

 

The Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA) is responsible for state forests around the 

country, although MINAGRI is responsible for on-farm agroforestry. MINIRENA is also 

responsible for environmental protection and in this capacity has its own programs of hillside 

terrace construction, which reinforce the land conservation terracing that MINAGRI undertakes. 

MINIRENA is also responsible for the RNRA water resources department, and seeks closer 

collaboration with MINAGRI. 

 

The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM) has the key responsibility of promoting 



7 

 

business and trade growth and development, including expanded agribusiness. It leads the 

development of policy and strategy to accomplish Rwanda’s goal of an expanding, competitive 

and healthy private sector. 

 

The Ministry of Infrastructure’s (MININFRA) Rwanda Transport Development Agency (RTDA) 

has the responsibility of supporting Districts and monitoring implementation of feeder roads 

rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance. RTDA works closely with the Districts in 

procurement, contract management and management of social and environmental systems.  In 

addition, MININFRA/RTDA provides guidance on technical standards and specifications.   

 

The Rwanda Development Board (RDB) is responsible for investment promotion in Rwanda. 

Although it concentrates on foreign direct investment (FDI), it also promotes local investment. It 

brings together all the government agencies responsible for investment under one roof. This 

includes key agencies responsible for business registration, investment promotion, environmental 

clearances, privatization and specialist agencies which support the priority sectors of 

Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and tourism as well as Small and Medium 

Enterprises (SMEs) and human capacity development in the private sector. RDB has a 

substantial portfolio of agriculture and agri-business investment projects which it is promoting 

for private sector-driven investment, including expanding the public and private partnerships. 

 

The Rwanda Development Bank (RDB) is the government’s main investment arm and offers 

long and medium-term loans. The GoR is pursuing privatization of the Bank and has signed an 

MOU with a prospective investor. In April 2014 the RDB had an agriculture and agri-business 

loan portfolio of RWF 33.3 billion accounting for a significant proportion of the Bank’s total 

lending. Most agricultural loans were for coffee and tea production and processing and the 

import of fertilizer. On May 16, 2014 the International Finance Corporation (IFC) issued its first 

bond denominated in Rwandan francs, raising RWF 15 billion (about US$22 million) to expand 

the availability of long-term local-currency finance for local businesses through the RDB. 

 

The Private Sector 

 

In addition to the public sector agriculture entities, there are two organizations dedicated to 

supporting private sector actors in agriculture as follows: 

 

The Private Sector Federation (PSF) is the representative umbrella body for the private sector in 

Rwanda and advocates and dialogues with government for policies and programs which will 

promote the growth of the private sector. Amongst its objectives are business promotion and 

development, building private sector capacity and effective private sector advocacy. It is 

composed of nine chambers, including the Chamber of Rwanda Farmers. The Chamber conducts 

a program to train farmers and build entrepreneurship. The member associations of the Chamber 

cover most of the major agricultural commodities produced in Rwanda. 

 

The Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) is the representative body for the cooperative 

movement in Rwanda. There are 1,953 agricultural and 1,307 livestock cooperatives operating as 

farmer associations involved in crop production, agricultural savings and credit, livestock 

development and processing and marketing of outputs. RCA promotes the interests of the 

cooperative movement and runs support and training programs in helping cooperatives function 

and perform as private sector entities 


 


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 11

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA19546

Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Western Africa Project ID: P158983
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P122065

Project Name: Additional Financing for West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP- 1C) (P158983)

Parent Project 
Name:

West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP-1C) (P122065)

Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Nov-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

06-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries, 
Ministry of Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00
IDA Credit from CRW 8.00
Total Project Cost 68.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No


B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
African agricultural development acquired new momentum when, in January 2014, the African 
Union adopted the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and 
Transformational➢❬¢ in which African Heads of States and Governments recommitted 
themselves to the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) principles 
and values to uphold the 10 percent target for public spending on agriculture, to double 
agricultural productivity, and thus to sustain annual growth in agricultural GDP at 6 percent or 
higher. 
 
During the same period, there was a renewed commitment of development partners to engage and 
invest in the agricultural sector. Several initiatives are being launched, including from the United 
Nations, the African Development Bank and the World Bank. The United Nation adopted the new 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), and the second of the seventeen proposed SDGs is to end 
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agricultural. The 
African Development Bank launched (Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in 
Africa, 2016-2025) which aims to end hunger and rural poverty in Africa in the next decade. 
Also, the World Bank has committed itself to twin goals: eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 
and boosting shared prosperity, measured as the income of the bottom 40 percent in any given 
country.
Sectoral and institutional Context
One of the main challenges in West Africa is satisfying the demands of a rapidly growing 
population that is expected to increase from 300 million in 2011 to about 500 million by 2030. 
The 2008 food, fuel, and financial crisis has demonstrated the need to base food security in West 
Africa on the utilization of the region's huge agricultural potential, as this option would 
simultaneously contribute to economic growth and reduction of poverty. Moreover, meta-analyses 
conducted by International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) have shown that the benefits 
from productivity growth attributed to agricultural research exceed their costs by a factor of 10 or 
more whereas high rates of return on investments in science for agriculture, to the order of 40-60 
per cent, have also been consistently proven. 
 
Gains from smart investments in agricultural R&D were amply demonstrated by WAAPP impact 
analysis completed under the first phase of WAAPP in Mali, Senegal, Ghana, Cote d➢❨ Ivoire 
and Guinea. The analysis found that: (i) WAAPP beneficiaries have increased their yields and 
income by at least 30 percent over the control group; (ii) most of these gains resulted from the 
adoption of new varieties, improved crop management practices and improved small scale food 
processing technologies; and (iii) the immediate pathways exist to achieve rapid growth in 
agriculture through greater focus on productivity enhancement using a regional integration 
approach. The analysis also showed that program beneficiaries experienced a reduction in hunger 
by half and also improved their nutrition standards.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
To generate and accelerate the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries' 
top agricultural commodity priority areas that are aligned with the sub-region's top agricultural 
commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP.



Page 3 of 11

Key Results 
As it concerns the achievement of the WAAPP in the targeted countries, as of October 2016, the 
project has reached in the four countries a total of more than 1 million direct beneficiaries 
(1,153,000), about 26 technologies have been generated by the NCOS in Benin and Niger and the 
rice research system in Guinea, close to 1.1 million hectares (1,083,000) have been covered by the 
new technologies and more than 650,000 producers/processors have adopted at least one new 
technology. The disbursement performance of the project is also satisfactory; more than 96 
percent of the parent project (WAAPP-1C) financing is disbursed, and an action plan is being 
implemented which will ensure full disbursement by the current closing date of December 2016.

D.  Project Description

The AF will build upon the achievements of the original project to complete, consolidate and 
expand project activities. Therefore there will not be change in the project development objective 
and component structure as well as or safeguard category. The proposed AF will also continue to 
use the implementation arrangements and technical design of the original project. 
However, the primary focus of the AF will be to scale up the adoption the innovations and 
technologies generated by the WAAPP (more than 174 technologies have been released by the 
Program to improve agricultural production, post harvest, processing and mechanization). Thus 
the AF will add a particular focus on marketing of these technologies and innovations in order to 
scale up their adoption and to increase food availability in the sub region, and thereby contribute 
to poverty alleviation and agricultural growth. And since some of these technologies have 
different level of marketability and their scope for adoption also varies markedly the AF will 
among others, include the contracting of a private firm/NGO by CORAF/WECARD to design a 
technology marketing strategy and a technology marketing specialists in each country to 
implement an action plan for the commercialization of the technologies. In this framework the AF 
will finance incubation centers and seed money for job creation for greater citizen engagement, 
youth and women, and provide incentives and mechanisms to actively involve the private sector 
and mobilize some of their resources for the development of the targeted value chains. 
 
And in order to take the above scaled-up activities of the AF into account, the project➢❨ s Results 
Framework will be updated to review the targets of the indicators and also include the new 
indicators on job creation/employment, nutrition, citizen engagement and private sector 
participation. In addition the closing date of the original project will be extended to correspond to 
the duration of the AF. The Risk ratings have been updated to reflect experience gained during 
implementation of the original project.

Component Name
(a) Component 1: Enabling Conditions for Sub-regional Cooperation in the Generation, 
Dissemination, and Adoption of Agricultural Technologies.
Comments (optional)
The AF will: (i) upscale the implementation of common regulations and strategies developed 
under the parent project; (ii) support the development and implementation of a regional strategy 
and national action plans to address the issues of nutrition and food safety in collaboration with 
FAO nutrition unit; and (iii) assist the countries in finalizing the setting up of their sustainable 
funding mechanism for technology generation and dissemination.



Page 4 of 11

Component Name
(b) Component 2: Strengthening National Centers of Specialization/Strengthening of the 
Research System
Comments (optional)
The component will finance: (ii) for Benin and Niger, the implementation of  their action plans to 
transform the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence 
(RCOE) for agricultural research in maize and livestock, respectively; and (ii) for Togo and 
Guinea, which does not have an NCOS, the upgrading of their adaptive research systems to 
participate more actively in the network of the RCEO and bring and adapt in their countries the 
maximum technologies and innovations from the sub region.

Component Name
(c) Component 3: Support to Demand-Driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and 
Adoption.
Comments (optional)
The  component will finance: (i) financing through the competitive agriculture grant schemes the 
completion of the ongoing research and a limited number of new on-demand projects that may be 
commissioned; (ii) strengthening the regional technology market including organizing local and 
regional technology fairs; (ii) upscaling the adoption of existing technologies and innovations 
with a much greater emphasis on nutrition-sensitive and climate smart agriculture technologies 
that have high potential for accelerating job creation for youth and women (iii) implementing  an 
action plan to scale-up commercialization of the promising technologies to facilitate private sector 
investment and create more jobs for young agro-entrepreneurs; and (iv) strengthen the regional 
seed market and upscale the p

Component Name
(d) Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Comments (optional)
The Project will continue to finance the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCUs) in Togo, 
Niger, Benin and Guinea selected additional staffs and specifically a technology marketing 
specialist in each country.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project in each of these fours countries has a national coverage. Although it would be mainly 
developed in R&D centers, newly availed WAAPP technologies will also be expanded to new 
farmers own lands to ensure technologies contribute indeed to alleviate poverty and shared 
prosperity. These technologies would be gender sensitive and youth-driven as the project seeks at 
engaiging more women and youth as citizen for sustainable development.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)



Page 5 of 11

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
The proposed AF does not foresee any changes in terms of implementation arrangements. The AF 
will be placed under the technical responsibility of the Ministry in charge of Agriculture in each of 
the participating countries and under the responsibility of CORAF for the regional level activities. 
The PCUs in each country and CORAF will therefore continue to coordinate project activities, 
prepare the Annual Work Program and Budgets (AWPB), organize the Implementation Support 
Missions (ISM) and ensure project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The PCUs and CORAF have 
a solid track record for Social and Environmental Safeguards, procurement, financial management 
and M&E, which have consistently been rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout the 
parent project implementation. CORAF and each PCU will be strengthened with an additional staff 
who will be specialized in Technology Marketing and Commercialization. The Guinea PCU will be 
reinforced with additional staffs including two social and Environmental specialists (each with 
specific responsibilities), a financial management specialist, a procurement specialist and a technical 
expert. Implementation of the AF activities will also be supported by strategic institutional and 
technical partners, as well as service providers (other agencies, NGOs, CSO, etc.) who will be 
contracted through the: i) result-based MOUs for public service providers and other Projects and ii) 
result- based contracts for private service providers and NGOs.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The AF is a Category-B project due to the fact that 
potential social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, site-specific and easily 
manageable. Because it is a continuation of 
WAAPP-1C the ESMF has been updated, revised 
and adapted within the context of the focus of the AF 
on scaling up technology adoption which follows the 
same line of intervention of the parent project. The 
ESMF includes further provisions for capacity 
strengthening at all levels for the successful 
implementation of the project safeguard measures, in 
compliance with national and Bank safeguard 
policies. The updated version of the ESMF was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The AF is not supporting any agricultural sites near 
wetlands, mangroves, or other critical habitats . It 
will work on improving productivity on existing 
developed land.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The AF is not supporting any extension of cropping 
area and therefore no damage of forests is expected. 



Page 6 of 11

It will develop its activities on land already under 
exploitation.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The AF will scale up the parent project 
achievements. The initial PMP was revised, updated 
and adapted to reflect the AF interventions and set 
forth the basic principles each member-country 
would follow to adequately handle the possible usage 
of pesticides, particularly as the AF will focus on 
dissemination of agriculture technologies. Upon 
completion, the updated version of the  PMP was 
reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank 
and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF 
websites and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not finance activities that threaten 
culturral ressources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The AF is a category B project due to the fact that 
foreseen social and environmental impacts are 
expected to be local, sites specific and easily 
manageable.  OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for Guinea 
only because  of the expected land acquisition, loss 
of assets or loss of access to livelihoods support 
means upon which local beneficiary communities 
depend. To comply with OP/BP 4.12 policy 
principles and guidelines Guinea prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on how to 
comply with the above mentioned land use/right 
issues. Upon completion, the RPF was reviewed, 
cleared by both CORAF and World Bank and then 
disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites 
and at the InfoShop on November 18, 2016.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The AF is not involving any construction or 
rehabilitation of dams.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The AF does not affect or involve international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The AF is not in a disputed area.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have no significant negative social impacts. 
Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers  in food crop production for national, regional 
and international markets - in which women play a critical role.The Project will work to ensure 



Page 7 of 11

that the circumstances of small-scale farmers, particularly women and youth, are accounted for in 
setting priorities. Adaptive research will be conducted in farmers➢❨  fields. Competitive grants to 
implement R&D will be open to producers➢❨  organizations and agribusiness associations and not 
only to research organizations. The Project will work with development operations and public/
private partnerships to scale up producers➢❨  use of technologies. 
 
As a Category B Project, the foreseen social impacts are expected to be local, mostly sites specific 
and easily manageable. The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been 
triggered only or Guinea - where the project will cover new commodities and new intervention 
areas, because of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of access to livelihoods 
support means upon which local beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 
4.12 policy principles and guidelines, Guinea has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/right issues. The RPF was amply 
consulted upon and stakeholders feedback provided in the annexes of the documents. 
 
Environment (including Safeguards). The AF is expected to have a positive environmental impact 
through its support for agricultural technologies that promote better use of land and water 
resources. Potential environmental risks could include point and non-point pollution of water 
sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental 
impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research 
stations. Research on transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If it becomes part 
of the research agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with social and environmental 
safeguards consultants with international good practice and the regulatory framework of the host 
country. In particular, such research must be done in accordance with the obligation of each 
country under international treaties to which it is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety (for Burkina Faso and Nigeria). Potential adverse environmental impacts associated with 
the NCoS activities will be of low intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under safeguard 
measures already in place for ongoing activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
NA

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
NA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This is an additional financing to a project which was implemented during a 5 year period. During 
the parent project phase a close supervision of the implementation of safeguards measures were 
conducted by the social and environmental safeguards specialists of the World Bank. In addition 
each country and CORAF appointed social and environmental safeguard focal points in charge of 
ensuring that the social and environmental safeguards are well implemented and mitigation 
measures are also identified and implemented. A capacity building plan was also implemented 
including two regional training workshops and several country level workshops for all safeguard 
focal points. The recent ISM in June 2016 rated compliance with safeguards policies as 
satisfactory for the 4 recipient countries and indicates that both the safeguards focal points have 
the required knowledge and are playing a key role in ensuring that safeguards measures are well 
implemented. However, it was convened that each PIU will recruit/appoint one qualified 



Page 8 of 11

environmental safeguards specialist and one qualified social safeguards specialist, to improve the 
safeguards performance. The ESMF and the PMP have been updated, including a better 
clarification of roles and responsibilities for safeguards implementation among the PIU staff; this 
role distribution will be inserted in the Project implementation manual (PIM). An RPF has been 
developed for Guinea as recommended by the policy, since Guinea will be developing a variety of 
new crops which would probably need additional lands acquisition or encroachment of which. in 
public domain, would need a proper handing and payment of compensation to the recipient 
communities. All these documents include measures to ensure that safeguard requirements are 
being properly complied with.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A comprehensive set of stakeholder were consulted during the preparation of the safeguards 
documents for the original project. Similarly, consultations were done during the preparation of 
the AF that included various beneficiaries, agricultural, social, and environmental, health agencies 
as well as some NGOs and other civil society agencies. Producers/processors and their 
organizations at the sub region levels (ROPPA) and at national levels were also consulted. 
Following the consultations the original safeguard documents were updated for the AF and each 
country organized a national stakeholder workshop to disseminate and validate the documents. 
Key issues and recommendations of the workshops were used to improve the safeguards 
documents. Recommendations from both the client and the Bank and from the stakeholders 
workshop have been reflected in the final draft of the ESMP, PMP and RPF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Comments:
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 11-Nov-2016



























































World Bank Document
Project infORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA646

Project Name Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania Investment 
Project (P125728)

Region AFRICA
Country Tanzania
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, 

fishing and forestry sector (25%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P125728
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance & Planning
Implementing Agency Office of the Prime Minister
Environmental Category A-Full Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Jan-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 20-Jan-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

22-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

03-Mar-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
Tanzania has been experiencing high rates of economic growth. This growth has been driven by 
economic liberalization, sound macroeconomic policy management, and expanding public sector 
spending. Growth accelerated from an average of 3.5 percent during the 1990s to around 7 percent 
over the past decade.  Improvements in tax administration and provision of foreign aid created 
space for a significant expansion in public spending, which increased from less than 16 percent of 
GDP in 2000 to almost 28 percent in 2011. Inflation was low from 2000 to 2005, but picked up 
pace from 2006 to 2011. It was briefly in double digits, and has now settled back to around 7 
percent. Fiscal policy has been largely prudent accompanied by strong growth in tax revenues.  
However, the government needs to keep its debt and debt service to reasonable levels, reduce the 
growing deficits of certain parastatals, and manage the commitments under the public pension 
scheme. There are a number of recent developments (including discovery of natural gas) that are 
expected to contribute to Tanzania’s positive economic performance. Looking forward, the 
economy is likely to remain on its current growth trajectory in the near future. 


Notwithstanding the country’s solid economic growth record, poverty rates have not declined 
significantly. In November 2013, the government announced the new official poverty figures. The 
basic needs poverty level in Tanzania mainland has fallen from 33.34 percent in 2007 to 28.2 
percent in 2012. Rural poverty has declined from 39.4 percent to 33.4 percent over the same period. 
Despite impressive macro-fiscal performance, and decades of concerted efforts to lift rural masses 
out of poverty, agricultural incomes have grown slowly. Economic growth has been concentrated in 
urban areas and in capital-intensive sectors, such as the mining, communication, construction, and 
banking sectors. In comparison, the growth in agricultural value added has been less than two 
percent per worker. This growth in the agriculture sector has not been high enough to reduce 
poverty in rural areas, where more than 80 percent the country’s poor reside.  
Limited opportunities for commercialization are at the heart of small farmers’ problems in 
Tanzania. The majority of smallholder farmers sell little of their production. Approximately three 
quarters of all maize, and approximately half of all paddy, is consumed within the village in which 
it is produced. The expansion of smallholder production of these food crops, as well as a range of 
cash crops such as cotton, tea and coffee is undermined by low productivity, and high transport and 
marketing costs. New strategies for agricultural commercialization are needed. 
The top leadership of the country is strongly committed to share prosperity more widely, and 
recognizes the economic importance of agriculture for rural growth and poverty alleviation. The 
government at the highest levels has made transformation of agriculture a major national priority. 
Learning from the experience of other countries, the Tanzanian government has embarked on an 
ambitious program to strengthen agriculture value chains and integrate larger numbers of small-
scale farmers into these competitive trade partnerships. These initiatives target the transformation of 
large numbers of semi-subsistence producers to become successful commercial farmers. There is a 
market failure in service provision to these smallholders to enable them to link up with modern 
agriculture value chains (which enables them to acquire modern technologies and markets; and 
learn by doing); hence government is committed to correcting this market failure by incentivizing 
agribusinesses through matching grants. The matching grants would help underwrite the risks 
agribusinesses face in bringing in more smallholders into their value chains, and smallholders 
would gain from the experience of more targeted modern services and improved markets for their 
output.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Tanzania has witnessed an expansion in agribusiness investment with supply chain links with 
smallholder farming. A growing number of these agribusinesses are pursuing contract or out-
grower farming with smallholders. These include investments in out-grower sugar, tobacco cotton, 
sorghum, barley, cocoa, dairy and horticultural crops. Agribusinesses are experimenting with 
alternative strategies for strengthening this co-investment. 
 
The Government of Tanzania (GoT) recognizes that the private sector is a critical partner in 
delivering development benefits. Particularly when it is linked to smallholder production potential, 
it can provide an important engine of agricultural growth. In 2001, the government adopted a new 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) targeting achievement of a green revolution in 
agriculture. To better implement this strategy, the government then prepared the Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP), highlighting the need for stronger public-private partnership to 
promote the commercialization of smallholder production. This commitment was reinforced in 
2009 with the signing of the Kilimo Kwanza (Agriculture First) resolution calling for greater 
investment in agriculture, and inclusive commercialization. 


The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) Program was developed by the 
GoT to operationalize the Kilimo Kwanza. The SAGCOT Program, as articulated in its core 
document, the Investment Blueprint, highlights commitment to a strategy of joint public-private 
investment targeting the development of agribusiness value chains across the country’s southern 
corridor. In aggregate, the Blueprint proposes that a public investment of USD1.3bn can leverage 
an additional USD2.1bn in private investment in order to bring 350,000ha of agricultural land into 
commercial production over the next twenty years. Tens of thousands of smallholders are expected 
to become successful commercial farmers, more than two million people are to be lifted out of 
poverty and food security will improve. The primary emphasis of the SAGCOT Program is to 
expand partnerships between agribusinesses and smallholder farmers in building larger and more 
competitive value chains.   Agribusiness investors are sought who are willing to work 
collaboratively with smallholder communities to raise productivity and incomes. Early successes 
have been highlighted for sugar and rice, where out-growers have achieved higher levels of 
productivity and income compared with smallholders in neighboring regions. Similar examples are 
cited for tea and horticultural crop farmers.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
To support the adoption of new technologies and improved market access by small-holder farmers 
through expanding and creating partnerships between small-holder farmers and agribusinesses in the 
Southern Corridor of Tanzania.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Strengthening of SAGCOT Support Institutions (total USD14.33 million, IDA USD5.95 million)
Comments (optional)
This component will strengthen the capacity of SAGCOT Support Institutions in order to pursue 
their functions of information and data provision, support of investment planning and guidance, 
government/private sector intermediation, business enabling environment and investment 
promotion.  The component will support two institutions: 
 
(i) SAGCOT Centre  
(ii) Tanzania Investment Centre (Government institution)

Component Name
Strengthening Smallholder Business Linkages (total USD85.76 million, IDA USD55.65 million)
Comments (optional)
The objective of this component will be to link smallholder farmers to agricultural value chains. The 
component will: (a) expand the number of smallholders linked to agribusinesses in successful 
commercial partnerships; and (b) improve the benefits derived by smallholders and rural 
communities from these partnerships in the form of growth in agricultural productivity, income and 
employment. This component will comprise two sub-components: 
 
(i) Fund Management 
(ii) Matching Grants

Component Name

Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (total USD8.41 million of which USD3.80 
million were provided by two Project Preparation Advances, IDA USD8.41 million)Comments (optional)
The component will establish project management and M&E systems and provide financing for 
salaries, office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. Complementarities will 
particularly be sought with other IDA funded programs such as the Private Sector Competitiveness 
Project and the Agricultural Sector Development Program.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 75.00 Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5.00
International Development Association (IDA) 70.00
Total 75.00

V. Implementation
The Project will be overseen by the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO). A Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) meeting quarterly and on specific demand has been established. It is chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary (PS) of the PMO, and amongst others comprises PS from key line ministries, 
the Chief Executive Officers of the TIC, SAGCOT Centre, SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund (CTF), 
Rufiji Basin Development Authority (RUBADA), and representatives from smallholder farmers. 
The PSC will: (a) ensure coordination and cooperation among all participating agencies; and (b) 
endorse annual work plans and budgets for all project-related activities. 
 
The PMO has proposed that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) originally created for the IDA 
funded Private Sector Competitiveness Project be expanded to also coordinate the SAGCOT 
Investment Project. This PCU will have management oversight and reporting responsibilities for all 
components of the Project. This entity will integrate the financial and technical progress reports 
from each of the agencies being funded, and carry out the overall M&E for the Project. The PCU 
will also take overall procurement and financial management responsibility during the first six to 12 
months of the Project implementation until sufficient capacity has been built in the other 
implementing agencies (an assessment will be undertaken to assess the agencies capacity). The full 
staffing of this PCU as set out in the Operational Manual. All participating institutions will prepare 
annual work plans and budgets to be submitted to the PCU for approval by the PSC. 
 
IDA financing agreed with the Ministry of Finance that will flow to agencies other than the PCU, 
will be governed by subsidiary agreements acceptable to IDA (these agencies are the SAGCOT 
Centre and the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund). These subsidiary agreements lay out the fund flow, 
implementation and reporting requirements of the two entities. Direct funding to these entities may 
only begin once these subsidiary agreements, and an associated set of fiduciary systems including 
financial management and procurement systems acceptable to IDA, are in place. It is estimated that 
this will take place in the first year of implementation. 
 
The SAGCOT Centre will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.1 activities. 
Funding for the SAGCOT Centre will be committed in parallel with other Development Partners 
(initially DfID and USAID) to support the operations of the Centre as a whole. A Memorandum of 



Understanding (MoU) has been signed on September 30, 2014 between the SAGCOT Centre, GoT, 
DfID, the World Bank, Norway, EU, and UNDP. The MoU states that the funding will be 
committed against an indicative five year budget, and against an approved annual budget agreed by 
the SAGCOT Centre Board.  
 
TIC will be the responsible implementing agency for sub-component 1.2 activities.  The TIC will 
directly implement these activities and be responsible for procurement, financial management, 
input/output and progress reporting.  In the first instance, procurement under the Project will be 
implemented by the PCU until such time as TIC has reinforced its procurement capacity. 
 
Component 2 will be implemented through the SAGCOT Catalytic Trust Fund. The institutional 
structure of the catalytic fund management is designed and specified in a Trust Deed. A Board 
comprising five members has been established. The Board has recruited an Executive Secretary and 
initiated recruitment of a Fund Manager, estimated to be selected soon after the approval of the 
Project.   
 
The grant application process under the Matching Grant Fund (MGF) will be managed by a 
professional and competitively recruited Fund Manager. The Fund Manager will periodically (at 
least twice a year) invite applications from eligible partnership between smallholders and 
established agribusinesses, and through a two phased process select those applications which satisfy 
the core criteria (benefits to smallholders, safeguard compliance, sustainability, etc.). The Fund 
Manager will have a specific duty to provide support to applicants, in particular to help ensure 
benefit flows to smallholders, and that smallholder interests are well represented in the application 
and the partnership. The final applications will be submitted to the independent Investment 
Committee to be appointed by the Board to review all grant proposals and make recommendations 
to the Board on those that warrant funding. The eligibility, selection process and implementation 
arrangements are detailed in the Trust Deed and further specified in the MGF Operational Manual. 
Grants will be funded on a reimbursement basis with expenses pre-financed by the investors and 
may be tranched. Grants payments made through the agribusiness may be allocated to the 
agribusiness investor, smallholders or some combination thereof, as requested in the application, 
and set out in the grant agreement.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA14019

Project Name NMPRP-2 Additional Financing (P148733)
Parent Project Name Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P113493)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Vietnam
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (80%), Animal production 

(20%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural markets (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148733
Parent Project ID P113493
Borrower(s) Government of Vietnam
Implementing Agency Ministry of Planning and Investment
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Nov-2014
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Nov-2014
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

26-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

14-Jan-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
In spite of Vietnam’s impressive achievements in poverty reduction – poverty declined from 58 
percent in 1993 to 14 percent in 2010 according to official statistics, and to 20 percent according to 
GSO-WB – poverty remains high at 60 percent in the West Northern Mountains Region and at 38 
percent in the East Northern Mountains Region (GSO-WB methodology). Limited access to basic 
services, markets, and financial, land, and information resources are the most important constraints 
for the poor in the Northern Mountains. Addressing these constraints is hampered by weaknesses in 
institutional capacity and public sector management: Vietnam has moved from a highly centralized, 
hierarchical, central planning system, to one where many decisions are decentralized. However, 
capacity building at the local level has not kept pace with decentralization. A five-year (national) 
Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP 2011-2015) which responds directly to these 
development challenges was approved by the National Assembly in November, 2011.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context


Poverty is increasingly concentrated among Vietnam’s ethnic minority populations. While ethnic 
minorities account for only 15 percent of the country’s population, they make up for half of the 
poor in Vietnam and have experienced a much slower pace of poverty reduction compared to the 
majority of Vietnam’s population. Poverty among ethnic minorities remains at 66 percent.   Most of 
these ethnic minority groups live in highland or upland areas, in particular in the North-West and 
North-East as well as in the Central Highland regions. The Northern Mountains region has the 
highest rate of poverty and is home to almost one-third of Vietnam’s poor. 
 
Improvements in both the delivery and accessibility of basic public services in the Northern 
Mountains region are especially needed to reach the twin goals of eliminating poverty and fostering 
shared prosperity in Vietnam. Over the last fifteen years, the GoV has launched a number of 
programs through the Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MoLISA), the MPI, the 
Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD) and other line Ministries to address this poverty challenge. Among others, 
these include: (a) the Program for Socio-Economic Development in Communes Facing Extreme 
Hardship in Ethnic Minority and Mountainous Areas (referred to as P135) to finance the commune 
and inter-commune level infrastructures and strengthen planning and implementation capacity; (b) a 
follow-up program (P135-2) designed to reduce poverty among disadvantaged groups; and (c) 
Program 30-A (Support for Fast and Sustainable Poverty Reduction in Poor Districts)  financing the 
development plans for the 62 poorest districts in the country. More recently, the GoV decided to (a) 
continue the series of poverty programs with the newly launched P135-3 under the CEMA; and (b) 
launch a New Rural Area Program (NRAP) under the MARD. In total, Vietnam currently has 16 
different NTPs implemented through various ministries. The consequence of this evolution is a 
degree of institutional fragmentation (and resulting contestation) across major Government 
agencies. 
 
The World Bank has supported Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts through two community-
driven development (CDD) operations – the Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project 
(CBRIP) and the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (NMPRP-1) – which introduced 
participatory approaches and promoted decision making at the commune level; three Development 
Policy Credits (DPCs); and the ongoing CDD operation (NMPRP-2) which focused on 
infrastructure support, livelihood activities, market linkages and further devolution of investment 
ownership to communities. There is evidence that the positive lessons from the Bank’s support are 
being mainstreamed leading to a wider menu of community projects, a stronger focus on 
participatory planning, transparency, devolution of decision making, and institutional capacity 
building at the local level.  
 
In spite of the positive results of various poverty programs, both the GoV and donor agencies are 
concerned about the inefficiencies, administrative requirements and associated costs resulting from 
the high level of fragmentation in Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts. Although a clear consensus 
on the consolidation of poverty programs has not yet emerged, various GoV stakeholders at the 
national and provincial levels, as well as donor agencies are taking initiatives to address this 
situation. These efforts focus on (a) the consolidation of existing poverty programs and NTPs in 
possibly two overarching national poverty programs;  and (b) the integration of the planning efforts 
at the local level in one common SEDP.       
 
Alignment with Government Strategy. The NMPRP-2 supports the Government’s Resolution 80/



Page 3 of 6

NQ-CP on Direction of Sustainable Poverty Reduction which aims at accelerating poverty 
reduction in the poorest districts, communes and villages of the country, by setting poverty 
reduction targets of 4 percent per annum over the 2011 – 2020 period (compared to a national target 
of 2 percent) and by prioritizing the mobilization of resources and support to these areas.  
 
The GoV is moving towards medium term planning (3 years planning cycle with a multi-year 
budget allocation rather than annual budgeting as is currently the case). Fully implemented, this will 
give more predictability, flexibility, and discretion to the commune level to plan their investment 
priorities in a more integrated manner. The GoV is also moving towards greater consolidation of its 
various poverty alleviation efforts. The SEDP approach developed under the NMPRP-2 fits very 
well both in this medium-term planning context and in the efforts to integrate various NTPs.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The development objective for the proposed project is to Enhance the living standards of the project 
beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructures; (ii) the productive and 
institutional capacity of local governments and communities; and (iii) market linkages and business 
innovations. The key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the PDO are as follows:  
 # At least 60% of the project beneficiaries report satisfaction on the selection, design, and 
implementation of project activities.  
 # The project beneficiaries report an improvement in on- and off- farm income of at least 10% over 
the life of the project.

B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
The AF focuses on institutionalizing and mainstreaming the socio-economic development planning 
approach in the broader planning and budget allocation processes in the project area. The PDO will, 
therefore, be revised to capture this important element of the AF.  
 
Project Development Objective for the AF is revised to read: The Project Development Objective 
(PDO) is to enhance the living standards of the Project Beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access 
to productive infrastructure; (ii) the productive and institutional capacity of local governments and 
communities; (iii) commune integrated investment planning and (iv) market linkages and business 
innovations.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: District Economic Development
Comments (optional)
(about 30% of total allocated provincial project funds, equivalent to US$28.8 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide investment support to the District Socio-Economic Development 
Plans, focusing on productive and economic infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, 
direct local employment and income generation, and facilitation of business innovation. This 
component supports specific efforts to link the supply side, namely the market and business 
institutions, with the poor.

Component Name
Component 2: Commune Development Budget
Comments (optional)



Page 4 of 6

(about 58% of total allocated provincial project budget, equivalent to US$55.68 million). This 
component will provide block grants to communes to finance small-scale sub-projects at the village 
level for productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement activities that are identified through 
participatory planning processes. Livelihood support will assist the poor with strengthening the 
operations of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), develop necessary skills and the further 
development of market linkages and ensure that women participate in and benefit from the project 
through targeted support to village level women’s groups.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building and Communication
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of the total project provincial allocation budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US
$6.76million). Under the AF, this component will mostly focus on the farmers and other 
beneficiaries to help sustain their capacity for implementing project activities during the AF period 
and beyond. This component will continue to help improve the capacity of project implementation 
agencies at all levels, especially of the local governments and the communities to plan, manage, 
implement, supervise, and maintain productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement programs, 
communication and information sharing and learning. This component will also support the scaling 
up and institutionalization of the participatory local development planning through the Socio-
Economic Development Plan (SEDP)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of total allocated provincial project budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US$8.76 
million). This component is to ensure effective and efficient project management through 
facilitation of various implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, coordination, 
and quality enhancement efforts.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 110.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 10.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 110.00

V. Implementation
MPI will take charge of overall project coordination at the central level, while provinces will be 
responsible for project implementation. At the central level, Central Project Coordination Office 
(CPO) will be established at the Department of Agricultural Economics in the MPI, and facilitate 
overall coordination with provinces, as well as serve as the focal point vis-a-vis the World Bank and 
relevant central government agencies. At each project province, a Provincial Project Management 
Unit (PPMU) will be established at Department of Planning and Investment (DPI). At the district 
level, District Project Management Unit (DPMU) will be created. Community Facilitators (CFs) 
who will provide vital support to the communes in particular in the process of CDBC planning and 



Page 5 of 6

implementation will be competitively selected, and hired under the project as members of DPMU. 
At the commune level, a Commune Development Board (CDB) will be established under Commune 
People’s Committee (CPC) to oversee the implementation of Component 2. Each unit will be staffed 
with appropriate experts as required (see Annex 6 for proposed staffing and key responsibilities).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖





















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC35817

Project Name Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE) 
(P154807)

Region AFRICA
Country Western Africa
Sector(s) Health (50%), Other social services (35%), Animal production (15%)
Theme(s) Other communicable diseases (40%), Health system performance (40%), 

Rural services and infrastructure (15%), Rural policies and inst itutions 
(5%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154807
Borrower(s) Ministere de la Sante et de la Prevention
Implementing Agency WAHO
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

12-Nov-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

13-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

25-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

13-May-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The countries of West Africa belong to the Economic Community of West Africa States 
(ECOWAS), which comprises 15 countries and is home to more than 310 million people. ECOWAS 
is a regional organization that serves to promote economic integration across the West Africa 
region. The region is very heterogeneous in terms of cultural, economic and human development. 
Overall, member states rank low on the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) human 
development index; as of 2014, life expectancy at birth and gross national income per capita of 
countries in the region ranged from 45.6 to 75.1 and 873 to 6,365 respectively.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Over the last four decades, the world has witnessed one to three newly emerging infectious diseases 



annually. The West Africa region is both a hotspot for emerging infectious diseases and a region 
where the burden of zoonotic diseases is particularly high. In this region, emerging and re-emerging 
diseases at the human-animal-ecosystems interface are occurring with increased frequency. As 
evidenced by the recent Ebola epidemics in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, highly contagious 
diseases in this region cross borders easily and have the potential to turn into pandemics. These add 
to the ongoing burden of neglected and endemic human and animal diseases, including zoonosis.  
 
Pandemics and epidemics have potential catastrophic effects on human and animal life, ecosystems, 
and on national economies. From 1997-2009, major outbreaks of fatal infectious diseases such as 
the human pandemic influenza (H1N1), highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1), Creutzfeld-
Jakob disease, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and EVD caused an estimated US$80 
billion in economic losses. Additionally, a recent analysis by the World Bank (WB) shows that a 
severe pandemic such as the 1918 Spanish Flu could cost approximately US$3 trillion globally, an 
estimate comparable to the impact of the 2008 global financial crisis.  
 
The pandemic of H1N1; epidemics of SARS, H5N1 and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
Coronavirus (MERS-CoV); and recent outbreaks of EVD are reminders of persistent risk of 
infectious, zoonotic diseases, and the economic losses they cause. Animal losses from zoonotic 
diseases are also high. On average, about half of all annual losses of Livestock Units (LSU) reported 
on average by veterinary services to the OIE-WAHID database from 2006 to 2009 were the result of 
zoonotic diseases. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) represents an increasing global health threat as resistant pathogens 
can be transmitted across healthcare facilities, in communities, and across international borders. A 
review of some disease control and prevention measures adopted in the human health sector shows 
that resistance to inexpensive and effective antimicrobial drugs has emerged at an alarming rate, 
increasing the likelihood that many common diseases and pathogens (such as tuberculosis, malaria, 
HIV, gonorrhea, MRSA, CRE and Salmonella Typhi infections) could become difficult and 
expensive to treat. Similarly, challenges with insecticide resistance continues to be on the rise in the 
region and could undermine the significant gains in the control of vector born disease such as 
malaria, dengue, and yellow fever. Detection, monitoring, and responding to AMR relies on having 
strengthened and coordinated laboratory and surveillance capacities in the region. 
 
Control of the accelerating spread of communicable diseases in West Africa is also hampered by the 
limited capacities of individual country health systems for efficient surveillance, early detection and 
rapid response to infectious disease outbreaks that result in significant reversals in human 
development progress in the region including increased cases of morbidity and mortality, threats to 
food security, and substantial economic losses. For many countries in West Africa, years of civil 
conflict and underinvestment have resulted in weak health infrastructure, periodic disruption in 
service delivery, and critical shortages or gaps in the workforce (eg. epidemiologists, laboratorians, 
information technology experts, etc.). Mitigation of the risks posed by diseases with pandemic 
potential, including emerging zoonosis, will have to address these weaknesses in country health 
systems in the region. 
 
The effectiveness of disease surveillance and response systems is currently hampered by:  
lack of appropriate plans and resources to respond to health threats in a timely manner; 
scarcity and non-retention of trained and motivated human and animal health workforce resources, 
at both central and local levels; 


overall weakness of  human and animal disease information systems, including insufficient data 
collection and use of data for informing policy decisions and action, as well as for the prevention 
and mitigation of the cross-border spread of diseases; 
insufficient integration of parallel disease- specific surveillance systems;  
insufficient cross-sectorial coordination and collaboration among Ministries, in particular among 
those in charge of public health, animal health and the environment leading to inadequate 
operationalization of the “One Health” concept; 
inadequate human and animal health laboratory capacity, including inadequate specimen 
transportation networks, and low involvement of laboratories in the surveillance and response 
systems; 
disparity in detection and disease management capabilities among countries and insufficient 
regional cooperation. 
 
In June 2007, the WHO set forth a mandate via the International Health Regulation (IHR 2005) that 
requires country governments to develop, strengthen and maintain the core capacities of national 
public health systems to detect, assess, notify, and respond promptly and effectively to health risks 
and public health emergencies of international concern (PHEICs).  In the WHO Africa Region 
(WHO/AFRO), the Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) strategy serves as a 
framework to fulfill the mandates of IHR (2005). However, till today, IDSR has not been fully 
implemented in most countries in the region, thus contributing to the limited capacity of the 
countries’ health system for systematic collection, analysis, confirmation, and interpretation of 
disease surveillance data, in addition to insufficient capabilities for preparedness and rapid response. 
Thus, the need to reinforce these capacities in this region as a mitigating risk for potential future 
pandemic outbreaks. 
 
Animal Health Sector 
The animal health sector in the ECOWAS region is characterized by a high incidence and 
prevalence of many contagious diseases, both zoonotic and non-zoonotic, impacting productivity, 
public health, rural development and livelihoods. Since December 2014, West Africa has witnessed 
a reemergence of an H5N1 outbreak.  Important weaknesses in veterinary public health systems 
caused long delays in detecting, reporting and putting other necessary mitigation measures in place 
to reduce the risk of spread and to eventually eradicate the virus. Lack of preparedness, insufficient 
human, physical and financial resources, and the lack of cross-sector collaboration were highlighted 
as key factors by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Organization for 
Animal Health (OIE) in all affected countries. A recent summary of evaluations of the performance 
of Veterinary Services (PVS) done by the OIE within ECOWAS also highlighted the insufficient 
budgetary resources, and a mismatch between human resources and actual requirements.  In terms 
of strategic actions for animal health, all countries identified the need to improve the surveillance 
cover, in line with the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code, and to control priority animal diseases 
(including through vaccination). 
 
Collaboration between Veterinary and Human Public Health Systems.  
West African countries do not have yet the requisite systems in place and are generally ill-equipped 
to prevent human infections and to mitigate the losses from exposure to diseases of animal origin. In 
addition to strengthening national veterinary and human public health systems and their regional 
cooperation, there is an urgent need to establish or reinforce and maintain strong collaboration 
between systems at national and regional levels in order to better manage risks that arise at the 
animal-human-ecosystem interface (the so called ‘One Heath’(OH) approach.). For that to happen, 

ar attention will be given to priority core public functions (veterinary public health and 
human public health) that would reduce these risks. Assessing these core functions, bridging divides 
among systems and ministries and reducing capacity gaps would constitute a critical element of the 
program. Country assessment tools now exist for both systems (Performance of Veterinary Services 
pathway; IHR monitoring framework costing tool) as well as well identified bridges for OH 
competencies. Attention to building systems for core functions and policy dialogue, based on 
credible assessments, rigorous analysis and adequate financing, will ensure sustainability and reduce 
disease risks. These efforts would support specific ongoing national and regional disease-control 
initiatives, already part of system-strengthening country program, and demonstrate the performance 
of collaborative systems in disease surveillance, prevention and control.   
 
Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Network 
The recent EVD epidemic in West Africa has been attributed, not only to environmental factors and 
human behavior, but also to weaknesses in the health systems of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone 
and their inability to detect and respond swiftly to public health threats, and moreover, to the lack of 
a regional surveillance and response network in West Africa. Containment of West Africa’s EVD 
epidemic that initially began in Guinea and spread to neighboring countries was hampered by the 
absence of the systematic collection and reporting and exchange of surveillance and laboratory data 
across country-borders in real time. The EVD epidemic dramatically illustrates the need for a more 
harmonized approach to disease surveillance and response, both within countries and within the 
West Africa region overall. The EVD epidemic highly underscores the importance of regional 
cooperation among West African countries for the prevention and control of potential cross-border 
disease outbreaks, as a key component of the post-Ebola health systems recovery strategy, and 
overall health systems strengthening efforts in the region.

Relationship to CAS
The project is in line with the WB’s mission to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. 
Communicable and non-communicable diseases are a major constraint on the health, education and 
potential earnings of people living in the ECOWAS region and have the greatest impact on the most 
vulnerable population.  Hence, the economic rationale for investing in these interventions is key to 
mitigating the economic burden not only on individuals but also on the country as a whole. The CPS 
for the nine countries targeted by this project emphasize the need to strengthen the capacity of 
health systems of which disease surveillance is a key pillar, in order to improve health outcomes and 
reduce vulnerability (To be updated with CPS for each country). 
 
The project complements both WBG and development partner investments in health systems 
strengthening, disease control and surveillance.  Establishing this complementarity is particularly 
important in the three countries most affected by the EVD epidemic.  For Example, in the context of 
the recent Ebola epidemic, the Government of Sierra Leone is eager to dramatically improve 
national disease surveillance and response capacity. Having experienced first-hand the devastating 
consequences of cross-border spread of Ebola, the government also acknowledges the paramount 
importance of regional disease surveillance and institutions for cross-border and inter-country 
collaboration. On 7-8 September, 2015, the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) 
and multiple partners met in Freetown to discuss the creation of a Sierra Leone's National Public 
Health Institute (NPHI). Core functions of this Institute will include surveillance and response, 
research aimed at answering important questions for policy and program design, and response to 
public health emergencies. The Government of Sierra Leone is acutely aware of its limited financial 
and technical resources and has already begun actively engaging partners to assist in the creation of 


the NPHI. US CDC, China CDC and Public Health England have already demonstrated significant 
interest. The proposed project can play a vital role in providing financial and technical assistance to 
the Government of Sierra Leone to create the NPHI, can convene the multiple partners around a 
harmonized agenda, and can ensure that what is created in Sierra Leone is integrated into regional 
systems.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project’s development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa.

Key Results (From PCN)
i. Percentage of participating countries that improve compliance with IHR (2005) and OIE 
international standards based on independent external evaluations;  
ii. Percentage of outbreaks for which cross-border investigations are undertaken; 
iii. Percentage of surveillance workforce who have been trained; 
iv. Percentage of satellite laboratories awarded 2-star or more status under the regional 
accreditation program based on WHO/AFRO 5-step accreditation process; 
v. Percentage of reported priority communicable diseases outbreaks with laboratory 
confirmation of etiologic agents as defined by IDSR and OIE/FAO; and 
vi. Number of regional rapid response teams set up and equipped, activated and demonstrate 
competency on a quarterly basis

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The project's development objective (PDO) is to strengthen cross-sectoral and regional capacity for 
collaborative disease surveillance and response in West Africa. 
 
The PDO seeks to address systemic weaknesses within the animal and human health sectors that 
hinder effective disease surveillance and response by: (i) strengthening the capacity of selected 
ECOWAS member countries to fulfill their obligations under the WHO IHR (2005) and the OIE 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code; (ii) reinforcing sustainable and effective regional collaboration and 
collective action to detect and respond promptly to priority infectious diseases threats in West 
Africa including zoonotic diseases; and (iii) establishing an efficient linkage of country health 
systems to regional laboratory, surveillance, and response networks. 
 
Ultimately, the project will contribute towards significantly reducing the burden of diseases 
particularly among the poor and vulnerable populations, mitigating the public health and economic 
risks posed by infectious diseases in humans and animals, and decreasing the threats of future 
disease outbreaks thereby promoting global health security.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖


Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 310.00 Total Bank Financing: 310.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 310.00
 Total 310.00


























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA17494

Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Sri Lanka Project ID: P156019
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sri Lanka Agriculture Sector Modernization Project (P156019)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

25-Apr-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Jun-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops (20%), Agro-industry, 
marketing, and trade (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Ge neral agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (20%), Water resource management (20%), Rural policies and 
institutions (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%) , Nutrition and food 
security (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry Primary Industries, Provincial Councils of 
Northern, Eastern, North-Central,  Central and Uva Provinces

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.74
International Development Association (IDA) 125.00
Local Communities 0.00
Local Farmer Organizations 44.10
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 169.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


Decision Note):
Other Decision: .
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Sri Lanka is a lower-middle-income country of 20.5 million people and a per capita GDP of US$ 
3,811 (2014).  Growth over the past decade has been strong, averaging 6-7% per year.  Absolute 
poverty declined from 22.7 to 6.7% from 2002 to 2012.  Despite this progress, roughly one 
quarter of the Sri Lankans remain nearly poor, as defined by living above the national poverty line 
(about US$ 1.5 but below US$ 2.50 per day (2005 PPP terms).  Sri Lanka has comfortably 
surpassed most of the Millennium Development Goals. Primary school enrollment is near 
universal, while secondary and tertiary enrollment has substantially increased.  Maternal and 
infant mortality rates are at very low levels, and life expectancy at 74 years has been above its 
regional peers for over a decade. 
 
With the end of the civil war in 2009, reconstruction, infrastructure investment, and increased 
consumption have delivered a strong economic peace dividend, driven by the non-tradable sectors 
and public sector investments.  Sri Lanka is also undergoing a structural transformation away 
from agriculture, which now accounts for 10% of GDP towards industry (32.5%) and services 
(57.5%) with associated productivity growth and accelerating urbanization.  However, this 
transformation is progressing relatively slowly with 30% of the labor force remaining in 
agriculture.  Notwithstanding the post-conflict environment, Sri Lanka’s economic policies over 
last ten years have been inward-looking with an increasing degree of protectionism and anti-
export bias.  This has prevented the country from capitalizing on comparative advantage and 
exports; attracting domestic and foreign investments to foster technology transfer; and generating 
new sources of innovation driven growth and employment. 
 
The country’s fiscal landscape is challenging.  In 2014, a widened deficit and a slowdown in 
growth increased the fiscal deficit to 5.7% and the public debt 71.8%, as share of GDP, marking a 
slight reversal of the fiscal consolidation path of the post-conflict period.  The fiscal budget for 
2016 presented to Parliament projected a deficit of 6.0% of GDP for the years 2015 and 2016.  
The government presented its economic policy in November 2015 that includes as priorities the 
generation of one million job opportunities, enhancing income levels, developing the rural 
economy, and creating a wide and a strong middle class.  It proposed fiscal consolidation through 
increasing revenue collection, reforms of state owned enterprises, and enhanced trade and foreign 
investment.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Sri Lanka’s agriculture is characterized by a non-plantation sector and a plantation sector.  Of the 
country’s approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, 80% are used for non-plantation 
foods crops, comprising rice, maize, fruits, vegetables, and other crops that are primarily grown in 
small-holdings.  About 1.65 million smallholder farmers operate on average less than 2 hectares 
and contribute 80% of the total annual food production.  Commercial crops (minor export crops) 
include cinnamon, pepper, cocoa, and coffee and are grown on small and medium land holdings 

as well.  Plantation crops—coconut, rubber and tea—are cultivated in large estates and small and 
medium land holdings.  Typically, non-plantation crops are grown under irrigated conditions 
while plantation and minor export crops are grown in the rain-fed areas.  Monsoonal rainfall 
patterns shape the agricultural seasons and irrigation patterns.  Two thirds of the agricultural area 
are located in the dry zone where the bulk of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is located. 
 
Sri Lanka’s has successfully attained self-sufficiency in rice and recently also in maize 
production. Rice production has increased steadily from 2.9 million tons (2002) to 4.8 million 
tons in 2015, in part because previously inaccessible land was reopened for cultivation after the 
end of the war but also through introducing high-yielding varieties, expanding irrigation capacity, 
fertilizer subsidies, restrictions on crop choices, and import substitution.  Achieving self-
sufficiency has meant that the production structure has remained concentrated in the low value 
food crops. In 2013, about 45% of the cultivated area was under rice cultivation (up from 37% in 
1980) but the share of rice in the overall value of crop production was only 18%.  Furthermore, 
average rice yields of 4.06 tons/hectare are relatively low and agricultural productivity, as 
measured by total factor productivity, has only grown by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 
1980, lagging behind other South and East Asian countries. 
 
With rice self-sufficiency secured, there is a need to diversify the production structure out of the 
lower value food crops towards high-value agriculture.  Sector policy to date, however, has 
neglected the domestic fruits and vegetable sectors, despite growing domestic demand and 
potential for export growth.  Demand has instead been met by increased imports.  A broad 
recognition has however emerged recently that the modernization of agriculture is needed if 
agriculture is to realize its potential for greater value generation and as a renewed source of rural 
growth for poverty reduction and job creation. Such modernization will require a structural shift 
towards a more high-value oriented agriculture production structure, agro-processing and value 
addition activities, and increased competitiveness.  It will also involve aligning trade policies to 
become more consistent and conducive for high-value export agriculture; realigning and better 
targeting of public sector support, especially fertilizer subsidies; greater attention to R&D; and 
relaxing the rice self-sufficiency policy and allowing for more demand-driven and market 
oriented production.  This will require differentiated strategies for different parts and production 
arrangements across the country.  In the northern and eastern parts of the country, comprising 
primarily the dry zone, there is significant scope for agricultural productivity growth and potential 
for better linkages to domestic and export markets, including value-added production.  In other 
parts of the country, more robust and scaled-up private commercial investment and innovation 
through agri-enterprises and agri-enterprise-farmer partnerships is needed for value addition and 
farmer integration into high value chains through scaling up and diversification into more 
commercial crops.   
 
The proposed project provides a broad framework for Sri Lanka to experiment with innovative 
approaches to address the above mentioned sector issues, overcome the low productivity 
equilibrium, and strengthen agriculture’s contribution to the economy and employment creation.  
The strategic thrust reflected in the project design is to support overall agriculture sector 
development and addressing the longstanding constraints through: (a) developing an incentive 
structure for small, medium, and large enterprises, including farmer producer organizations, to 
invest in commercial agriculture and value chains; (b) promoting partnership arrangements 
between private sector partners and smallholder pro ducers for better linkages; (c) demonstrating 
new agriculture technologies and innovations at sufficient scale to enhance productivity, 

resilience, and diversification in selected prioritized lagging regions; (d) promoting technology 
diffusion through capacity building and training and new models for extension service delivery; 
and (e) supporting sector policy analysis and research for reform.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support increasing agriculture productivity, 
improving market access, and enhancing value addition of smallholder farmers and agribusinesses 
in the project areas.

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following results indicators: (a) number 
of direct project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender; (b) number and share of participating 
farm households adopting improved technology packages and production practices supported 
under the project; (c) number and share of project-supported farmer producer organizations and 
farmer – agribusiness partnerships making a profit; (d) percentage increase in average value of 
sales of agriculture products due to project interventions; and (e) the number of new jobs created 
through small and medium enterprise investments under the project.

D.  Project Description

The project comprises four components, as follows: 
 
Component 1: Agriculture Value Chain Development (Total US$102.7 million; IDA US$58.6 
million). The component would promote commercial and export-oriented agriculture through 
attracting and leveraging investments from farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for 
high value agriculture production and value addition. Component 1 comprises the following sub-
components: 
 
Sub-component 1.1: Investment Preparation Support, supporting: a training program on principles 
and procedures of the Matching Grants Program under sub-component 2; public advertisements 
and information workshops at national, provincial and district levels for prospective grant 
applicants; support to the project’s Technical Review Group and Board; international advisory 
support to operationalize the Matching Grants Program; staffing support and equipment and 
operation cost for the Matching Grants Secretariat and three regional support offices; technical 
assistance support to assist applicants in the preparation of quality investment proposals; and 
technical assistance support to support the environmental and social safeguards requirements 
within the Matching Grants Program. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses, supporting a 
Matching Grants Program to support investments from farmer producer organizations and 
agribusinesses in agriculture. Matching Grants would be provided under two windows.  Matching 
Grants of US$5,000 up to US$75,000 would be provided for investments to be developed and 
implemented by farmer producer organizations.  Eligibility criteria for farmer producer 
organizations to participate in the program would include: formal registration; appointment of an 
accountant; a cash contribution of 10 percent of the total investment; and availability of 
commercial financing of 40 percent of the total investment.  Matching Grants of US$75,000 up to 
US$500,000 would be provided to agribusiness for agriculture value chain investments. 


Applications for grant support would be evaluated on criteria, such as outreach and capacity 
building to smallholder farmers, including women headed producer groups; focus on lagging 
regions; as well as technical quality, innovation, business rationale and others. 
 
Sub-component 1.3: Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG), supporting a PCG to share financial risk 
with participating financial institutions that have expressed interest in lending to beneficiaries of 
the Matching Grant Program.  The PCG would be administered by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) and operate on the basis of the World Bank Group Principles on Partial Credit Guarantee 
Schemes, published in December 2014, covering the governance, management, administration, 
sustainability, and monitoring of PCG. 
 
Component 2: Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations (US$ 58.63 million, 
IDA US$ 58.63 million).  The component would support smallholder farmers to produce 
competitive and marketable commodities, improve their ability to respond to market 
requirements, and move towards increased commercialization.  Component 2 comprises three 
sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Farmer Training and Capacity Building, supporting knowledge building and 
capability improvements of smallholder farmers and the establishment of farmer organizations to 
help them to respond better to market opportunities.  Individual farmer capacity building and 
farmer producer organization training will be implemented through training programs reaching 
out to approximately 600 villages and approximately 500 farmer producers groups.  The trained 
and established farmer producer organizations would become eligible for participation in the 
Matching Grants Program under Component 1. 
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Modern Agriculture Technology Parks, supporting the introduction, 
demonstration, and scale-up of innovative agriculture technology packages to support 
productivity improvements, diversification, commercialization, more sustainable and climate 
resilient production patterns.  The sub-component would support 7 agriculture technology 
demonstration parks in the selected districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura (Northern 
Province), Batticaloa, (Eastern Province), Matale (North-Central Province), Moneragala (Uva 
Province), and Polonnaruwa (Central Province) which have been identified based on high poverty 
headcounts and agriculture potential.  The agriculture parks would be established to demonstrate 
entire value chain approaches, involving farmer mobilization and training, production, post-
harvest handling and/or processing, and marketing. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure, supporting: (i) the up-
grading and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks in 
selected areas and linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement 
of existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development (sub-component 2.2). 
 
Sub-component 2.4:  Analytical and Policy Advisory Support, supporting the CPCU, MOPI and 
MOA in addressing knowledge gaps; developing an evidence-based policy, legal and regulatory 
framework; and formulating sector and sub-sectoral strategies to provide an enabling environment 
for a sustainable and competitive modern agriculture and food system.  The component would 
provide support to evaluate policies and regulations and recommend adjustments, reforms or new 
policies to promote competitiveness, responsiveness to market demand, sustainability, and 
resilience; undertake market analyses for new exports, and analyze policy, regulatory and 
institutional constraints, and identify public investments to address these constraints; and evaluate 
the social and economic impact of policies and public expenditures and make recommendations to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures.  The sub-component would also 
provide some technical support the MOA, including the design of a National Agriculture 
Information System and others. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total Cost US$ 7.74 million, US
$ 7.7 million IDA).  The component would support the PMOs at MOPI and MOA at the central, 
provincial and district levels in project management and coordination, technical supervision, 
financial management, procurement, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E).

Component Name
Agriculture Value Chain Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is national in scope and designed as framework approach.  Specific project locations 
and their characteristics are not yet known and would be identified during implementation as part 
of the project’s demand-driven Matching Grants Program approach. Itis expected that project sites 
would be located in all three major agro-ecological zones, including the wet zone (average annual 
rainfall above 2500 mm); the intermediate zone (annual rainfall between 1750-2500 mm); and the 
dry zone (annual rainfall less than 1750 mm).  The dry and intermediate zones cover about 66% 
of the agriculture land area and receive about 30% of the country’s annual surface water yield.  
They are extensively used for agriculture and require irrigation water to be productive.  The bulk 
of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is hence located in the dry zone.   The wet zone, on the 
other hand, comprises 34% of the agricultural land area and receives 70% of the country’s annual 
surface water yield.  The three major plantation crops, most other export crops and various types 
of fruits are grown here under rain-fed conditions. 
 
The project’s proposed agriculture technology demonstrations parks included under Component 2 
and the complementing production infrastructure investments will be located in the 7 priority 
districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, Batticaloa, Matale, Polonnaruwa, and Moneragala.  
While exact project sites are not yet known and will be determined as part of a detailed feasibility 
study process during implementation, the districts are located in the dry zone (except for 
Moneragala, which is located in the intermediate zone) and have been identified based on high 
poverty rates and high absolute numbers of poor.  The majority of these districts are located in the 
former conflict affected areas and are characterized by poor or dilapidated public infrastructure, 
lack of productive infrastructure at the farm level, and poor access to markets, as well as limited 
livelihood and employment opportunities.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU06)

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional responsibilities and arrangements for project implementation will be established, as 
follows: 
 
A Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) will be set up in the Ministry of National Policies and 
Economic Affairs with representation from other government stakeholders.  The CPCU has the 
mandate to ensure effective coordination and communication between the Ministry of National 
Policies and Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, Ministry of Primary Industries, 
Ministry of Agriculture, and Provincial Councils; provide overall policy guidance and support to the 
implementing ministries; mobilize and ensure coordination with public and private sector 
stakeholders; and oversee the project’s regular internal auditing/ third party-monitoring of the two 
main investment components to ensure adherence to project principles and transparency. 
 
Ministry of Primary Industries (MOPI).  MOPI will be responsible for implementing Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, and will oversee the following project-relevant units and entities: 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOPI is responsible for the management of Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, including annual work and budget planning, coordination of the 
Department of Export Agriculture in Kandy and the three regional offices (Kilinochchi, Ampara, 
Matara); coordination with the three Provincial Councils and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture; 
procurement; fund withdrawal and financial reporting; technical and institutional aspects of 
implementation; general oversight, field supervision and acceptance checks; and training and 
capacity building, and the periodic progress reporting to the Bank.  A separate Secretariat would be 
set up in the PMU of MOPI to manage the day-to-day implementation of the matching grants 
program. 
 
A Board of Directors will be set up to oversee and govern the application process and approval of 
matching grants under sub-component 1.2.  The Board will be chaired by the Secretary of MOPI and 
include representatives from MOF, Board of Investment, Ceylon Export Board, Central Bank, 
Chamber of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and the Provincial Councils 

and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture.  The Board would be responsible for reviewing and 
approving applications for matching grants that have passed the technical, institutional and business 
reviews, ensuring that proposals are in accordance with government policy directions and objectives, 
especially outreach and integration of farmers and female entrepreneurs; make good business sense; 
and are in compliance with project regulations, including safeguards. 
 
A Technical Review Group (TRG) will be appointed, comprising representatives from government 
technical departments, academia/ research, industry-related enterprises, and other stakeholders.  The 
TRG would provide guidance to farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses that have 
expressed interest in applying to the matching grants program on technical and business-related 
aspects of investment proposals, such as crop/ product selection, technology innovation, production 
organization and processing, marketing research, partnership arrangements, investment costing, and 
other elements of investment planning process.  The TRG would review finalized investment plans 
for farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for technical and economic soundness and 
compliance with project regulations and recommend such proposals for approval to the Board.  
 
The Regional Development Department of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka would be responsible for 
administering the Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) under Component 1, sub-components 1.3.  The 
Department would also maintain the PCG Operational Manual, develop a business plan and pricing 
model, continuously review the eligibility criteria for loans, establish a registration system for loans 
to be covered under the PCG, and manage the claims processing system under the project. 
 
Under the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)  the following project-relevant units and entities would be 
set up or would be set up for the management of Component 2.  
 
A Coordinating Committee will be set up in MOA to be responsible for the regular coordination 
between MOA and the Provincial Councils of the participating provinces, based on the principles of 
the Wadduwa Declaration of the National and Provincial Ministers of Agriculture, signed on 
September 30, 2015. The Coordinating Committee would ensure that project’s sub-components 2.2 
(Agriculture Technology Demonstration Parks) and 2.3 (Upgrading Production and Marketing 
Infrastructure) are fully coordinated with the Provincial Councils based on the devolved provincial 
mandates for agriculture and rural development 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOA will be responsible for overall day-to-day coordination 
and management of Component 2 in coordination with the five Provincial Councils and Provincial 
Ministries of Agriculture.  The PMU would be responsible for annual work and budget planning; 
coordination with provinces/ districts in public outreach and community mobilization, procurement 
and contract management, fund withdrawal and financial management, including and financial 
reporting; technical and institutional implementation aspects, field supervision and acceptance 
checks; and training and capacity building.  It would also be responsible for reporting on project 
progress and implementation issues to the Bank, including the relevant project M&E indicators and 
safeguards implementation performance. 
 
The Sri Lanka Council for Agriculture Research Policy (CARP) under MOA, would be responsible 
for implementation of sub-component 2.4. Day to day activities under the component will be 
managed by a small Policy Analysis Unit, housed in CARP with project support and reporting to the 
Chairman of CARP.  The primary responsibility of the Unit would be to support policy level 
discussions of the CPCU, Ministry Finance, MOPI and MOA; monitor consistency of economic 


policies across various parts of the government; develop an annual program of studies and analytical 
work, and monitor implementation during the year through periodic activity progress updates.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes To mitigate potential environmental and social 
impacts that may be caused due to physical project 
interventions and ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided and/
or mitigated, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared.  These will provide detailed guidance on 
the specific due diligence requirements as well as on 
the specific environmental and social safeguards 
instruments required for sub-projects, including 
screening, environmental management plans, 
resettlement action plans etc.) to mitigate any 
potential negative project impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project will support agriculture activities on 
existing farmland.  Expansion of farmland into 
fragile habitats is not foreseen. The project will 
improve agricultural practices and is expected to 
reduce the pressure on farmland and surrounding 
natural habitats.  Some activities might impact 
natural habitats because of their proximity to such 
habitats (construction and/or upgrading of rural 
infrastructure).  The EAMF prescribes a due 
diligence mechanism under OP 4.01 to ensure 
impacts are mitigated.  Preventive and mitigation 
measures will be included in sub-project EMPs, as 
needed.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas.  No activities in 
commercial forests or in close proximity to forest 
areas are expected.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
a key thematic area,  however, the intensification and 
diversification of agriculture could to lead to changes 
in the application of pesticides for pest and disease 
control.  A Pest Management Plans (PMP) has been 
prepared based on Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) principles, describing the national regulatory 
framework, current status of pest and disease control, 
monitoring and supervision mechanism, major 


experience and problems, and lessons learned from 
past projects.  It specifies a range of actions to 
strengthen integrated pest management practices and 
awareness and includes capacity building and 
monitoring program to facilitate implementation.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No No project-support activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or to affect physical cultural resources, as 
defined by OP/BP4.11. Measures on safeguard 
chance finds are  included as part of mitigation 
measures defined in EAMF OP/BP 4.01.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No No conclusive evidence or data exist yet on the 
possible presence of indigenous peoples 
communities in the country.  In general, "forest 
dwellers" who live in remote locations and close to 
commercial forests and national forest reserves are 
considered native communities.  Their livelihood is 
dependent on forest resources.  Project supported 
agricultural activities will take place on existing 
agricultural areas and there will be no expansion into 
forest areas.  No activities in commercial forests or in 
close proximity to forest areas are expected and 
therefore forest dweller communities will not be 
affected through proposed investments under the 
project.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will not involve involuntary resettlement 
or physical displacement.  Small-scale land 
alignment or acquisition for village-level civil works 
may be necessary.  Where the need for land 
acquisition may arise, the project’s RPF will apply.  
The RPF provides the guidelines and procedures for 
land acquisition; describes provisions for 
compensation and mitigation measures, includes a 
grievance redress mechanism, and set up safeguards 
monitoring and institutional arrangements in the 
event of land acquisition and livelihood losses.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The project may include the up-grading and 
rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation facilities   and 
water tanks.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the 
dependence on water conveyance and control via 
irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with 
the storage and operation of upstream medium/ large 
dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s cascading tank 
and irrigation infrastructure.  The rehabilitation of 
small irrigation schemes and tanks will not include 
dams and embankments more than 15 meters high 
and will not include medium to large scale dams.  

The EAMF includes generic dam safety measures to 
be adopted in the design and implementation of 
rehabilitation/ improvement of irrigation structures.  
It also includes guidance on the preparation of 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plans and dam 
safety plans in accordance with OP/BP4.37.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and therefore 
this policy is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this policy 
is not triggered.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to bring positive environmental benefits to the project areas through the 
introduction and expansion of modern technology applications that help improve current cropping 
patterns and farming methods, increase efficiency in the management of water resources, protect 
agriculture soils, and roll out integrated pest management. However, two components under the 
project may involve activities that could have significant environmental impacts if not mitigated 
properly, especially during the construction phase.   Component 1 will support commercial 
agriculture and agro-products processing. Component 2 would finance the establishment of 
agriculture technology demonstration parks and improvements of rural infrastructure, including 
access roads and tracks, rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, land preparation, market 
facilities, and others. The project’s process-oriented and demand-driven framework approach does 
not allow to determine project investments and specific project locations for investments under 
these components at appraisal. However it is known that these will be conducted in existing 
agricultural areas. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses:  
 
The agricultural sector faces a number of challenges in managing land productivity which often 
results in encroachment of forest areas for search of new land for cultivation. Soil erosion, crop 
disease management, water use efficiency, water pollution from excessive use of chemicals, and 
cultivation of unsuitable crop varieties are among the key areas where focus in terms of 
environmental management are a priority.   
 
Supporting the commercial agriculture and agro-products processing will require that stringent 
environmental screening, identification of potential environmental and impacts and management 
in terms of set up and operations of the activity. Among other best practices would be organic 
cultivation and at the same time careful soil management needs to be taken care of to prevent soil 
erosion and top soil degradation.  As specific sites and nature of the agro-business activities are 
not yet known, best practices that need to be employed and general recommendations cannot be 
employed as the nature of the activity varies and depend upon the soil type, area of cultivation ,i.e. 
dry zone or wet zone, and topography, crop type and the specific agriculture sector.  A site-


specific Environmental Management Planning approach plays a key role and has been 
incorporated in to the Matching Grants Program.  In addition, via strengthening technical 
knowledge and extension services focusing on the careful and minimal use of chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides/herbicides through good practices such as Integrated Pest Management and 
Integrated Plant Nutrition Management via the project’s Pest Management Plan, activities that 
facilitate sustainable agricultural development should be essentially promoted. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of Modern Agriculture Technology Parks: The sub-component 
would support 7 agriculture technology demonstration parks in selected districts in the Northern, 
Eastern, Central, North-Central and Uva Provinces, which have been identified based on high 
poverty headcounts and agriculture potential. The exact location of where these interventions will 
be taking places will only be deduced during the project implementation stage. Environmental 
screening will be an essential part of the site selection process in order to ensure project-supported 
agriculture-related activities would take place on existing farmland and no expansion or creation 
of new farmland into fragile habitats is foreseen. The project will bring improvements to 
agricultural practices that are expected to reduce the pressure on these areas and the likelihood of 
encroachment into sensitive natural habitats. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure:  This component will 
entail physical interventions under the following purview; (i) the up-grading and rehabilitation of 
small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks and irrigation systems in selected 
priority areas, linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement of 
existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development.  Impacts to physical and ecological environments during the construction 
phase of physical interventions outlined under Sub-component will be predominantly during the 
construction phase and consist of impacts such as the stress of natural resources such as sand, 
water and spil, removal of productive topsoil, solid waste generation in the form of construction 
waste, localized dust and noise and safety and occupational health to laborers. These impacts will 
be management via mitigation measures that will be implements via sub-project specific 
environmental management plans. 
 
The project is expected to generate positive social benefits and provide sustainable poverty 
reduction opportunities into lagging rural areas. Improved agriculture productivity and value chain 
development are expected to create additional economic returns for farmer households.  Expected 
benefits include employment opportunities for poorer households, individual and collective 
empowerment through membership in formal farmer producer organizations and in partnership 
arrangements with agribusinesses, improved access to finance, technology, and markets, as well as 
technical and management skills. Attention to more equitable sharing of economic gains from 
investments in commercial agriculture modernized value chains will be paid during the process of 
farmer producer organization establishment. Investments in local infrastructure will have positive 
impacts if infrastructure is targeted to serve both agricultural production needs and the needs of 
local communities.  A mandatory social screening is specified in the Operations Manual and RPF 
and will allow for the detailed assessment of potential social impacts and risks and relevant 
mitigation measures of all sub-projects.  Land acquisition is expected to be small-scale and to be 
manageable through the RPF and Resettlement Action Plans.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
No potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under the project.  It is 
worthwhile to note that women producer organizations will receive priority in the matching grant 
facility and other project-supported activities. However, a number of issues deserve attention and 
monitoring from a social development perspective during implementation:  Women-headed and 
poor households may be especially vulnerable and their participation in project activities might be 
limited resulting in inequitable production arrangements within farmer producer organizations or 
in partnership arrangements with agribusinesses. Market risks will remain substantial, and timely 
access to market information will remain challenging.  This may result in producer organizations 
not being able to assess market and demand conditions adequately.   Modern agriculture requires 
more investment while some of the proposed commodities may provide returns only with some 
time lags.  Poorer households may therefore face increased risk of indebtedness because of their 
motivation to participate in the project.  Producer arrangements will require the organization and 
streamlining of large numbers of smallholder producers under unified production and land 
management arrangements, requiring special attention to ensuring voluntary and fully informed 
participation.  Complex land tenure and land ownership patterns in Sri Lanka’s smallholder 
agriculture might hinder the introduction of modern agriculture practices and new technologies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Alternative design consideration included a three pronged approach that included major 
investment components on climate smart agriculture, value chain development for higher value 
agricultural products, and on reforms to the country’s research and development and extension 
systems.   This scope was considered to broad and complex, including from an environmental and 
social safeguards perspective and the project design was simplified as described above.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared as details of specific sites and related activities and interventions are not yet available. 
The EAMF primarily includes an assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with 
anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental risk mitigation and 
institutional arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, instruction to the preparation 
of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), implementation and monitoring. The RPF provides 
guidance on the land acquisition process and  the preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans where needed. 
 
To ensure that project interventions supported under the Matching Grant Program are 
environmentally sound, the EAMF includes environmental screening and evaluation criteria which 
will be part of the screening process for matching grant applications under Component 1.   MOPI 
will be responsible for ensuring the environmental screening of all project concept notes and full 
proposals submitted by applicants to the matching grant program.  The environmental screening 
process and evaluation criteria presented in the EAMF are reflected in the Operational Manuel of 
the Matching Grant Program as well and built in to the eligibility assessment criteria of matching 
grant applications.  
 
All interventions (excepting those that obviously are environmentally benign or low impact) under 

Component 2 will be subject to an environmental screening with the objective to: (a) determine the 
anticipated environmental impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; and (ii) determine if the 
anticipated impacts and public concern warrant further environmental analysis, and if so to 
recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental Assessment needed as per the set 
criteria in the EAMF.   
 
The EAMF is taking the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental analysis and 
mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will have the potential to 
trigger negative environmental impacts and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank’s 
environmental safeguard policies and the relevant national Environmental regulations during 
implementation. As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in 
general will be required to prepare an EMP and follow the World Banks Environmental Health 
and Safety Guidelines and agriculture sector guidelines as defined in the EAMF. 
 
Interventions under Component 2, sub-component 2.3 may include the rehabilitation and up-
grading of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks (managed by the Agrarian 
Services Departments) linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks under sub-
component 2.2.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the dependence on water conveyance and control 
via the irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with the water storage and operation of 
upstream medium/large dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s historical cascading tank and 
irrigation infrastructure.  There is an ongoing and effective dam safety program in Sri Lanka 
targeting all large to medium scale dams (upstream of small irrigation structures) and smaller 
dams along cascading irrigation systems.  Full-level inspections, dam safety assessments, and 
safety remedial measures have already been conducted and details are documented by the 
Government satisfactorily to the Bank and in compliance with the provisions of OP/BP4.37 on 
Dam Safety.   
 
Typical interventions under this project would include repairs and improvements, such as 
protection of downstream slopes of dam embankments, providing toe-filters and toe drains to 
improve downstream drainage and arresting excessive seepage flows, upstream slope protection 
strengthening of the structural stability of  spillways and sluice structures etc.  The anticipated 
project activities will result in an overall enhancement of the safety of dams (tank bunds) against 
the risk of failure.  The project, however, will not finance construction of new tanks (new dams/
tank bunds).  Small dams i ncluded under the project would be less than 5 meters in height. 
 
All irrigation infrastructure related interventions will require a screening, as per the EAMF to 
verify whether upstream medium to large scale dams are present and connected hydrologically, 
and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed outline follow-up actions.  If the presence of 
upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been rehabilitated or 
strengthened and thus have Dam Safety implications, the following will be conducted: an 
inspection and evaluation of the safety status of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance 
history; and a review and evaluation of the mandated dam owners operation and maintenance 
procedures.  A report will be provided on the findings of the review, including recommendations 
for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an 
acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary additional dam safety measures or remedial work may be 
financed under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken 
using the following procedures: a competent professional will be recruited to design and supervise 
the work.  Because the size of dams would be less than 5 meters in height, qualified professionals 


will be hired by MOA to design and supervise the work. 
 
The MOA and MOPI have limited prior experience with Bank-funded projects respectively and 
the capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards in project implementation is limited 
as well.  MOPI is a new entity.  MOA has been long established, however, does not partake in the 
implementation of national level environmental regulations and institutional capacity is weak.  
MOA has however sufficient capacity and technical expertise in pest management because MOA 
is implementing national programs in pest control and pesticide management.  To address capacity 
weaknesses, the PMUs under MOA and MOPI will both recruit full-time qualified environmental 
and social specialists prior to the commencement of field implementation to be responsible for the 
implementation of the project’s environmental and social regulations, including the EAMF, PMP, 
EMPs, and RPF and RAPs.  In addition, the project will provide training in environmental 
management and on environmental and social management to improve institutional capacity. The 
cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social project 
regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with direct and indirect project beneficiaries, government stakeholders at various 
administrative levels and farmers will be conducted as part of the participatory process for 
designing and implementing sub-projects.  Consultation will aim at: sharing information, listening 
to feedback, engaging citizens in decision making, and involving stakeholders in participation in 
the implementation process.  Consultations will also enable the project team to hold joint 
discussions with the beneficiary communities, share ideas about planning and implementation, and 
benefit from local knowledge to take more informed decisions. Consultation will take place inform 
of public meetings, focus group discussions, sub-project specific community consultations as part 
of the social screening process and direct one-to-one consultations.  A Public Information Booklet 
will be used as an information dissemination technique to promote competition and innovation in 
technology development and advocate for poor framer groups, including women farmer groups, to 
take part in project activities.  Following review by the Bank, the safeguards instruments including 
RAPs, EMPs have been disclosed through the Infoshop and locally on the ministries’ websites, 
and through the PMUs and at Divisional Secretariats of project areas. 
 
The project will adopt following as citizen engagement mechanisms: (a) continuous community 
consultations as social preparation and screening of  subprojects; (b) social audit committees at 
local level to monitor subproject implementation; and (c) third party monitoring of project 
implementation to ensure projects benefits are distributed  equally and efficiently across different 
social groups and geographical regions.  The outcome of the citizen engagement exercises will be 
documented and reviewed during implementation support missions.


























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC18818

Project Name National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349)
Region AFRICA
Country Kenya
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national 

government administration (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(10%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Social Inclusion (30%), Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153349
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

02-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

10-Nov-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Jan-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing poverty, in 
particular in rural areas, remain.  Kenya’s poverty reduction from 47 percent in 2005/6 to about 39 
percent based on best estimates in 2012/13 , has been driven by solid growth across most of the 
economy, but improvements in income are not evenly shared amongst people but also amongst 
regions and inequality appears to be rising .  The scale of consumption poverty in Kenya is 
staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas.  Based on the last national household budget survey, 
close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was poor in 2005, the vast majority of 
the poor lived in rural areas, and were more likely to depend on income and consumption from 
crops and livestock, as a source of livelihood. Revised poverty estimates indicate that nearly 4 in 10 
Kenyans continue to live in extreme poverty. Poverty levels are highest in arid and semi-arid areas, 

with roughly 70 percent the population living in the “small share” (about 12 percent) of the more 
agriculturally productive regions of the country (source: CPS FY2014-18). Tackling poverty must 
address the difficulties of low-income rural communities as well as the distinct problems of urban 
poverty that also encompass secondary cities.  
 
Income inequality levels are not likely to have decreased in recent years, and achieving inclusive 
growth remains Kenya’s key development objective. Kenya’s Gini coefficient of 47.7 is above that 
of neighboring comparators, including Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Uganda. The richest 10 percent of 
the population garner 40 percent of the nation’s income, whereas the poorest 10 percent receive 
only 2 percent of national income. While fostering income growth of the bottom 40 is not currently 
a target set explicitly by the national authorities, in practice it is currently equivalent to fostering 
income growth of the extreme poor. Significant investment and economic reform must be part of the 
effort to cut the poverty rate by 2 percentage points each year from now to 2030 if extreme poverty 
is to be ended in that timeframe (source: CPS, FY2014-18).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture is the mainstay of Kenya’s economy, but is not reaching its potential to fully contribute 
to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The sector directly accounts for 25 percent of GDP, and 
provides 62 percent of formal employment, and 45 percent of government revenue.  However, 
although specific high-value sub-sectors like horticulture and tea have performed well, small-scale 
agriculture – the main livelihood for most of Kenya’s poor – has performed very poorly.  Despite 
demographic changes and urbanization, the majority of the rural population still derives their 
livelihoods from agricultural and related activities, at low levels of productivity. There is therefore a 
very strong linkage between agriculture and the overall performance of the economy as well as the 
wellbeing of the Kenyans (both rural and urban). 
 
Vulnerable groups in rural areas bear the highest incidence of poverty depending on how well they 
have been prepositioned to face shocks.  Social exclusion creates vulnerability particularly among 
women and youth.  Lack of stable income, secure shelter, isolation from markets, jobs scarcity, lack 
of access to information and technologies and knowledge, education etc. all act as drivers to social 
exclusion and lack of prosperity that is being experienced by rural families. In agriculture, women 
comprise more than 70 percent of the labor force, yet they own only 1-5 percent of agricultural land 
titles. In terms of non-agricultural employment, only 29 percent of those earning a formal wage are 
women and female youths are twice as likely to be unemployed as adult females. 
 
Management of natural resources and water catchments is critical to the well-being of the most 
vulnerable and to improving prosperity of rural communities. Kenya's growth prospects and main 
economic activities, especially agriculture, hydro-power generation and water supply are strongly 
linked to the country's environment and natural resource base.  However, such catchment areas in 
Kenya have undergone intensive environmental degradation resulting in the siltation of rivers, 
reservoirs and irrigation canals, which in turn exacerbates flooding and vulnerability.  Kenya 
already is one of the most degraded areas in the region with about 70 percent of the population 
living in the 12 percent of total land area that is classified as being of medium to high potential for 
agriculture and livestock production. Further, Kenya is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. Many of the economic activities and livelihoods rely on natural resources will be impacted 
by climate change related occurences, such erratic weather patterns, floods and droughts. Proper 
management and conservation of key catchment areas, as well as actions to respond to climate 
change (such as the adoption of climate-smart agriculture practices, or strengthening the adaptive 


capacity of communities through improved access to information and services) are key strategic 
requirements for increasing for increasing agricultural productivity, poverty reduction and economic 
growth. 
   
The 2010 Constitution gives hope in addressing some of the exclusion witnessed in the past.  
Devolution to 47 Counties paves way for a more equal distribution of resources and better service 
delivery. The Constitution Bill of Rights emphasizes the need to protect the vulnerable and 
marginalized members of Kenyan communities. Much needs to be done in practice to ensure that it 
rectifies the unequal distribution of investments and services and does not instead cause service 
delivery to deteriorate. The Constitution also recognizes improved governance, transparency and 
citizen participation as essential to realize Kenyan aspirations.  
 
The Constitution and the Government’s ambitious devolution process bring major new 
opportunities, as well as near-term challenges, for enhancing poverty reduction, citizen 
participation, agricultural productivity, as well as governance. Counties now play the primary on-
the-ground role in delivering agriculture services that previously were managed by the national 
government.  Key functions related to these services were transferred to the Counties in August 
2013, and the “Equitable Share” includes significant resources that had formerly been allocated to 
national ministries to carry out these services, with national government retaining a policy making 
role. There is a major need, and window of opportunity, to support Counties to put in place 
institutional structures, mechanisms and staffing to deliver on their mandates. Many Counties are 
looking for mechanisms, such as community-led development programs, that can help to mobilize 
their citizens to take an active role in delivery of services.  
 
Kenya has significant experience supporting community-led development, agriculture and citizen-
centered governance, specifically gained from the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development 
and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD/FM) Project and the Kenya Agricultural Productivity and 
Agribusiness Project (KAPAP) .  Both projects are delivering on their development objectives and 
have demonstrated new approaches to mobilizing communities and small-scale agriculturalists, 
while facing implementation and governance challenges that have afflicted multiple projects in the 
Bank’s Kenya portfolio. These types of operations have demonstrated results in mobilizing poor 
communities to undertake initiatives that improve local livelihoods, and have progressively sought 
to incorporate lessons learned from similar community-led initiatives in South Asia and other 
regions. Experience thus far suggests that unlike top-down approaches, effective community-level 
planning and execution encourages innovative development solutions that reflect local priorities.   
 
Rural transformation in an inclusive and sustainable manner is the long-term vision of the 
Government of Kenya (GoK).  To achieve this inclusive transformation, a series of multi-sector 
programs will be required over the next 5 to 15 years. The Bank, in response to the GoK’s request to 
scale up community-led and market-driven approaches in the agricultural sector as the first program 
in the series, proposes a Kenya National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349) 
to be implemented over five years with an approximate IDA envelope of US$200 million.

Relationship to CAS
The Government, as well as the World Bank’s new Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS/
FY2014-18), places a strong priority on supporting agriculture and the devolution process to 
enhance poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Enhancing the role of agriculture in generating 
shared prosperity and poverty reduction, as well as in supporting national and County governments 


to provide effective decentralized service delivery are key priorities.  The agricultural sector is 
identified as one of the key sectors of the economic pillar in the “Kenya Vision 2030” which is 
operationalized by the Second Medium Term Plan (2013-2017), as well as other key policies such 
as the Agriculture Sector Development Policy aiming to achieve 5 – 7 percent annual agriculture 
sector growth. The CPS identifies agriculture as the sector with the most potential to make a 
significant difference to Kenya’s rural poor, including women, who make up 70 percent of the rural 
labor force; and to deliver on national objectives for shared prosperity.   
 
Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy. The proposed program is fully aligned with the focus 
areas of the CPS and will contribute to its objectives through the Bank’s three key domains of 
engagement in Kenya.  First, under Domain 1 – “Competitiveness and sustainability: growth to 
eradicate poverty”, the proposed project would help achieve the high level objective of improving 
agriculture productivity and sustainability . Second, the proposed project would directly contribute 
to Domain 2 – “Protection and potential: delivering shared prosperity”, where the focus is to protect 
the vulnerable and help them develop their potential. The CPS recognizes that agriculture is one of 
the high priority areas interventions to target support for the poor that directly links with helping 
farmers in rural areas. Engaging communities and supporting especially women and youth are also 
recognized to be important. Third, the proposed project would also assist in achieving the two high 
level objectives of operationalizing the devolution framework for local decision making and smooth 
delivery of decentralized services under Domain 3 – “Consistency and equity: delivering a 
devolution dividend”.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed development objective is to reduce vulnerabilities and promote inclusive agricultural 
and other livelihoods of the small-scale and marginal farmers in the targeted communities.

Key Results (From PCN)
Achievement of the PDO and key results are proposed to be measured by the following  indicators: 
(a) Direct project beneficiaries (number) of which female (percentage)- this core indicator will 
essentially measure the number of vulnerable and poor/small and marginal farmers (bottom 40 
percent, disaggregated by gender) benefitting from project interventions both in terms of 
infrastructure and livelihoods; (b) Communities and Counties, through their own institutions, 
implementing, operating, and managing their development activities (number); and (c) Increase of 
household incomes and assets of small and marginal farmers (less than 2 acres) (percentage).  A 
detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Approach and Scope: To promote inclusive and sustainable agricultural and livelihood 
development, the proposed project interventions will use a three-pronged approach along the key 
guiding principles of: participation, inclusion, poverty targeting, transparency, accountability, value-
for-money, and self-help. First, to address key aspects of rural development that cut across cultural, 
ecological, and socioeconomic areas , the project design will use a holistic, integrated landscape 
approach that looks at all resources (natural capital (land, water, and other natural resources), 
physical capital (infrastructure, etc.) and social capital (communities, institutions, etc.) to develop 


strong horizontal and vertical collaboration with stakeholders to managing competing demands. 
Second, to effectively identify and address distinct local needs, the project will use a community-led 
approach that has been successfully providing services to rural populations in Kenya. Participation 
of the beneficiary population and County governments in all stages of the process would be 
essential for ensuring ownership and sustainability of the investments. Third, the project will adopt 
a market-driven approach to ensure that agricultural development and livelihood promotion are 
linked to markets/private sector thereby contributing to increased economic transformation and 
improved livelihoods of the target population. With focused support, a sizeable group of small 
farmers and other vulnerable groups can be a source of much needed employment and growth in the 
rural areas. The project will also place a strong emphasis on sustainability – how to build and 
sustain community-led institutions and farmer-led market associations that can raise adequate 
revenues to sustain and expand operations, and are incentivized to deliver tangible benefits for poor 
and vulnerable populations.  
 
Project Area.  Selection of the proposed project area will be defined during preparation recognizing 
that some degree of geographical concentration will be needed in order to provide widely shared 
benefits.  Roughly, the project will cover about 10 to 15 counties, benefitting about 500,000 farm-
families, about 2. 5 million population . Selection of the project area will be in done following an 
overall holistic/landscape approach, ensuring close collaboration and coordination with proposed 
IDA-supported rural roads, rural energy and devolution projects currently under preparation. The 
selection criteria could include: (i) agricultural and livestock potential areas; (ii) number of poor 
people living in rural areas; (iii) human development indicators such as malnutrition, food 
insecurity, sanitation coverage, etc.; (iv) willingness of County governments and communities to 
commit to the program’s objectives/principles and provide cash/labore or in-kind support, and; (v) 
clustering approach – in terms of both physical/biological clustering as in case of watershed, and 
economic clustering.  
 
Project Components: The project will comprise 4 components:  
 
Component 1: Support to Farmer/Community Institutions and Agricultural/Rural Livelihoods 
(roughly US$100 million of IDA Credit): This component will provide support and resources to 
communities for building and strengthening their institutions (farmer/producer groups, cooperatives, 
etc), improving agriculture and rural livelihoods (extension, technology, irrigation, natural resource 
management, finance, etc), reducing vulnerabilities such as unemployment (especially youth), 
disability, food insecurity and malnutrition, and improving quality of life (small access roads/
bridges, water, etc). This component could provide support through two windows aimed at: (a) 
providing financing for public goods, and; (b) promoting agricultural and rural livelihoods as 
private goods. The funds will be released directly to the communities in tranches based on their 
performance, and will be managed at the community level. Investments would need to be made in 
land rehabilitation and land conservation measures also to arrest erosion-induced declining land 
productivity, and connecting the farmers as well as community to roads and markets.   
 
Component 2: Strengthening Inter-community/Producer Cooperatives and Investments for 
Agricultural Value Chains (roughly US$60 million of IDA Credit): This component will support the 
strengthening of higher level farmer institutions (cooperatives, producer federations, natural 
resource users associations, etc) that help farmers and communities work together to improve 
productivity and value-addition, and to achieve efficiency and economies of scale of local activities. 
The component will also support activities that require cooperation within and across multiple 


communities. Key activities proposed under this component include: (i) strengthening producer 
federations and cooperatives; (ii) developing value-chains and commercial agriculture; (iii) 
improving catchment management practices; (iv) promoting innovative technology, farming 
methods, and good agricultural practices that help target beneficiaries to improve efficiency and 
quality of their production; and (v) complementing existing subsistence strategies that promote 
climate resilience with new measures such as efficient irrigation, new crop varieties (e.g., drought 
and disease tolerant, quicker-growing), and erosion controls. These climate smart techniques and 
dissemination of climate information (e.g., seasonal forecasts and long-term trends) can address 
more intense rainfall events and water conservation measures. Component 2 will build synergies 
with other initiatives at the national level and in the project area such as feeder roads development, 
rural electrification and devolution, etc., in order to have a multiplier effect on achieving sustainable 
results.   
 
Component 3: Building Capacity of County Governments and Other Partners to Support 
Community-Led Development (roughly US$30 million of IDA Credit): This component will 
support County governments and other partners (including communities) to strengthen their roles 
and capacity as enablers of community-led initiatives for farmers and vulnerable populations. 
Proposed activities to be supported will include: (i) integrating community-led initiatives in County 
Integrated Development Planning and Budgeting processes; (ii) building County capacity including 
policies, staff, processes/systems, and monitoring; (iii) identifying and monitoring progress and 
needs of poor and marginalized communities, and; (iv) developing platforms to share information 
on ongoing initiatives, identifying and disseminating good practices, and enhancing coordination 
among different actors.   
 
Component 4: Coordination, Facilitation and Monitoring (roughly US$10 million of IDA Credit): 
This component will support overall national level coordination, facilitation, management, technical 
support, and monitoring, learning and evaluation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 200.00
Financing Gap: 0.00



















































COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC15495

Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P155617
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Assam Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P155617)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

05-Sep-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

22-Dec-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(30%), Crops (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), 
Animal production (10%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation 
and market access (20%)

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services (ARIAS) Society

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 50.00
International Development Association (IDA) 200.00
Total Project Cost 250.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 



(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1.      During the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, 
and projections are for the high growth rate to continue.  Despite the headline figures on growth, 
concerns linger about the pattern of growth. India continues to face daunting challenges in 
reducing the number of poor, creating jobs, and achieving shared prosperity. Long term 
agricultural growth remains volatile, fluctuating around 3 percent per year.  With India’s labor 
force predominantly in rural areas, and about 68 percent employed in agriculture, the political, 
social and economic importance of agriculture continues. 
 
2.      The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the important role of agriculture in the ongoing 
rural-urban transformation process and the potential it represents as an important source of growth 
and job creation.  The GoI also recognizes the necessity of strategic shifts for structural 
transformation of Indian agriculture to tap into this potential of growth and job creation.  These 
shifts reflect underlying trends in demand for food and factors affecting the supply of agriculture 
produce, and include:  (i) a shift away from a focus on foodgrain production towards 
diversification into high value agriculture production of fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc.; (ii) a shift 
away from a focus on on-farm production towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of 
agriculture value chains; (iii) a shift away from a focus on productivity towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; and (iv) a shift away 
from a focus on agriculture production towards nutrition sensitive agriculture. 
 
3.       To facilitate these four shifts, GoI has launched a number of policies and initiatives since 
2014. These include, among others, a technology driven second green revolution with a focus on 
higher productivity and diversification; a “National Adaptation Fund” to meet the challenges on 
climate change; a nationwide District Level Incubation and Accelerator Programme” focusing on 
micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector; and a scheme for promotion of a National 
Agricultural Market to accelerate the integrated development of agriculture marketing and trade. 
 
4. Consumer demand for food commodities in India is rapidly changing, fueled by strong 
economic growth.  The structural shift in consumption pattern away from cereals to high value 
agricultural commodities is seen both in rural and urban areas.  This in turn is generating growing 
domestic demand for higher quality/value agricultural commodities (including animal proteins) as 
the share of cereals and staples in food expenditure declines, whilst that of animal proteins, fruits 
and vegetables increases.  This provides opportunities for farmers to obtain higher incomes from 
increasingly smaller holdings. 
 
5. Signaled by changes in consumers’ food baskets, India’s agriculture and agri-food marketing 
system is poised for a profound transformation.  The agri-food marketing system is changing from 
ad hoc transactions towards coordinated systems like cooperatives, producers’ associations and 
contract farming.  Public policy has been proactive in facilitating this transformation.  The central 
and state governments have taken important policy initiatives, such as de-regulation of food 
industry, enactment of an integrated food law, de-monopolization of agricultural markets, 
reduction in excise duties on manufactured food products, and priority sector lending to food 
industry to strengthen agriculture-industry linkages. 

Food processing is a “sunrise sector” and its share in GDP is on a continuous rise, with a 
compound annual growth rate of 8.4 percent. According to the Annual Survey of Industries 
2012-13 the food processing sector ranks first amongst all industry groups, both in terms of total 
number of factories (16%) and  number of factories in operation (16%), and third in terms of total 
output (12%), next only to ‘coke and refined petroleum products’ and ‘basic metals’.  More 
importantly, this sector is the largest employer amongst all industry groups, accounting for 11.59 
per cent of industry employment in India.  Its employment intensity can be seen by the fact that 
for every INR 1 million invested, 18 direct jobs and 64 indirect jobs are created in organized food 
processing industry.  Furthermore, food in India has an economic multiplier of 2-2.5, thus 
implying that not only the food products industry can be the antidote for India’s jobless growth, 
but that such a scenario may come at a relatively low (fixed capital) cost. 
 
7. Transition to high value commodities and opportunities in agro-food processing underscores 
the enormous potential for commercialization and income growth in agriculture (including small 
holder) as production, consumption and trade shift from traditional food crops to horticulture and 
other non-traditional (high value) commodities.  Moreover, relative to other countries, India has 
considerable comparative advantages in having a very large (growing and largely un-tapped) 
domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver for near term 
agriculture growth.  Nonetheless, beyond the domestic market there are also strong comparative 
and competitive advantages in developing high value agricultural trade, which is currently 
negligible.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8. In Assam, agriculture and related sectors are the principal occupation of the vast majority of 
rural population in terms of employment and livelihood. About 90 percent of state’s population 
lives in rural areas and is mostly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.  Agriculture and 
the allied sectors directly or indirectly support more than 75 percent of the population, providing 
employment to about 50 percent of the total workforce.  While the average operational holding in 
India is 1.10 hectare, Assam’s farmer families are predominantly small and marginal (85%) with 
an average land holding of only 0.63 hectare. 
 
9.      The recently concluded the Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP) was 
instrumental in increasing cropping intensity, on-farm productivity and diversification of 
agriculture in the state. Supported by AACP and other Government of Assam (GoA) initiatives, 
high value horticulture has seen a significant growth in production - the annual growth rate of 
production of fruits, spices and vegetables was 19.2, 6.4 and 72.2 percent respectively in the last 
decade, with Assam contributing significantly to national production in commodities like ginger, 
banana, pineapple, litchi, etc. As such AACP has laid the foundations for long term agriculture 
transformation in the state by shifting the focus from rice production towards diversification into 
high value agriculture production (vegetables, spices, fish, dairy etc.).  This move towards higher 
value products offers opportunities to increase contribution of agriculture to Assam’s growth. 
 
10. Diversification to higher value commodities and opportunities in specialized commodities 
reflect significant opportunities and challenges for farming communities in Assam:  growing 
specialized commodities would need adoption of rapidly changing technologies and quality 
standards.  Smallholder farmers face significant challenges in learning about and adopting rapidly 
changing agriculture technologies.  The Bank supported AACP has successfully introduced the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model, a participatory, decentralized 



planning, funding and implementation of technology dissemination to district, block and village 
levels in partnerships with farmer groups, and different line departments.  While the ATMA 
platform has introduced improvements in technology transfer and demand driven extension, the 
current approach focuses mainly on production related issues.  Its capacity needs to be 
strengthened to enhance the ability of farmers to adopt efficient and market led production and 
post-harvest practices for meeting the volume, timing and quality requirements of different 
markets. 
 
11. The key constraints in structural transformation of agriculture in Assam are limited market 
access, poor post-harvest handling infrastructure and fragmented supply chains:  agriculture 
marketing in Assam is characterized by a multiplicity of regulatory authorities in the state (viz., 
local panchayats, municipalities and state agriculture marketing board).  Reforms would be 
needed not only to harmonize the regulatory regime in the state, but also for the development of 
alternative marketing options for farmers.  The supply chain is characterized by the dominance of 
middlemen at different levels, involving pre-harvest contractors, forwarding agents, commission 
agents, wholesalers, sub-wholesalers and retailers.  The existence of multiple intermediaries 
causes prices to snowball with each transaction.  Despite the comparative production advantage in 
agriculture and allied commodities, and emerging marketing opportunities, conversion of this 
advantage into competitive food processing industries has proved to be a challenge in the state.  
There is low investment in assets and limited technology penetration across the food processing 
sector in the state, even though this sector contributes about 22 percent of the industrial output 
and represents 26 percent of gross value add of the state.  The food processing sector is largely 
unorganized and operates on a small scale.  Facilitating the development of organized Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) both for value addition and job creation, would require 
handholding, business facilitation services, and facilitation of access to financing, along with 
critical regulatory changes for agro and allied MSMEs to flourish in the state. 
 
12.     GoA recognizes that creating conditions for agriculture based rural transformation in the 
long term would require:  (i) a shift away from a focus on on-farm production towards value 
addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture value-chains; (ii) a focus on productivity 
towards resilience of agriculture production systems in order to deal with the effects of climate 
change; and (iii) creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a dynamic agri-business 
and enterprise sector in Assam.  Furthermore, GoA at the highest level is committed to 
transforming the agriculture and allied sector to a more commercial and market oriented 
production; promoting MSMEs and implementing necessary reforms for realizing the project 
goals. GoA has also stated its intention that this project will form the nucleus of a much larger 
government agribusiness and rural transformation program. Fundamentally this will involve 
mainstreaming of project’s initiatives in government programs and policies as well as 
convergence of various public programs to deliver along the objectives enshrined in this project. 
Especially the government will oversee the refocusing and strengthening of training and human 
resources program to support (agriculture) enterprise development activities in Assam.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
13.   The proposed World Bank support to this project is consistent with the current Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (2013-2017). The CPS outlines Bank support to India under 
the three pillars of integration, transformation and inclusion with a cross-cutting focus on 
improving governance, environmental sustainability and gender equality.  The proposed project is 
aligned along at least two of these three pillars – transformation, and integration.  Under 
transformation, the project will directly help achieve one of the intended outcomes of the CPS, 



which is increase investor confidence and inward financial flows into the agriculture sector (CPS 
para 43).  The broader objective would be to instill a collective entrepreneurial spirit where 
producers shift from being “price takers” of primary produce, with no or very little influence over 
the market to being more business and value focused.  A key project thrust will be on enhancing 
agglomeration of producers to improve economies of scale in producing, processing and 
marketing.  In parallel with this, the project will support agriculture and livestock productivity 
(including value and incomes) through essential technology transfer in production and improved 
post-harvest and market operations, and also explore and pilot possible financing modalities to 
support entrepreneurship and agri-business (CPS outcome 2.4 para 86 and 89).  Overall, the 
support of the project to the development of higher value commodities and more efficient supply 
chains will underpin ongoing structural transformation of the economy (CPS para 34).  Under 
integration, the project offers the opportunity to increase gross state domestic product (GSDP) 
growth by stimulating private sector investment and agri-enterprise development in Assam, a 
special category state. (CPS, Outcome 1.4).  
 
14.   The project will also leverage the pent-up demand and natural resource advantages of the 
state as well as improve the investment climate (CPS para 72).  In particular, the focus will be on 
processed food, agribusiness, logistics and infrastructure, and MSME finance and insurance. The 
project will establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills 
training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs (CPS, Outcome 
1.3). Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the WBG’s goal of promoting shared 
prosperity.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
15. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “increase value-added and 
improve resilience in the production and processing of selected agriculture commodities, focusing 
on small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs in targeted districts”.  
 
16. Project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the MSME 
segment.  Others would include farmer producer organizations, sector management companies, 
and other value chain participants.  During preparation, specific attention would be given to 
gender inclusion in project design and implementation arrangements. The methodology followed 
to identify targeted districts is elaborated in the Annex 3, attached to the PCN.

Key Results (From PCN)
17. The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  
 
a) Increase in value addition by agri-enterprises; 
b) New agri-enterprises established in the targeted districts; 
c) Number of jobs created, including for women (percent); 
d) Increase in value of agricultural marketed output per farm (in formal partnership);  
e) Increase in market oriented production – (% of farmer and area under cultivation); and  
f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage).

D.  Concept Description

18.   The proposed project would support, value addition in the production and post-harvest 
segments of selected agriculture value-chains; facilitate agribusiness investments through 


inclusive business models that provide opportunities to small farmers as well as stimulate the 
establishment of new small and medium agribusiness enterprises; and support resilience of 
agriculture production systems in order to better manage increasing production and commercial 
risks associated with climate change, in the targeted districts . The project would adopt a cluster 
strategy within the targeted districts to generate economies of scale; promote vertical and 
horizontal links between local agricultural enterprises; enable diffusion of innovations; leverage 
network externalities; and channel public support for services and infrastructure. By adopting a 
cluster approach, the project would enable all the value chain participants to develop competitive 
and innovative products that meet market demands rapidly and successfully. 
 
19.    The project would achieve the PDO by:  (i) promoting investments in agri-enterprises, 
reducing the business and transaction costs, facilitating access to finance for agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or policy change; (ii) 
supporting the development of a modern supply chain; improved information communication 
technologies (ICT) based farm information and intelligence services, and alternative marketing 
channels; and (iii) improving producer’s access to knowledge, technologies and infrastructure so 
that they are able to respond to market opportunities and climate variability. 
 
20.    By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions of the growth nexus (business 
environment, key infrastructure, access to basic services, local governance), the proposed project 
aims to remove key constraints to business development and strengthen the platform for growth in 
agriculture and allied sectors within targeted districts.  By doing so, it will contribute to the key 
aspects of the GoI, GoA and the Bank’s CPS strategic objectives related to faster and broader 
agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. In line with the PDO, the project will have 
the following components. 
 
Component A: Support to Agri Enterprise Development 
 
21. The focus of this component to enhance the pace of agricultural enterprise growth and 
employment in the targeted districts.  This would be done by establishing a cohesive institutional 
platform, and securing increased private sector investment in the development of value chains, 
processing and marketing in the targeted districts. 
 
Component B: Farm - Market Infrastructure Development 
 
22. The focus of this component is to establish a modern supply chain from farm to market that 
would enable farmers and other value chain participants to access new markets. This would be 
done by enabling secondary and tertiary processing that creates higher value for the produce; 
improving value realization at the farm level through improved sorting, grading and packing of 
produce that enhances the average price realized; supporting a supply chain infrastructure that 
prevents wastage and value erosion in transportation, and allows access to more distant markets; 
and supporting the development and up-gradation of basic and agriculture-specific infrastructure, 
including transportation linkages, warehousing capacity and wholesale market facilities. 
 
Component C: Market-led Production and Resilience Enhancement 
 
23.  The focus of this component is to enable farmers in the targeted districts to take advantage of 
the rapidly changing consumer demand and ensuring resilience of agriculture production systems 


in order to better manage increasing production and risks associated with climate change.  This 
would be done by diversification of their farm production; and introduction of climate resilient 
solutions. 
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Learning 
 
24. This component will ensure effective implementation of the project activities and monitor and 
evaluate project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes, building on implementation 
experience of AACP.  The component will support: (i) establishment and operations of a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), which will oversee and coordinate activities of the implementing 
agencies of the project; (ii) establishment and operations of Project Implementation Units in the 
respective implementing agencies; and (iii) setting up of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system for the project, including a project management information system, and contracting an 
external M&E agency to monitor project activities and impact. This component will also finance 
dedicated staffing for the project activities, consultancies, training and related material, office 
equipment, and incremental operational costs. The Project will provide investment and technical 
support for the establishment of a sound management information system and information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems and accompanying capacity strengthening of key 
personnel. 
 
25.      Green House Gas (GHG) Accounting: In accordance with guidelines for IDA 17 projects, 
GHG accounting for the proposed Project will be undertaken during the preparation phase. This 
analysis will help to measure the impact of the project on the GHG footprint and also guide 
investments that contribute to climate mitigation, given that world-over agriculture investments 
account of 25% of the GHG emissions. The conceptual framework of the proposed project 
indicates there could be reduced GHG emissions and carbon sequestration benefits as a result of 
interventions such as adoption of improved cropland management, plant nutrient management and 
conservation farming practices, soil health/fertility enhancement, whereas increased emissions 
and decreased carbon stocks could result from cropland expansion and increased electricity and 
fuel consumption during past harvest management, processing and transportation.  There is a 
paucity of specific carbon accounting data for the agri-horticulture sector.  The implementing 
agency will coordinate with the relevant departments to collect the relevant data for these 
analyses.  Furthermore, the recently concluded AACP and other government and donor-aided 
projects will provide a basis for developing carbon balance estimates for the proposed project.  
This accounting exercise will be undertaken using established methodologies that are consistent 
with the international best practice to measure GHG emissions in the proposed project.  The ex-
ante carbon balance tool developed by FAO has been selected as the primary tool for GHG 
accounting in agriculture. The analysis will be carried out by a World Bank team during the 
project preparation phase in close collaboration with state government counterparts and will be 
finalized by project appraisal.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
Though the project location and boundaries are yet to be established, it is expected to cover most of 
the state, and would comprise of critical landscape features, ranging from hills and mountains on the 
one hand and floodplains and wetlands on the other. Water quality in Assam has often come under 
scrutiny for presence of natural fluorides, iron and arsenic. Assam is also endowed with a good forest 


cover and rich biodiversity that is well protected with several designated Protected Areas. The 
project will support small infrastructure development including rural roads that may require land and 
leading to minimal adverse impact on people including those who belong to Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste and other vulnerable groups. Proposed agri-infrastructure development under the 
project could have adverse impacts on natural features, such as, wetlands, if not sited and built 
appropriately. Disposal of construction waste would require monitoring, as it could block natural 
drainage channels if dumped casually. Such impacts would necessitate an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) and management plans and/or framework for managing adverse environmental 
and social impacts and risks.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The state is well versed with the Bank’s safeguard policies, as it has, over the past several years, 
implemented the World Bank funded projects including the recently concluded Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (AACP) wherein the safeguards have been rated as Highly Satisfactory in 
the Implementation Completion and Results Report. The ARIAS society, earlier supported under 
AACP would be responsible for implementing the project’s environmental and social safeguards. 
ARIAS Society would be suitably staffed for this purpose. An ESA will be undertaken that would 
identify the potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The ESA would develop 
and include an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would have 
appropriate mitigation guidance for complying with the Bank’s safeguard polices. The proposed 
ESMF would draw from the experience of implementing the existing one for AACP and build upon 
new activities that would be supported under this project, including wider dissemination and use of 
the Integrated Pest Management Plan developed under AACP. A good reporting mechanism on 
safeguards already exists in AACP and will be continued. At present all project locations are not 
known, therefore the use of framework is proposed. The ESA would be undertaken based on a 
sample of locations covering most of the proposed investment activities under the project. Therefore, 
even though the nature and scope of investment activities would be known, it may so happen that 
actual physical locations may not be known until an advanced stage of preparation. Therefore, an 
ESA will be done during preparation but an ESMF would be used during implementation. As far as 
possible and as the project design evolves, the borrower would ensure that some of the sampling 
locations and sites for the ESA are actual locations/sites proposed for project interventions. In 
addition, the proposed ESMF would include a screening mechanism that would allow for preparation 
of specific EMPs to mitigate adverse impacts of infrastructure investments, once exact location and 
design of infrastructure activities are identified. These would be particularly required for rural feeder 
roads, rural markets and supply chain infrastructure. At this stage, neither the scope and nature of 
infrastructure investments nor the locations are known. By appraisal, the borrower will develop site-
specific EMPs for infrastructure whose locations have been determined and detailed technical 
designs completed.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Mridula Singh (GSU06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes An ESA is required as the project is likely to support 

new activities that were not included in the recently 



OP/BP 4.01 completed AACP.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The State has a widespread network of naturally 
occurring wetlands (beels) and would require 
mapping of potential impacts through project 
supported infrastructure and other agricultural 
investments.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is unlikely to bring any management 
changes to the State’s forest resources that are 
governed under a robust national law.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes There is likelihood of use of pesticides and other 
agrochemicals once project investments are realized. 
The project would promote the wider use of the Pest 
Management Plan and Integrated Pest Management 
Plan that was developed under AACP.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not impact any physical, cultural 
and/or religious sites and will be implemented in 
areas where agriculture is already practiced.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

Yes The policy is triggered, accordingly a Tribal 
Development Framework will be prepared to address 
impact. It will also include an action plan to ensure 
that equal opportunities are provided to access 
benefits.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The policy is triggered as land may be required for 
the small infrastructure and rural roads. Resettlement 
Policy Framework including Social Management 
Framework will be prepared.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not support construction, 
refurbishment and replacement of equipment etc. of 
any dams. It also does not support rehabilitation of 
existing or building any new irrigation schemes 
originating from existing dams in the State.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD During project preparation applicability of this policy 
would be determined based on a technical analysis.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No Project activities do not fall in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The safeguards documentation would require four to six months for completion from the time it is 
started. We expect it to be ready by September 2016.





























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia  OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 
Executing Agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 51,000,000 51 
Inspection and supervision 
fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

IDB (FSO): 9,000,000 9 Interest rate: SCF fixed
(b) 

0.25% 

Local cofinancing: 40,000,000 40 
Credit fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

Approval currency: US$ US$ 

Total: 100,000,000 100 

Project at a Glance 

Program objective/description: To increase legal certainty over rural property. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of 

Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) will sign a 
subsidiary agreement defining the following matters, among others: (a) the method to be used to transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; 
and (b) INRA’s commitment to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); 
(ii) appointment of the Director of INRA’s Planning Bureau (DGP) as the program’s general coordinator and of the program 
component coordinators, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and the contracting of the following 
specialists: financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social management, through a competitive process, in 
accordance with terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) the entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7). 

Special contractual conditions by component: Evidence of the signing and entry into force of the following interagency 

cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA and the Real Property Rights Registry prior to the disbursement to finance activities 
related to public registries under Component 2 (paragraph 3.5); (ii) between INRA and the Forest and Land Social Control and 
Oversight Authority, the Madre Tierra [Mother Earth] Plurinational Authority, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, prior to 
disbursement to finance activities related to the program’s Environmental and Social Management Plan in Component 2 (paragraph 
3.5); and (iii) between INRA and the National Statistics Institute, prior to disbursement to finance activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan (paragraph 3.5). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(b)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-cutting issues
(c)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the 

Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies. 
(b)

 The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balances of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan at a LIBOR-based rate. Once the outstanding 
balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is greater, the rate will be set for this balance. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law). 

 
 

 



 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Property rights over land and agricultural competitiveness. The agriculture 
sector is one of the most important sectors of the Bolivian economy. Between 2002 
and 2014, average annual growth in the sector was 4.16%, accounting for close to 
13.4% of gross domestic product. It employs 30% of the total labor force nationally 
and is even more significant in rural areas where it employs 62% of the labor force. 
The agriculture sector also makes a significant contribution to Bolivian exports; 
between 1999 and 2014, exports grew at an average annual rate of 13%, leaping 
from US$247 million to US$1.29 billion. Over this period, the agriculture sector 
accounted for between 14% and 18% of the total value of the country’s exports.1 
Considering that the economy of rural households is closely tied to agricultural 
activities, growth in the sector contributed to a 21 percentage point reduction in 
rural poverty levels, with poverty falling from 62% to 39% (Castellani and Zenteno, 
2015).  

1.2 Despite the importance of the agriculture sector, a detailed examination shows low 
productivity levels. According to the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), agricultural yield from grain production is 57% of the average 
for South America and 39% in the case of starchy root crops. In addition, a Bank 
analysis shows that growth in Bolivia’s total factor productivity has been lower than 
the regional average, with a decline in efficiency but increases in technological 
change (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Data from the Social and Economic Policy Analysis 
Unit indicate that the area under cultivation increased by 460,000 hectares 
between 2006 and 2014. This means that sector growth has been due more to 
expansion of the area under cultivation than to increased productivity. Sector 
growth was concentrated in a small group of items intended for export in the 
eastern part of the country, where producers have benefited from the region’s 
natural characteristics (soils, topography, and water), a good level of public 
spending on sector public goods, and private investments in intensive systems of 
production with access to financing and the latest technologies. 

1.3 The agriculture sector’s potential contribution to economic growth and rural poverty 
reduction depends on farmers’ increased productivity, particularly among small and 
medium-sized producers (World Bank, 2008; Escobal, J., 2012). In Bolivia, most 
small and medium-sized producers are located in the valleys and highlands. The 
main items of those agricultural producers are crops such as potato, corn, and 
grains. More than 80% of the parcels with pending regularization and titling belong 
to the small farmer category, which includes rural producers with fewer than two 
hectares in the highlands and up to 50 hectares in the lowlands. These agricultural 
producers are estimated to represent 83% of the country’s rural households.2 

1.4 Improving agriculture sector productivity and thus efficiency and sustainability in 
the use of land in Bolivia requires investments in sector public goods to promote 
farmers’ private productive investments (Lopez, 2004, Blackman et al. 2014, 
Quisumbing and Kumar, 2014; Ali, et al., 2014). A requirement for achieving this 

                                                
1
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC). What Does Bolivia Export? 

(http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 
2
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura 

http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura


- 2 - 

objective is to establish secure property rights over land. According to the available 
empirical evidence, such rights reduce the risk of expropriation and give farmers 
the incentive to make investments that increase productivity and the sustainability 
of rural properties. In the Bolivian case, the empirical evidence is limited because 
no rigorous assessments of the impacts of titling on the productivity and 
sustainable management of agricultural producers’ natural resources have been 
done. Nonetheless, empirical evidence in the region shows the positive impact of 
titling on the use of inputs, increased productive investments, stimulation of the 
land market, reduced deforestation, and farmers’ income (Aldana and Fort, 2001, 
Ghatak and Besley, 2010; Deininger and Chamorro, 2004; Hernández and 
Reardon, 2012; Foltz, Larson and Lopez, 2000, Torrero and Field, 2005; Zegarra, 
2008, Gignoux, J. et al. 2013; Lawry et al. 2014; and Rockson et al., 2013). 

1.5 Property rights, sustainability, and conflicts. Property rights in and of 
themselves do not guarantee the sustainable use of natural resources. In 
Nicaragua, the assignment of property rights improved agricultural productivity and 
also increased the rate of deforestation (Liscow, 2013). The preliminary data for 
Bolivia (Santa Cruz) indicate that land titling, particularly for ranchers, increases 
deforestation (Murguia, 2016). Thus, if the regularization of rural property rights is 
not accompanied by a legal framework and the corresponding environmental 
management instruments, the results of rural titling tend to generate environmental 
degradation. In this regard, the evidence shows that a requirement for ensuring the 
positive impacts of rural land titling on environmental management is the ability to 
monitor and penalize violations (OECD, 2009). With respect to social conflicts, 
10% of the last 25 million hectares subject to intervention are paralyzed by social 
conflicts. This problem is estimated to be significant in the area where property 

rights are yet to be regularized, covering 15 million hectares (paragraph 1.6), in that 
small landholdings (minifundios) are involved (Carrasco, 2016). Under this 
scenario, dispute resolution is important to remove barriers to titling. 

1.6 Status of regularization and titling. The Bolivian government has made 
significant strides in the regularization of rural property and the regularization, 
cadastre, titling, and registration of rural lands is reaching its final stage. Table 1 
indicates that the regularization and titling target was approximately 106 million 
hectares. Between 1996 and 2014, the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 
has been involved in interventions covering approximately 93 million hectares as 
follows: (i) it regularized and titled approximately 41 million private hectares, which 
included collective properties (Territorios Indígenas Comunitarios Campesinos 
[Rural Community Indigenous Territories] (TIOCs) and Comunidades 
Interculturales Originarias [Native Intercultural Communities (CIOCs)) and 
individual properties; (ii) it regularized approximately 25 million hectares of public 
lands; and (iii) it made headway with the regularization of rural lands that did not 
yet comply with all the legal and technical requirements, involving 27 million 
hectares. The work of regularization, titling, and registration of rural lands that is 
pending for the next few years is to continue in the areas not yet subject to 
intervention, amounting to 15 million hectares, and to finalize the regularization 
process in 25 million hectares that were already subject to intervention but have 
not yet complied with all the requirements of the regularization process. 

1.7 The indigenous peoples and intercultural communities were the primary 
beneficiaries of INRA’s interventions, for a total of approximately 32 million titled 
hectares, which represents 78% of the total titled area in the country (Table 1). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 3 - 

This is the result of the effect of Law 3,545, which gave priority to the regularization 
and titling of TIOCs and CIOCs. Small and medium-sized properties occupy 
second place in terms of titled area, with 5.6 million hectares, which represents 
14% of the country’s titled area. According to INRA, this individual titling progress 
occurs in settlement areas, Andean-Amazonian transition areas, and integrated 
management areas of the Amboró National Park (Cochabamba and Santa Cruz). 
Lastly, three million hectares held by agricultural companies were dealt with in the 
regularization process, representing 8% of the country’s titled area. The company-
held properties are located in Santa Cruz, Pando, and Beni. 

Table 1. Status of Regularization and Titling between 1996 and 2014. 

Categories 
Titles 

(Number) 

Area 

(Hectares) 
% 

A. Regularization and titling target  - 106,751,722 100 

B. Titled Area 391,685 40,786,475 38.2 

B1. Small property  377,802 3,852,050 9.4 

B2. Medium-sized property 3,148 1,667,651 4.1 

B3. Agricultural company 1,374 3,091,530 7.6 

B4. Community properties (CIOCs)    8,921 9,176,971 22.5 

B5. Rural Community Indigenous Territories (TIOCs) 440 22,998,273 56.4 

C. Regularized public lands - 24,542,520 23.0 

D. Area in the process of being regularized - 26,867,679 25.2 

E. Area without regularization and titling - 14,555,048 13.6 

Source: INRA, 2016 and Colque et al. 2016. 

 

1.8 According to data from INRA (Andrade, 2016), the areas still not covered by the 
titling policy are distributed throughout the country. Nonetheless, the demand for 
titling of rural lands is concentrated primarily in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, 
Cochabamba, Beni, and Santa Cruz. In terms of the number of titles to be 
delivered, La Paz (48%) has the highest percentage, followed by Potosí (15%) and 
Cochabamba (14%). The departments with the largest areas to be titled are: 
Santa Cruz (30%), La Paz (22%), and Beni (22%). 

1.9 Institutional framework of property rights.  The institutional structure for 
establishing property rights over rural land was developed under the Agrarian Law 
of 1953. That law created the National Agrarian Reform Service, which is headed 
by the President and implemented through the National Agrarian Reform Council. 
The Council controlled the operational aspects of the work of titling rural lands at 
that time. This institutional framework was redesigned in 1996 with the enactment 
of Law 1,715/96. With the new law, the Council was replaced by INRA, identified 
under Law 1,715/96 as a technical and legal institution with operational 
responsibilities for defining rural land ownership rights. In 2006, Law 3,545/06, 
which reinstituted the agrarian reform on a community basis, amended Law 
1,715/96 by facilitating the titling of collective lands and establishing that all 
available public lands would preferably be assigned to indigenous or campesino 
peoples or communities that had limited land. It also established that private lands 
(medium-sized property owners and companies) would revert to the State if they 
failed to serve an economic and social function (Endo, 2016; Colque et al., 2016). 

1.10 Laws 1,715/96 and 3,545/06 retained the National Agrarian Reform Service as the 
body responsible for planning, executing, and consolidating the agrarian reform 
process. The Service is made up of: (i) the President, the supreme authority 



- 4 - 

responsible for signing title deeds, among other duties; (ii) the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land (MDRyT), which is responsible for implementing policies 
and other strategic activities in the sector; (iii) the National Agrarian Commission, a 
mixed government/civil society agency charged with community oversight and the 
strategic course of the agrarian reform process; (iv) the Agrarian Judicatura [bench 
of judges], a specialized body for the administration of agrarian justice, made up of 
the Agri-Environmental Tribunal and the Agri-Environmental Courts, for the 
resolution of disputes arising from land ownership and property rights, which was 
conceived as an independent institution and is thus not part of the Service; and 
(v) INRA, an autonomous decentralized public agency under the MDRyT 
responsible, among other things, for steering, coordinating, and executing agrarian 
property regularization policies (Endo, 2016; Colque, et al., 2016). 

1.11 Law 1,715/96 kept unchanged the rural property types previously defined by the 
Agrarian Law of 1953. Rural property types include: campesino site, small 
property, medium-sized property, and agricultural enterprise. However, Law 
1,715/96 added a new type of collective property, the Native Community Land, and 
recognized equal property rights for men and women, defining parity criteria in land 
distribution, management, tenure, and use. Another important change introduced 
by Law 1,715/96 was the development of new instruments recognizing rural 
property rights. The regularization instruments were developed to implement the 
multiple objectives of Law 1,715/96: to regularize property rights, consolidate 
indigenous territories, recover idle lands, certify public lands and distribute them to 
those who need them, resolve disputes, and develop the rural cadastre (Endo, 
2016). 

1.12 The Real Property Rights Registry (DDRR) supplements the institutional 
framework of property rights mentioned above. The DDRR is the Judicial Council 
entity responsible for recording all entries and annotations covering real property 
rights, including real estate and real estate rights, in Bolivia. It was created by the 
Law on the Registration of Real Property Rights of 1887; its operational rules are 
defined in the Civil Code and the regulations approved by Supreme Decree 29,757 
of 2004. For a large-scale rural land regularization and titling operation like that 
proposed in this program, the technical, operational, and technological link 
between INRA and the DDRR is very important for expediting the registration of 
rural properties that have been regularized and surveyed. The workloads 
generated by INRA exceed the existing capacities of the DDRR, which sometimes 
receives packets of more than 10,000 property titles in files and titling data maps 
all at once. 

1.13 Bank actions and other sources of financing. Various funding agencies have 
supported the activities involved in regularizing rural land property rights. The 
World Bank granted a loan of US$24.7 million; the Nordic Development Fund 
financed US$7.5 million; the Kingdom of the Netherlands provided support through 
a nonreimbursable fund of US$8.8 million; the European Union contributed 
US$4 million to the process. The Bank began its support for land titling in Bolivia 
through the “Environmental and Social Protection Project in the Santa Cruz – 
Puerto Suárez Corridor” (1099/SF-BO), through which it financed a titling 
subcomponent amounting to US$2.4 million. The Bank consolidated its 
participation in this area with a land titling operation for US$22 million called the 
“Land Regularization and Legal Cadastre Program” (1512/SF-BO). These funds 
totaled US$70 million and were executed between 1996 and 2012. 



- 5 - 

1.14 The advances made in the area of land regularization are part of a series of 
reforms in the country’s legal framework. Since the National Agrarian Reform 
Council was replaced by INRA, a series of rules was developed to expedite the 
process of regularizing rural lands. Although an institutional structure was created, 
INRA still lacked the capacity to implement the new legal framework for land 
regularization. To overcome the institutional constraints, the decision was made to 
contract land regularization companies, which transferred regularization 
technologies and trained local specialists during contract implementation. With the 
entry into force of Law 3,545/06, the method whereby companies were contracted 
for land regularization became obsolete and INRA assumed the direct execution of 
land regularization. The existing financial resources were thus reallocated to 
finance INRA’s specialized brigades (equipment, vehicles, and specialists). The 
Bank also supported the development, implementation, and linkage of the initial 
versions of the rural property cadastre and registration systems.3 

1.15 Problems in land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration. The 
diagnostic assessments of the process of regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural land indicate that the following issues need to be addressed:  

1.16 Limitations of the regulatory framework. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the existing legal framework (Endo, 2016), the latter permits 
program execution to start. Nonetheless, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) the regularization, titling, and cadastre 
manuals are outdated; (ii) the rural land regularization procedures are not entirely 
suited to the new areas of intervention; (iii) the rural land regularization procedures 
do not incorporate technological changes that will have a positive impact on titling; 
(iv) the current dispute resolution mechanism needs to be reformulated to reduce 
the burden of pending litigation in titling processes; (v) the ability to use land as a 
guarantee for obtaining credit is restricted to medium-sized property and 
agricultural enterprises; and (vi) the costs for maintaining the formal status of rural 
properties are high and the incentives for maintaining the rural cadastre are 
insufficient. 

1.17 Limitations of the regularization process. The cadastral sweep (barrido 
catastral)4 is the most efficient methodology for large-scale regularization of land 
tenure in rural areas with large numbers of producers and low titling levels. The 
cadastral sweep takes advantage of economies of scale; per title costs are thus 
lower than regularization based on individual demand. Operation 1512/SF-BO 
helped the government to implement the cadastral sweep method. Operation 
1512/SF-BO financed the basic inputs for implementing the sweep, including: 
(i) the formation of regularization specialist brigades – contracting of specialists; 
(ii) the purchase of equipment for the field work; and (iii) logistical support. 
According to the regularization diagnostic assessment (Andrade, 2016), in order to 
achieve the program targets, it is essential that: (i) brigade staff members working 
in INRA under contingent contracts be retained throughout program execution; 
(ii) equipment for the field work be modernized; and (iii) the logistical support 
infrastructure be replaced. An estimated 150 to 200 field brigades will need to be 

                                                
3
  The project completion reports (PCR) for project 1099/SF-BO and program 1512/SF-BO detail the efforts 

made by the Bank and the government to overcome the challenges of regularization work in Bolivia. 
4
  The cadastral sweep is a methodology for systemic surveying of each and every one of the rural parcels 

in an area to gather the technical and legal information on the property and its owner for the mass 
regularization of rural property tenure.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319504/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/37382628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/36662436/R


- 6 - 

financed each year. These brigades are made up of seven regularization 
specialists. Each brigade’s field operations require a minimum infrastructure of 
GPS equipment, portable computers, complete stations, and vehicles. 

1.18 Deficiencies of the technological platform. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the technological platform (Solíz, 2016), the current technology is 
capable of continuing the rural land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration 
process. However, the following problems must be overcome: (i) consolidating the 
Land Maintenance and Management System (SIMAT) and the Integrated Cadastre 
System (SIC) as technical tools; (ii) migrating data from the Integrated 
Regularization and Titling System (SIST) to the SIMAT/SIC systems; (iii) replacing 
the use of the SIST with the SIMAT/SIC in all INRA offices; (iv) improving the 
electronic link between INRA and the DDRR for the large-scale property tilting and 
registration process; (v) reorganizing the data centers and updating the data 
servers; (vi) updating the equipment (computers); (vii) developing the INRA nexus 
with GeoBolivia; (viii) reviewing and consolidating administrative systems; 
(ix) cleaning spatial data; (x) completing the process of digitization and indexation 
of the INRA documentary collection; and (xi) developing the INRA platform. 

1.19 Limitations of environmental and social management tools. According to the 
results from the program’s Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) (see Carrasco, 2016), the current legal framework is sufficiently developed 
for the environmental and social management of the rural property regularization 
process. However, the management tools for handling potential environmental and 
social problems stemming from rural property regularization are not fully 
developed. The main conclusion of the SESA indicates that the above weaknesses 
produce a situation in which current regulations are not fully enforced and/or 
compliance with them is not verified. Accordingly, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) forest coverage monitoring does not 
generate information in real time for monitoring and controlling deforestation; 
(ii) the rural cadastre does not include the environmental information needed to 
facilitate monitoring and control at each rural property; and (iii) the tools that INRA 
has for managing social conflicts are inadequate for addressing the complexity of 
the conflicts and the processes for resolving them.  

1.20 Lessons learned. The proposed project has taken into account lessons learned 
from loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO and other similar Bank-financed 
operations in the region (see Table 2).  

  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323300/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 7 - 

Table 2. Lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in the sector 

Problem by work area Reflected in project design 

Legal framework. It is necessary to 

ensure that the legal framework 
allows rural titling to be carried out. 

While the current legal framework allows for moving 
forward with the regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural lands, the program will finance activities to improve 
the regulatory framework. 

Institutional organization. Titling 

requires the participation of various 
public agencies that neither share 
information nor coordinate activities 
well. 

The project will finance the strengthening of key 
institutions involved in the process of regularizing rural 
property.  

Information safeguards. The rural 

cadastre information must be 
protected.  

The working methodology for the cadastral survey will be 
100% digital with backup systems.  

Cadastral survey. The cadastral 

sweep methodology has yielded good 
results. 

The sweep methodology will be improved for working in 
highland areas with small landholdings, through the use 
of unmanned aerial vehicles, for example. 

Monitoring and quality control 
system. The lack of monitoring 

systems makes it difficult to manage 
progress made in rural titling. 

The project will develop an integrated system for 
monitoring progress, including the reactivation of 
participatory monitoring mechanisms. 

Community participation. The 

communities’ participation in the 
titling process was a key factor in the 
success of the operation. 

The program will reinstall the interagency titling 
committees with the participation of authorities from 
indigenous communities and territories. 

Support for permanent institutions. 

It is important to focus efforts on 
supporting permanent institutions. 

The project will support INRA, the DDRR, the Forest and 
Land Social Control and Oversight Authority (ABT), and 
the Mother Earth Plurinational Authority (APMT), which 
are permanent government institutions, in the work of 
regularization and environmental and social 
management of rural property.  

Management of the regularization 
brigades. It is critical to design a 

cadastral sweep methodology with 
incentives and penalties. 

In the first year of program execution, funds will be 
earmarked for the design of a system to monitor the field 
brigades, taking into account incentives for achieving 
goals and penalties. 

Source: OVE, 2014. Comparative Evaluation: Land Regularization and Management, PCRs for the following 
projects: 906/OC-PE, 1340/OC-PE, 1099/SF-BO, and 1512/SF-BO. 

 

1.21 Conceptual overview of the operation. The project is conceived as an operation 
that continues the rural property regularization process initiated by the Government 
of Bolivia through loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO. The project design 
emphasizes the key aspects identified in the diagnostic assessment of the current 
situation: (i) the strengthening of integrated mass sweep campaigns for the 
regularization of rural property, which will make it possible to proceed with rural 
titling on a cost-effective basis; (ii) modernization of the cadastre and public 
registry system, which will help to strengthen the integration of titling entities and 
public registries, as well as the efficient and secure management of cadastral 
information; (iii) strengthening of environmental and social management tools, 
which will help to reduce the environmental and social problems identified; and 
(iv) maintenance of the cadastre and public registry of rural properties, which will 
help to reduce transaction costs for the end user. 

1.22 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020, 
the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019, and the Bank’s strategy 
with Bolivia 2016-2020. The program is consistent with the Update to the 
Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008). Specifically, the program is 



- 8 - 

in line with the challenge of low productivity and innovation, by increasing farmers’ 
productivity related to the establishment of secure land ownership rights. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 
(document GN-2843) in that it contributes to the priority area of increasing 
productivity and diversification in the economy as well as with its strategic 
objectives: (i) promotion of innovation and (ii) provision of quality public goods and 
services. The operation is included in the 2016 Country Programming Document  
and the 2016 Operational Program Report (document GN-2849). Lastly, the 
program is consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management 
Sector Framework (document GN-2709-5), which identifies security of land tenure 
as a key activity for improving productivity and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to increase 
legal certainty over rural property. 

1.23 Target population. The program beneficiaries are small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and indigenous communities. Small and medium-sized 
producers characteristically have small family farming operations, primarily for their 
own consumption and with low levels of access to financing and productive 
technologies. The livelihood of the indigenous communities is based on the use of 
natural resources, along with small-scale farming usually occupying less than one 
hectare.  

1.24 Component 1: Land regularization, titling, and registration (US$74.9 million). 
This component will support rural land regularization, titling, and registration. In this 
respect, the following stages in the process need to be financed: (i) preparatory 
stage, which will support: evaluations of the areas of intervention, preparation of 
the technical and legal diagnostic assessment, increased density of geodetic 
points; (ii) field survey, which will support: dissemination of regularization, signage 
of vertices and boundaries, signing of records of agreement, survey of the rural 
property file, verification of the social function and/or social and economic function, 
dispute resolution, and development of the cadastral database; and (iii) titling and 
registration, which will finance: the preparation of draft resolutions, the signing of 
resolutions, the issuance of property titles, and registration of the titles in the 
DDRR. This component will also support management of social conflicts and the 
activities to be financed include: dispute resolution training for INRA staff; 
implementation of dispute resolution brigades; strengthening of the 
Agri-Environmental Tribunal for dispute resolution, development and 
implementation of customer service protocols and mechanisms, and strengthening 
of INRA’s Transparency Unit. 

1.25 Component 1 will use loan proceeds to finance key inputs for continuing with rural 
land regularization (paragraph 1.17). The key inputs for carrying out the 
regularization work include: (i) retention of INRA temporary staff; (ii) purchase of 
computer equipment, navigation and measuring equipment, and furniture; and 
(iii)  purchase of logistical support vehicles. Up to US$47 million in loan proceeds 
will be used to finance staffing requirements, to hire technical personnel to perform 
land regularization work. The “service delivery contractor” model indicated in 
paragraph 3.21 of the Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants 
financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9) was identified as being suited to 
INRA’s needs. According to this Bank policy, this model is recommended when 



- 9 - 

project execution requires the hiring of large numbers of individuals who deliver 
services on a contract basis. 

1.26 Component 2: Land management (US$14.04 million). This component will 
finance: (i) modernization of INRA’s rural cadastre technological platform and the 
DDRR’s rural land registration platform to facilitate the administration of mass rural 
land cadastre, titling, and registration processes; and (ii) the program’s 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will contribute to the 
social and environmental management of titled land. 

1.27 To modernize INRA’s cadastral system, the component will finance: the 
consolidation of the SIMAT and SIC as technical tools for rural land administration, 
the development and implementation of the INRA–GeoBolivia nexus, the design 
and implementation of the INRA services platform, and the digitization and 
indexation of the INRA documentary collection. To modernize the DDRR 
registration system, the component includes: the development of the DDRR 
services platform; training for DDRR office staff in the use of the platform 
developed; and the implementation of the cadastral maintenance campaigns. To 
implement the ESMP, the component will finance: the strengthening of the national 
forest coverage monitoring system; the development of the environmental 
dimension of the rural cadastre; indigenous land management measures; and 
measures to strengthen the gender focus and interculturality in the titling process.5 

C. Results matrix and key indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with INRA; it shows 
impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, targets, and 
means of verification. The program’s main outcomes are: (i) to regularize and title 
approximately 24.5 million hectares; (ii) to record property rights in the DDRR for 
approximately 1,340,000 parcels of small and medium-sized rural producers, 
benefiting approximately 490,000 families; (iii) to regularize and title the pending 
indigenous territories; (iv) to modernize the cadastral and registration information 
systems; and (v) to institutionally strengthen the Bolivian government in order to 
improve the environmental and social management of land. Over the long-term, 
the impact of the program will be reflected in increased agricultural income for 
small and medium-sized agricultural producers.  

Table 3. Main Results Matrix Indicators 

Impact Indicators 
Frequency of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Per household agricultural 
income (US$) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraph 1.3. Increased productivity 
results in higher income.  

Gross value of agricultural 
production per hectare 
(US$/ha) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4. Greater 
certainty regarding land tenure increases 
productive investment; and this investment 
increases agricultural productivity. 

 

                                                
5
  In the final stage of the design of the Rural Land Regularization Program, the Ministry of the 

Environment and Water, the technical focal point for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), asked the 
IDB for an additional project to be financed by the GEF Fund to implement the environmental dimension 
of the rural cadastre in the amount of approximately US$6 million. This additional project will 
complement the activities envisaged in the program (ESMP). 



- 10 - 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is US$100 million, which will be financed by the Bank 
through a blended loan as follows: US$51 million from Ordinary Capital funds and 
US$9 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The local counterpart is 
US$40 million. The distribution of the financing by source is shown in Table 4 
below: 

Table 4. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Investment category IDB Local Total % 

I. Administration 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

Execution unit 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

II. Direct costs 56.32 35.56 91.88 91.88 

Component 1. Regularization, titling, and 

registration 
46.92 28.01 74.93 74.93 

Component 2. Land management 9.40 7.55 16.95 16.95 

III. Monitoring and evaluation 0.58 - 0.58 0.58 

IV. Audit 0.30 - 0.30 0.30 

Total 60.00 40.00 100.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

Table 5. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB Total  20.95  19.11 9.07  6.95 3.92 60.00 

% 34.9% 31.8% 15.1% 11.6% 6.5% 100% 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. 
The analysis is based on the program’s expected incremental costs and benefits 
using a time horizon of 15 years and a discount rate of 12%. Program costs 
include investment, operation, and maintenance. The benefits stem from an 
estimate of marginal changes in agricultural income as a result of improvements in 
land tenure certainty and reduced processing time for registering property. Data 
from the 2008 Agricultural Survey, the 2013 Agricultural Census, and INRA titling 
databases were used to quantify the direct benefits associated with an 
improvement in the land tenure situation. The results indicate that the families that 
obtained title to their land increased their annual agricultural income by US$336 
and the gross value of agricultural production by US$216/household. Surveys and 
process analyses at both INRA and the DDRR office were used to estimate the 
benefits of reduced costs and processing time at the DDRR office. The results 
show benefits amounting to US$22.1 million due to a 16% reduction in processing 
times. The cost-benefit analysis indicates that the program has a positive net 
present value and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 51%. An analysis was done of 
the sensitivity to variations in the speed with which the benefits of titling were 
generated. In the worst case, in which the benefits increase gradually, the IRR is 
36%. The benefits of reduced processing time for registration exceed the expected 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553


- 11 - 

costs of maintaining the cadastre, which increases system sustainability by 
transferring these benefits to the users. 

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.4 This program has been classified as a Category B operation in accordance with 
the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). During the 
preparation of the program a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) was developed; it determined that the program would have significant 
positive impacts and negative risks and impacts. The principal risks identified in the 
SESA were summarized in the program’s environmental and social management 
report (ESMR). They include: (i) failure to meet the indigenous peoples’ demand 
for titling due to conflicts already existing in the area of intervention; (ii) weakening 
of campesino communities’ organizations due to the demand for individual titling; 
(iii) maintenance of gender inequality in terms of access to and use of the land; 
(iv) exacerbation of existing social conflicts and creation of new conflicts due to 
land titling; and (v) loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services in lowlands due to 
the deforestation of titled properties. A program environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) was developed to mitigate these risks and negative 
impacts. Table 6 summarizes the main risks and mitigation measures proposed in 
the ESMP. Thus, the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies have been 
fulfilled, especially those of the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP-765). The ESMR 
presents compliance with the safeguards policies in detail (paragraph 3.18 of the 
ESMR). Lastly, consultation processes have been carried out, resulting in records 
of agreement with the program signed by the principal national organizations 
representing the program’s beneficiaries (paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23 of the ESMR). 

Table 6. Main Risks and Mitigation measures  

Problem and risks (ESMR) Main Mitigation Measures (ESMP) 

Problem: Remaining demand from indigenous 

people in lowlands consists of lands where 
third parties are present.  
Risk: Failure to provide titling for indigenous 

populations and potential fragmentation of 
their territories. 

(i) Participatory mechanisms will be implemented for the 
titling of the remaining areas; 
(ii) The extent to which the territorial demand of the 
indigenous populations is met will be evaluated; 
(iii) INRA will be trained to incorporate the intercultural 
approach in rural land titling activities.  

Problem: Parceling of collective lands in 

peasant communities. 
Risk: Weakening of community organizations. 

(i) Will contribute to making decisions that are appropriate 
for communities by providing information on the 
advantages and disadvantages of collective and individual 
titling. 

Problem: Gender inequality in access to and 

use of land. 
Risk: Continued gender inequality in access to 

and use of land through rural titling. 
 

(i) INRA’s Gender Unit will be strengthened; 
(ii) INRA will be trained to implement a gender approach 
in titling and registration; 
(iii) Women’s knowledge/exercise of their rights over the 
land will be promoted.  

Problem: Exacerbation of existing conflicts 

and emergence of new social conflicts; 
Risk: Delay in the regularization of property 

rights.  

(i) A comprehensive strategy for resolving disputes over 
rural land will be implemented; 
(ii) INRA staff will be trained in dispute resolution; 
(iii) Specialized dispute resolution brigades will be formed 
in INRA; 
(iv) The dispute resolution capacity of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal will be strengthened. 

Problem: Increased deforestation of titled 

properties; 
Risk: Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 

services.  

(i) The national plant cover monitoring system will be 
strengthened; 
(ii) The environmental dimension of the rural cadastre will 
be developed; 
(iii) Soil use plans will be updated. 

Source: Program’s Environmental and Social Management Report and Environmental and Social 

Management Plan, 2016. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319558/R


- 12 - 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, INRA has the institutional 
capacity needed to assume responsibilities as the executing agency for the 
proposed operation. The results indicate that programming and organizational 
capacity, execution capacity, and control capacity are at a satisfactory level of 
development and present a low level of risk. However, based on the risk analysis, 
some institutional weaknesses affecting the institution’s fiduciary capacity have 
been identified. Accordingly, an institutional development plan was drawn up to 
mitigate the risks identified. The main actions include: (i) contracting procurement 
and financing specialists to strengthen execution capacities; (ii) deepening and 
institutionalizing an operational framework for risk management; and 
(iii) developing a framework of internal procedures for accounting and cash flow, as 
well as updating internal administrative management documents. 

E. Other project risks 

2.6 The SESA has identified the risk that the presence of third parties with legitimate 
rights within the lowland TIOCs may become an obstacle for completing the titling 
of all the territory claimed by these TIOCs. This could turn into a reputational risk 
for the Bank. To mitigate this risk, Component 1 includes participatory titling 
mechanisms6 that involve the authorities of the TIOCs, to reach consensus on 
titling processes and results. In addition, the ESMP includes a diagnostic 
assessment of the extent to which the territorial demand of lowland indigenous 
peoples is met, as well as the formulation of new public policies in the event that 
this demand has not been addressed. An extensive process of consultation with 
the principal organizations representing those benefiting from and affected by land 
titling was carried out during the preparation of the program. These consultations 
have resulted in the signing of records of agreement with the program by the 
participants, beyond what is required for projects with the identified level of risk and 
impacts (see paragraphs 3.20 to 3.24 of the ESMR for more details on the 
consultations). 

2.7 As indicated earlier, the Bolivian government has been financially supporting the 
regularization of rural property for the last 20 years. The proposed program, with a 
total cost of US$100 million, will complete the work of regularizing rural lands 
throughout the country, involving 106 million hectares. Once the investment for 
regularizing rural properties is completed, long-term sustainability will depend on 
the ability of the key stakeholders to keep the information on rural properties up to 
date, both in the rural cadastre system (INRA) and in the Real Property Rights 
Registry (DDRR) system, as identified in the report on the legal framework for the 
regularization of rural property (Endo, 2016). The program seeks to improve, 
simplify, and reduce the costs of rural cadastre and property registration services, 
as well as to generate information on obligations and benefits so that owners will 
have incentives and will report to the official entities the existence of changes in 
property rights (through market transfers or inheritance) or through cadastral 
conservation processes (subdivisions or consolidations). 

                                                
6
  The Interagency Titling Committees are the main mechanism of participation. The participants in these 

committees are the authorities of indigenous and campesino organizations and the representatives of 
the program’s beneficiaries. The role of the committee is to reach agreement with INRA on the work 
plans for the titling of beneficiary communities and TIOCs and to promote the beneficiary population’s 
participation in and monitoring of the execution of these plans. The role of the committees will be duly 
clarified in the program’s Operating Regulations. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R


- 13 - 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the executing agency will 
be INRA, legally established under Law 1,715/96 as a decentralized public entity of 
the MDRyT with national jurisdiction and legal status.  

3.2 INRA’s responsibilities as executing agency include: (i) maintaining consolidated 
accounting records that make it possible to identify the sources and uses of 
program funds by component; (ii) preparing and submitting disbursement requests 
and supporting documentation to the Bank, together with the financial statements 
for the components under its responsibility; (iii) contracting the program’s annual 
external audits and submitting the respective reports to the Bank; (iv) preparing 
open calls for proposals and bid processes, processing contracts and payments, 
and providing technical supervision of the contracts for activities under its 
responsibility; (v) preparing the consolidated monitoring and evaluation reports 
required, submitting them to the Bank, and making them publicly available; and 
(vi) ensuring compliance with the contractual clauses established in the loan 
contract, the program’s Operating Regulations, and the agreements signed for 
program implementation. A condition precedent to the first disbursement will 
be the signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and INRA 
defining the following aspects among others: (i) the method to be used to 
transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; and (ii) INRA’s commitment to conduct 
program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.  

3.3 Program execution will use INRA’s existing organizational structure, in both 
technical and fiduciary (procurement and finances) and legal matters. In this 
respect, the Planning Bureau (DGP) will be designated as the entity responsible for 
the general coordination of the program and the ESMP; the Regularization and 
Titling Bureau will be designated as the entity responsible for the execution of 
Component 1; the Land Management Bureau will be designated as the entity 
responsible for the execution of Component 2; and, lastly, the Administration and 
Finances Bureau will manage the program’s budget, procurement, legal analysis, 
and financial control. 

3.4 The Director of INRA’s DGP will serve as the general coordinator of the program 
with sufficient autonomy to make operational decisions, prepare all documents, 
program actions, and coordinate with the participating entities and the IDB. A 
condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the appointment of the 
Director of INRA’s DGP as the general coordinator of the program, 
appointment of the program component coordinators, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, and the contracting of 
financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social 
management specialists through a competitive process, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.  

3.5 During program preparation, provision was made for the signing of interagency 
collaboration agreements between INRA and the DDRR Office, the APMT, INE, 
and the ABT. These agreements will lay the foundation for cooperation among 
those involved and will describe the activities covered under the agreement, the 
parties’ commitments, including the operation and maintenance of investments, 



- 14 - 

and other conditions necessary for execution. Evidence of the signing and entry 
into force of the following interagency cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA 
and the DDRR, will be a special condition for the disbursement of financing for 
activities related to public registries under Component 2; (ii) between INRA, the 
ABT, the APMT, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the program’s 
ESMP under Component 2; and (iii) between INRA and INE, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan. 

3.6 To facilitate implementation of the ESMP, in the context of the program, INRA may 
provide cooperation and technical coordination to the relevant public institutions 
that assist in achieving the program’s objective. 

3.7 Program Operating Regulations. Execution of the program will be governed by 
the program’s Operating Regulations. These regulations establish guidelines and 
operational procedures related to: (i) the responsibilities of the entities participating 
in the program; (ii) operational procedures for the planning and programming of the 
activities to be financed; (iii) financial and procurement instructions; (iv) procedures 
for the program’s environmental and social management; and (v) operational 
instructions for the implementation of activities to monitor and evaluate the 
program’s impact. The entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, will be a 
contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement.  

3.8 Procurement. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services funded 
with program resources will be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies 
as set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and the provisions of the 
loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (see 
Annex III), including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. That plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operations and computer equipment, furniture, 
the contracting of individual consultants and consulting firms, and other items. In 
addition, the procurement plan includes the contracting of “service delivery 
contractors” corresponding to the staff engaged in the regularization and titling 
process (paragraph 1.25). The contracting procedures currently used by INRA for 
annual or multiyear periods will continue to be used for these individual 
consultants. The procurement plan will be updated each year or whenever there 
are substantial changes, subject to the Bank’s approval. Procurement may be 
made using the ex post review method as established in Annex II. 

3.9 Recognition of retroactive expenses. The Bank may recognize and charge 
against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the local contribution) in 
eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to the loan approval date for operational 
and temporary staffing expenses, provided that requirements substantially similar 
to those established in the loan contract have been met. Said expenses must have 
been incurred on or after 6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in 
no case may they include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date. 

3.10 Audit. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the end of 
INRA’s fiscal year, the program’s annual audited financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank. The audit will be performed by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The determination of the scope and other related 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765


- 15 - 

aspects will be governed by the Guide to Financial Management for Projects 
Financed by the IDB (OP-273-6) and the guide on financial statements and 
external audit.  

B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements 

3.11 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. INRA will prepare 
and send a monitoring report to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of 
each six-month period during project execution. These reports will focus on the 
achievement of the output indicators and progress made in terms of outcomes, the 
identification of problems encountered and corrective measures adopted. INRA will 
submit to the Bank’s satisfaction the annual work plan (AWP) corresponding to the 
upcoming year, no later than within the final quarter of each year during project 
execution. INRA will perform two independent evaluations financed using loan 
proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no later than 
90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been executed; and (ii) the final 
evaluation will be conducted no later than 90 days after 90% of the project’s funds 
have been executed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of the 
data in the monitoring system, the degree to which the expected outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts established in the Results Matrix have been achieved, as 
well as the level of compliance with the ESMP, including progress made in the 
social and environmental indicators. 

3.12 Evaluation. The impact estimates will be based on the differences-in-differences 
method applied to a panel of households that includes a treatment group and two 
control groups. To this end, provision has been made for two surveys, a baseline 
and the final evaluation. The proposed sample includes the non-random 
identification of a group of municipios with a high percentage of titling in the first 
two years of the program. Later, through a propensity score matching process, a 
control group of municipios with a high percentage of titling prior to 2016 (control 
group 1) and another control group of municipios that will be titled at the end of the 
program (control group 2) will be identified. The municipios in control group 1 will 
serve to verify the proportion of attributable marginal change over time, while the 
municipios in control group 2 will be used to measure the program’s impact in the 
execution period. The sample for the baseline study is estimated to include 3,500 
farmers distributed in 50 municipios (20 treated and 30 in the two control groups; 
households will be selected at random within each municipio). A similar sample will 
be used for the final evaluation. The data collection budget has been included in 
the project. The design of the operation provides a good opportunity for generating 
empirical evidence on the impact of rural land titling on productivity, income, and 
the sustainable use of natural resources. 

 
































































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA 

 

 

 

PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 

 

THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)  

(AR-X1006) 

 

 

 

LOAN PROPOSAL 


PROJECT SUMMARY 

ARGENTINA 
PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 
THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT 

PROJECTS – (AR-X1006)  
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Argentine Republic 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Original WAL: 15.25 years 

Disbursement period: 4 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Inspection and supervision fee: (b) 

IDB (OC): 100,000,000 76 Interest rate: LIBOR based 

Local 31,426,000 24 Credit fee: (b) 

Total 131,426,000 100 Approval currency: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

The objective of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of 
regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent with this purpose. Specifically, the third i ndividual 
operation proposed herein seeks improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change. 

Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: 

The executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC), will provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations 
have been approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank, including the Environmental and Social Manual (ESM) (paragraph 3.3). 

Special contractual conditions for environmental and social execution: 

Those established in the environmental and social management report (ESMR) will be included (paragraph 2.6).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as well as 

currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests. 
(b) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 

lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

  



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

 Recent context on the development of the agricultural sector in Argentina  

1.1 In Argentina, the agrifood sector accounts for around 10% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), and 20% of GDP including the agroindustry sector. The sector generates 
65% of total exports (US$35 billion) and 36% of employment. The country’s Pampa 
region1 generates 90% of agricultural production by value and 80% of the sector’s 
exports. The non-Pampa agriculture sector accounts for around 65% of agricultural 
exploitation, generates 20% of total production, and provides 54% of all rural jobs to 
220,000 rural families, the majority of them without their own capital (INDEC, 
Gallacher, and Lema, 2014).  

1.2 Over the last 10 years, Argentina’s agricultural sector passed through three distinct 
periods of sector and macroeconomic context that significantly affected its structure 
and performance. Between 2006 and 2012, the strong growth of the sector’s grain 
exports stood out, a result mainly of high demand from Asian countries and the 
agricultural capacity of the Pampa to meet growing international demand. Six 
products accounted for 65% of all exports, with a significant contribution from the 
soy chain and with export destinations highly concentrated: 82% of the soy was 
exported to China and 60% of the wheat to Brazil. For agricultural products, 30% is 
exported without any processing, and only 54% of agribusiness exports are products 
with basic processing (soy oil and flour). Although the expansion of soy was 
concentrated in the Pampa provinces, growing areas have also expanded to other 
regions, causing changes in land use and replacement of traditional crops (Anlló, 
Bisang, and Salvatierra, 2010).  

1.3 A second contextual period from 2012 to 2015 was characterized by the application 
of policies resulting in strong macroeconomic distortions: taxes and quantitative 
restrictions on agricultural exports (grains mainly), foreign-exchange controls and 
differentiated exchange rates, import controls, price controls, and targeted 
subsidies. Estimates from the IDB Agrimonitor (2014) show that from 2007 to 2012, 
producers generated net transfers to the public purse (via tax collection) and to 
consumers (through lower prices) that averaged US$11 billion annually, accounting 
for more than 30% of the value of the sector’s production. This policy framework 
caused productive and export activity in general to stall, but particularly impacted the 
non-Pampa regional economies, since as described in the following section, these 
regions face significant development gaps, forcing them to compete with greater 
disadvantages (Gallacher and Lema, 2014). 

1.4 A third period of context began with the change of government in December 2015, 
one of whose first measures was to eliminate the macroeconomic and sector policy 
distortions (Argentina, Country Development Challenge 2016 – CDC). Along these 
lines, restrictions on corn and wheat were eliminated and restrictions on soy were 
reduced; the exchange rate was free floated and foreign exchange restrictions were 
removed, as were administrative price and import controls. The new government 
seeks to reposition Argentine agriculture to make it competitive in external markets, 

                                                
1  Argentina’s provinces are grouped into the following five broad geographic regions: (i) Pampa region; 

(ii) Northeast region (NEA); (iii) Northwest region (NWA); (iv) Cuyo Region; and (v) Patagonia region. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
incentivize private investment in cutting-edge technology, and focus attention on 
structural shortcomings and development gaps that affect the sector, particularly in 
the more vulnerable regional economies that have fallen behind in terms of social 
and economic development (Belgrano Plan). 

 Gaps in regional development and priorities for competitiveness and 
developing rural regional economies  

1.5 Development gaps in regional economies, particularly the Norte Grande (NG) 
provinces, are notable. The per capita GDP in the NG is 47.5% of that of the nation 
as a whole. With 20.7% of the total population, the NG only generates 9.8% of the 
country’s GDP and exports around 10% of the national total. (Meloni, 2012; 
Argentina CDC). In a study on production and technology gaps for the agricultural 
sector, Cuervo (2016) tracks the Global Yield Gap in Agriculture. The index 
measures the production gap based on maximum achievable yield and actual yield 
(farm yield) for national-scale field crops. The production gap shows low relative 
levels of technical efficiency: 41.5% for corn, followed by wheat with 41% and soy 
with 31.7%. Measured as “yield” differences in the production of national field crops 
(cereals and oilseeds) for the 2011-2014 period, the productive gap figures show 
that the NG’s technical efficiency index in corn is 62% that of the humid Pampa area, 
while for soy it is 82%, for wheat it is only 53%, sorghum stands at 62%, and 
sunflower at 74%. 

1.6 A number of factors affect the regional gaps in technology and development for 
Argentina’s rural regional economies, with the following generally standing out: (i) a 
deficit in production infrastructure, particularly irrigation, connectivity, and rural 
logistics infrastructure, as well as dependable access to energy sources; (ii) climate 
change and its implications for water availability for high quality and high volume 
agricultural production; (iii) deficits in services for improving competitiveness and 
value added, restricting productivity and innovation; and (iv) institutional, 
governance, and social participation weaknesses, both public and within private 
organizations and associations of small and medium-sized rural producers. (Lema, 
2010; Lissi and Losi, 2010; Leyva, 2016; Bisang, Campi, and Aniló, 2013). These 
factors are described below. 

1.7 Productive infrastructure: Irrigation. According to the 2014 National Irrigation 
Plan and the study “Potencial de Ampliación del Riego en la Argentina,” [Potential 
for Expanding Irrigation in Argentina, United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), PROSAP, World Bank, 2015], Argentina has a little more than 
2 million hectares of irrigated land, with potential to expand that to around 6 million 
hectares.2 The non-Pampa regions are the most dependent on this infrastructure for 
agricultural development. Half of all irrigated land is in dry regions with annual 
precipitation of less than 500 mm (e.g. the Andean areas of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán, 
Catamarca, La Rioja, San Juan, and Mendoza), while 20% is in the semi-dry central 
and northern regions, with between 600 mm and 800 mm of rain during the summer. 
The water stress situation in these regions is worsening due to the effects of climate 
change and more intense drought periods. Irrigation accounts for 70% of total water 
consumption in Argentina, and 75% of the water used for this purpose comes from 

                                                
2  Including expansion over existing areas, new areas, and complementary irrigation.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
surface sources, generally reservoirs created by dams and river diversion, with the 
other 25% coming from aquifers through individual wells. 

1.8 The four irrigation systems identified by the program have low efficiency (60%) as a 
result of: (i) main canals that are not lined (75%); (ii) secondary canals that are not 
lined (80%); and (iii) little use of pressurized irrigation systems (25% of farmers). The 
records and technical evaluations of the systems rehabilitated by PROSAP show 
that it is possible to increase initial efficiency levels from 60% to over 90% in terms 
of water loss reduction. Also, in terms of technology, at the level of the individual 
farm, the use of inefficient irrigation technology is still prevalent (e.g. surface 
irrigation) partly due to limited management capacity and knowledge, but also 
because of the property investment costs. The improved gravity systems have an 
average cost of US$398/hectare, but with objective efficiency of 65%, while 
pressurized irrigation systems (micro spray, drip, pivot) that achieve efficiency of 
80% to 90%, cost between US$2,600/hectare and US$4,000/hectare 
(FAO-PROSAP).  

1.9 The PROSAP interventions address the investment niche needed to rehabilitate 
existing systems and expand irrigated areas in provinces with a high degree of water 
stress, while targeting the needs of small and medium-sized producers. In the NG, 
investments have been identified of around US$3.6 billion that would make it 
possible to increase arable land by between 22% and 50% (approximately 320,000 
hectares). In any case, the success of irrigation interventions requires ensuring 
proper coordination between three areas: (i) institutional and legal, including 
regulatory frameworks, land titling and registration, institution-strengthening, and 
development of financially-autonomous user organizations; (ii) economic, including 
accessible financing instruments, viable public-private partnership models, 
affordable water fees and prices, and tax incentives; and (iii) technical, for dealing 
with cutting-edge engineering and technology, modern water information systems, 
and environmental studies. Investments in irrigation infrastructure financed by 
PROSAP have included actions in these three areas and contributed to improving 
productivity in the intervention areas (see paragraphs 1.19, 1.20, and 1.21).  

1.10 Productive infrastructure: Rural roads and rural energy. Of the total volume of 
cargo transported, 95% is moved over the country’s road network. Annual average 
daily traffic has been increasing, but not evenly across all regions, with significant 
imbalances for cargo traffic (Agosta, R. 2010). For rural economies in the non-
Pampa provinces, the poor condition of secondary and tertiary roads results in: 
(i) high transportation and logistical costs; and (ii) poor accessibility to large 
expanses of territory. For example, the project for secondary route RT13 in 
Corrientes province shows that the route is closed on average more than 80 days 
out of the year. RT13 is 163 km, unpaved and without drainage. In the rainy season, 
70 km of it (43%) is impassable. This worsens the competitiveness of non-Pampa 
rural areas considering that for the main exportable grains and oilseeds, logistical 
costs of transportation to the ports or mill account for 30% of the price for NEA and 
NWA producers (IDEA. FIEL, 2009). Likewise, regarding the rural public energy 
infrastructure, significant gaps and coverage needs are evident. Nationally, more 
than 60% of rural homes do not have access to electricity, with the farms furthest 
from the grid’s main lines being the most affected (Mendoza, 2016).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.11 Climate change challenges. Given the fundamental role that Argentina plays in 

global food security, addressing extreme events resulting from climate change is of 
vital importance considering their impact on agricultural activity and the production 
and provision of food. Agricultural and livestock activity are estimated to contribute 
28% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, for which reason these 
sectors are a central focus for the government as it complies with its goal of reducing 
GHG emissions by 15% by 2030, as established in its intended nationally 
determined contribution (INDC) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  

1.12 According to Argentina’s Second National Message on Climate Change, there is 
evidence that the effects of climate change have contributed to glacier melt in the 
Andes Mountains, increasing desertification, and an increased recurrence in forest 
fires over the last 10 years. From the perspective of impact on agriculture, the most 
severe effects manifest themselves through water stress and water availability for 
production, particularly in the areas of Cuyo, NEA, and NWA where PROSAP is 
engaged (Argentina: Second National Message; ECLAC 2012; Ludeña, Wilk, and 
Quiroga).  

1.13 The Cuyo region has been under a water emergency during 7 of the last 10 years, 
and the trend toward declining availability of water directly impacts availability of the 
irrigation needed to maintain the current levels of irrigation-dependent wine and fruit 
production (Brown, 2015). According to a study entitled “The Economics of Climate 
Change in Argentina” (ECLAC, 2014), if adaptation measures are not taken, climate 
change-related productivity losses could reach 17% of the national agriculture 
sector’s value added, along with drops in yield of between 11% and 16% for wheat, 
15% and 24% for corn, and 14% and 25% for soy. In terms of its effect on irrigation, 
in a study of Argentina’s irrigation potential, the FAO reports potential climate 
change-related productivity losses in areas under irrigation equivalent to the loss of 
325,000 hectares, or production value of US$900 million. 

 
Table 1. Production losses due to climate change in areas under irrigation (in 1,000s of ha) 

 

*FAO-PROSAP World Bank (2015). 

51

74 78

58

18

62
29

9

1

8

22 24 22 19 7
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Central Cuyo NWA NEA Patagonia

Underground irrigation Surface irrigation

Losses (% of total surface area)

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
 

1.14 Competitiveness services gaps. Integration of agricultural producers into clusters 
and value chains is necessary for regional economies to take off. The diagnosis of 
Argentina’s CDC indicates that the lower competitiveness of the non-Pampa 
agricultural systems can be partly attributed to the lower degree of sophistication of 
scientific-technological-educational subsystems and of management in general, as 
well as their poor links to agricultural technology supply companies. Along these 
lines, Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris (2008) find that the benefits of increased sector 
clustering are positive and highly significant, although to be effective it requires 
strengthened institutions. Likewise, using company-level data, Long and Zhang 
(2011) show that China’s rapid industrialization is characterized by the growing 
formation of clusters. They find that the clusters help overcome the credit restrictions 
that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face. Scalice (2016) finds in an 
analysis of nine agrifood supply chains in Argentina’s NG that more than 80% of 
small producers of are not part of a value chain, nor do they have access to financial 
services. The author also identifies a number of limitations to developing competitive 
chains and clusters, including: (i) low product quality; (ii) limited access to capital; 
(iii) lack of economies of scale; (iv) weak organizational capacity; and (v) limited 
capacity to innovate. Regarding access to capital, Sanguinetti (2011) identifies 
access to financial services as one of the main restrictions faced by rural areas of 
regional economies, and Lapelle (2007) finds that more than 80% of SMEs in 
regional economies are self-financing. 

1.15 Weaknesses in institutions, governance, and social participation. The various 
provinces are distinctly heterogeneous in terms of their institutional capacities. The 
provinces in the NWA and NEA have institutional quality gaps averaging -2.3 
and -1.2, respectively This means that, compared to the national average, these 
regions are being left behind. (Villalobos, 2015, CDC Argentina). In terms of social 
participation, which is an integral part of governance, unequal access for and 
participation by women is a key weakness. The URC report entitled “Las nuevas 
generaciones de mujeres rurales como promotoras de cambio (2015)” [New 
generations of rural women as agents of change] conducts a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the needs of and opportunities for young rural women. This 
study provides evidence of the relatively low impact of participation among women 
in rural areas, although regional differences are noteworthy (between 5% and 20%), 
and for young women facing a series of disadvantages that intensify in remote rural 
areas, the differences are related to difficulties participating in the labor market while 
caring for members of the household. PROSAP project design has found that only 
5% of the beneficiaries of training or technical assistance are women, and only 
between 0.3% and 3% of land owners in irrigator organizations are women.  

 Progress and outcomes of PROSAP loans from the CLIPP 

1.16 The national government implemented PROSAP in the mid-1990s to support 
agricultural development in the rural economies of the non-Pampa provinces. The 
implementation of this program was mainly focused on the construction of rural 
public works. PROSAP’s first phase was financed by the Bank through operation 
899/OC-AR. Based on that program’s outcomes, in 2008, the Government of 
Argentina requested a CCLIP (AR-X1006) for US$600 million. The CCLIP began 
with operation 1956/OC-AR (PROSAP II), execution of which completed in 2014. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
The second operation, 2573/OC-AR (PROSAP III) was approved in 2011. Its level 
of execution is 90%, and it is set for closure in March 2017. Project completion 
reports (PCR) for loans 899/OC-AR and 1956/OC-AR, as well as the midterm 
evaluation for 2573/OC-AR, describe in detail the outputs and outcomes achieved, 
as well as the lessons learned in each operation. The following table summarizes 
the scope and main outputs of the PROSAP operations.  

 
Table 2. Outputs of PROSAP operations 

 
PROSAP I: 
899/OC-AR 

PROSAP II: 

1956/OC-AR 

First operation 
under the 

CCLIP 

PROSAP III: 
2573/OC-AR 

Second 
operation under 

the CCLIP 

Loan amounts (millions of US$) 322 200 230 

Irrigation and drainage systems built (km) 294 154 374 

Hectares irrigated 137,521 73,038 59,560 

Beneficiaries of irrigation systems 12,769 14,489 5,269 

Rural roads improved (km) 482 339 49  

Rural electrification (km of power lines) 5,251 1,020 45  

Producers receiving services, technical 
assistance, and training 

111,819 34,039 149,111 

Business plans financed—
Nonreimbursable contribution (NRC) 

133 85 229 

 

1.17 The types of outputs that have been generated from PROSAP I to PROSAP III 
reflect the evolution of the interventions from an approach predominately aimed at 
physical infrastructure to interventions that are more balanced with technical 
assistance and soft components on management and market development. The 
PCRs for the completed PROSAP projects show that they have achieved the direct 
outcomes and effects expected, including: (i) productive overhaul of irrigation 
projects, with increases in surface area irrigated, better water availability and quality 
throughout the year for irrigators, and improved irrigation efficiency; (ii) improved 
productivity at the level of individual farms for specific crops; (iii) irrigator 
organizations strengthened and taking over the operation, maintenance, and 
financial management of their systems; (iv) the rural roads that were financed are 
usable year-round; and (v) development and consolidation of clusters that have 
been able to diversify into and/or export processed products for the first time. An 
ex post economic assessment of the Canal del Norte and 25 de Mayo, San Juan 
rehabilitation projects and the project to improve rural roads in productive areas in 
Entre Ríos, Zone VII, based on surveys conducted upon project completion shows 
that both projects achieved economic benefits demonstrating their economic return, 
with economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of 21.1% and 19.4%, respectively.  

1.18 Other noteworthy outcomes of PROSAP are institutional and strategic. Among them, 
PROSAP has provided the Ministry of Agroindustry with a land management 
operating model that enables it to strengthen and leverage programs with greater 
scope and coverage in the provinces as part of its provincial strategies for the 
agrifood sector (PSAS) and its development and competitiveness improvement 
plans (DCIP). Among other outcomes, this has enabled the strengthening of an 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
environmental and social area that enables it to move forward on these issues 
proactively, incorporating the inclusion of the gender dimension in rural 
development, as well as addressing climate change, resulting in the Ministry 
qualifying as an executing agency for the Climate Change Adaptation Fund.  

1.19 PROSAP impact evaluations. During the design of PROSAP I and PROSAP II, 
impact evaluations were not performed for experimental designs. Recently, 
PROSAP III has incorporated a methodology for evaluating the impact of quasi-
experimental designs that will enable analysis of how outcomes are attributed to the 
program’s investments. These evaluations will be conducted once PROSAP III ends 
in 2017. However, some partial and complimentary impact evaluations have been 
conducted using data generated by PROSAP projects, as described below. 

1.20 Using quasi-experimental methodologies, Gibbons, Maffioli, and Rossi (2016) and 
Rossi (2016) evaluated the impact of the PROSAP component providing improved 
irrigation channels in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. These studies 
conclude that PROSAP had positive impacts on both production and per-hectare 
productivity, showing that producers who participate in the program produce 9.4% 
more than nonparticipants, with per-hectare yields higher by 7%. 

1.21 Lastly, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture conducted a study 
entitled The Territorial Impact of Public Policies: The case of PROSAP (2016), which 
evaluated the outcomes of PROSAP I projects from 1998 to 2010. The study applied 
a synthetic methodology by comparing administrative data from departments that 
had PROSAP interventions with data from departments that did not. The study finds 
that out of all the departments, those with PROSAP projects had better development 
results in each of the dimensions analyzed and in the total synthetic index. The 
degree of overall development of the departments without PROSAP was almost 
37%, while for those benefiting from PROSAP it was almost 50%. 

 Lessons learned for PROSAP IV design and compliance with CCLIP 
requirements 

1.22 The main lessons learned from the execution of PROSAP II and III were taken into 
account when preparing this operation and formed the basis for the inclusion of 
certain adjustments. The following table provides a summary of these lessons. 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Institutional consolidation. The creation of a 

comprehensive strategic coordination 
structure, with the same functions as the URC, 
has been the basis for better PROSAP project 
performance  

The Ministry of Agroindustry has decided to 
maintain the URC’s functional structure and 
has launched a process to consolidate it 
internally as a specialized agency for 
coordinating investment with external funding. 

Coordination of public interventions in the 
field. Prioritizing projects in the framework of 

the PSASs, which were introduced starting 
with PROSAP II, has enabled participatory 
processes that offer better coordination and 
strategic synergy with a variety of initiatives, 
expanding the area of impact.  

The proposal is to strengthen and consolidate 
these processes for territory and microregion 
management in the framework of the PSAS so 
as to achieve synergies among PROSAP 
projects and other URC projects, in addition to 
better coordinating the intervention of other 
public policy instruments in the same areas. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Priority on investment in public goods, 
complemented by direct support that is 
intelligent and well targeted on producers. 

The initial focus of the first PROSAP on 
building public works demonstrated the need 
for supporting small and medium-sized 
producers with technical assistance and NRC 
for in-field improvements and development of 
new products. The evaluations conducted, 
including those of the Office of Evaluation and 
Oversight (OVE), found that the instrument 
had positive outcomes, but that it was 
necessary to ensure that the NRCs were 
applied with stricter diagnostic, eligibility, real 
market failure justification, measurement, and 
variability criteria.  

The Technology Modernization Fund, which 
includes NRC, has been redesigned based on 
the standards established in the recent 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document: 
(i) focus on technological support for mitigation 
of and adaptation to climate change and 
environmental sustainability; (ii) eligibility of 
small producers lacking access to credit and 
associations organized to establish new local 
networks and value added in new markets; 
(iii) technical assistance to promote the 
participation of the banking sector in financing 
the sector’s technological modernization, in 
coordination with private sector operations; 
and (iv) transient nature of the support and 
transparent, flexible, and evaluable 
mechanisms for granting it.  

Minor infrastructure works for rural 
development. During PROSAP III, a pilot 

program of minor works intended to meet the 
local production needs of small producers was 
piloted successfully. These works, which are 
prioritized in the PSAS, saw high ownership 
and participation levels among producers. 

The minor works component is continued in a 
reinforced context of PSAS interventions in 
priority microregions, along with technical 
assistance for local organizations to ensure 
the works’ sustainability. 

 

1.23 Eligibility of the operation under the CCLIP. Compliance with the eligibility 
conditions for a new individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006 of 17 April 2008 
has been verified: (i) the program is framed within the sectors and components 
defined under the CCLIP; (ii) its objectives are related to the Bank’s country strategy, 
and it is included in the country program; (iii) the aforementioned agreement 
stipulated that the executing agency would be the same for all the individual loans 
under the line, which is the case given that the URC will continue to be in charge of 
execution; (iv) the outcomes obtained by the URC in these two individual operations 
are satisfactory and have been supported by the corresponding performance 
evaluations for PROSAP II and PROSAP III, meaning the project team and national 
authorities can expect the new proposed program will perform satisfactorily; 
(v) regarding the financial execution of PROSAP III, under execution, 84% of the 
loan proceeds have been committed, while 94% of the proceeds have been 
disbursed; and (vi) the borrower and executing agency have fulfilled the conditions 
of the loan contract and the Bank’s policies on disbursements and procurement of 
goods and services, including updated financial statements.3 

 Design of PROSAP IV  

1.24 As the third individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006, PROSAP IV has the same 
design as the first two operations. Specifically, PROSAP IV is designed to bolster 

                                                
3  The most recent report including audited financial statements includes a minor qualification that does not 

affect the reasonableness thereof. This minor qualification refers to a debt observed by the Office of the 
National Auditor General between contractors and the provinces of Mendoza, Entre Ríos, and Catamarca, 
set forth in a note to the financial statements, representing an integral part thereof. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
local production systems via the strengthening of critical local assets (public goods: 
the economic infrastructure—irrigation, transportation, energy, social capital—
business culture; quality of regional associations and business networks) and 
improve the effectiveness of the intergovernmental framework. These actions 
contribute to improving the efficiency of local production systems by creating positive 
externalities through clustering and by resolving market and coordination failures. 

1.25 In particular, PROSAP IV will strengthen local development mechanisms, bolstering 
public-private partnerships in order to increase the competitiveness of producers 
and their associations. Also, the following specific objectives will be consolidated 
and strengthened: (i) internalization of measures for adapting to climate change with 
special emphasis on managing water resources and implementing climate-smart 
irrigation systems; (ii) the comprehensive incorporation of the gender dimension in 
the program through implementation of specific gender action plans for each 
provincial public investment project that include gender diagnostics, training, 
technical assistance, access to available funds, and monitoring of indicators; and 
(iii) consolidation of mechanisms for measuring outcomes and impacts.  

1.26 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 
2010-2020, and the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019. The 
program is consistent with UIS 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and strategically 
aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation through 
investments in productive public infrastructure and technical assistance that will 
enable increases in the productivity of rural producers in the program’s work areas. 
The program is also in line with the crosscutting issue of climate change and 
environmental sustainability through improved use of water and land via investments 
in irrigation technology. A full 100% of the proceeds of the operation are invested in 
climate change adaptation activities, according to the as climate financing for 
adaptation to climate change according to the multilateral development banks’ joint 
methodology for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB 
Group target of increasing financing for projects related to climate change to 30% of 
all operation approvals through 2020. The program provides additionality in terms of 
gender equality through specific activities for promoting the participation of women 
in the training provided by the program through gender action plans. In addition, the 
program will contribute to the goals of CRF 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) via 
the indicator of the number of beneficiaries that improve their management and use 
of natural resources. 

1.27 Alignment with the IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB 
Country Strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document GN-2687), in particular with 
the priority area “Alleviating Obstacles to Growth” in the area of rural and agricultural 
development, the objectives of which include supporting investment programs in 
basic rural infrastructure in regional economies. It is also aligned with the priorities 
of the new Country Strategy with Argentina (2016-2019), which is in the approval 
process as of the distribution date of this loan proposal, in particular with the 
following strategic areas: (i) business climate improvement by fostering 
environmentally sustainable solutions; and (ii) strengthening of private-sector 
integration and insertion into value chains by developing public goods for innovation 
and cluster development.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.28 The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development 
of regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent 
with this purpose. Specifically, the third individual operation proposed herein seeks 
improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small 
and medium-sized agricultural producers, with a focus on strengthening resilience 
to climate change. The program is structured in two main components. 

1.29 Component 1: Investment to support competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$80.2 million). This component includes: (i) a subcomponent for strengthening 
public infrastructure of major works aimed at increasing the coverage and quality of 
rural infrastructure in the provinces by executing the public investment projects 
prioritized in the PSAS. Investments include the rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage systems, forest fire prevention, and tertiary roads in climactically vulnerable 
areas with a focus on adaptation and resilience, and (ii) a subcomponent for minor 
infrastructure works for building, overhauling, or expanding public works and 
community improvements. All investments include financing for the technical 
assistance and training necessary for execution, use, and maintenance of the works 
and for strengthening local governance and the provincial and municipal agencies 
that manage water resources for irrigation while managing the promotion of 
participation by women. The objective of all the works and activities under this 
component is to support adaptation of the agricultural productive activity to scenarios 
and conditions of climactic vulnerability, with technical designs that take those 
scenarios into account in the long-term.  

1.30 The major infrastructure works to be financed whose final technical, economic, 
social, climactic, and environmental designs are in place are the following:  

 

Table 4. Major Works Projects 

Project 

Total 
amount 

(US$ 
millions) 

Lining of the of the upper section of the Cacique Guaymallén irrigation channel. 
First section. Mendoza 

21.5 

Improvements to the Colorado River irrigation system. Second stage. Colonia 
Santa Rosa. Salta 

13.9 

Improvements to the Benavidez Gral. 9 de Julio Canal system. Departments of 
Rivadavia, Chimbas, Santa Lucía, and 9 de Julio. San Juan 

17.7 

Development of the Tala River system irrigation area. Department of Trancas. 
Tucumán 

19.4 

Improvement of rural roads in productive areas of the province of Corrientes. 
Provincial Route 13 

10.4 

Improvement of provincial fire management services for preventing and 
controlling fires in the Northwest of Chubut 

6.1 

Total 89.1 

 

1.31 For their part, the minor works being prioritized and whose technical, economic, and 
environmental designs are in place are: (i) overhaul of systems for surface irrigation 
and increasing production yields, located in Anjullon, La Rioja; (ii) irrigation 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677496
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677507
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677534
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677541
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677483
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
improvement project in Colalao del Valle, Tucumán; (iii) water system improvement 
project in Angulos, La Rioja; (iv) improvements to the irrigation infrastructure of the 
water system in Figueroa, Santiago del Estero; and (v) micro reservoirs in the Cano 
River basin, Córdoba.  

1.32 Component 2: Support services for competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$14.4 million). This component finances technical assistance and business 
plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness and value-added of agricultural 
products in regional economies, with a priority on complementing the major and 
minor works projects of Component 1. The criteria for prioritizing and selecting 
business plans and technical assistance activities is detailed in the program 
Operating Regulations and the technical annexes for each of the three instruments, 
with technical, economic, financial, institutional, social, and environmental feasibility 
being a priority prerequisite: (i) Technology modernization fund, which uses NRCs 
to cofinance in-field  and partnership-building projects that contribute to closing 
technological gaps, bolstering value added at origin; and promoting environmentally 
sustainable practices and climate smart agriculture (CSA) to address the challenges 
of climate change. The focus of the fund is generating positive externalities and 
seeking synergies with private initiatives that promote producer access to formal 
banking and its financial product lines, including access to green financing;4 
(ii) Territorial development initiatives for financing development projects and 
consolidating agrifood clusters that are formulated and prioritized in the participatory 
framework of the DCIPs, which bring together public/private actors with 
scientific/technology actors and producers in the provinces. These projects finance 
technical assistance activities, generating knowledge and cutting edge technology 
that benefit the cluster and the regions where they are developed; (iii) Institutional 
strengthening and preinvestment, providing underlying and crosscutting support for 
technical assistance and training activities to improve management in provincial 
institutions, including raising awareness on climate change and improving capacities 
to identify, prepare, and monitor public investment projects. 

1.33 The program’s beneficiary provinces are the non-Pampa provinces, which will be 
prioritized based on the criteria set forth in the program’s Operating Regulations, 
including: (i) relative degree to which they lag behind; (ii) vulnerability to climate 
change; (iii) provincial sector strategies with a time horizon of at least 10 years; 
(iv) provincial association in place with adequate human and technical resources; 
and (v) due authorizations in place for the province to take on debt in order to accept 
PROSAP resources. The projects are chosen through a planning process consistent 
with the priorities of Argentina’s CDCs and the diagnostics performed. The program 
Operating Regulations defines project eligibility criteria, considering the different 
decision levels, type of project, criteria for analysis, and the project cycle from 
identification and preparation through to approval and execution.  

1.34 Program coordination, monitoring, and evaluation will also be financed. 
Under this item, support will be provided for the strengthening, operation, and 
maintenance of the project monitoring and evaluation system; the URC’s 
incremental operating expenses; the preparation of studies, including impact 

                                                
4  MIF project AR-T1170 includes financing technology packages for small producers and their cooperatives 

through a new line of credit between the Fund and Banco Credicoop. As part of the actions to integrate the 
IDB Group, once the MIF operation is approved, the proposal is to offer PROSAP producers this line of credit.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677611
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
evaluations, progress reports, and audit reports; and environmental and social 
monitoring. 

C. Key results indicators  

1.35 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the executing agency 
(Annex II). It includes indicators for impact, as well as outcomes and outputs, with 
their corresponding baseline values, targets, and means of verification. The main 
outputs include 31,638 hectares under irrigation, 71 km of main irrigation channels; 
and 44 km of rural roads. The main outcomes expected from the sample projects 
are described in Table 5. The program is expected to directly benefit 18,200 rural 
producers in six provinces. Over the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected 
in higher gross value of the production of rural producers and lower losses from 
drought associated with climate change. 

 

Table 5. Key Results Matrix Indicators 

Outcomes 
Time of 

measurement 
Proposed indicators 

Improved productivity for producers 
served by financed irrigation systems. 

Year 4  Average increase in land productivity 
(including both agriculture and livestock). 

Greater irrigation water use efficiency by 
rehabilitated systems. 

Year 4  Volume of water delivered to the farms / 
Volume of water that enters the system. 

Improved rural accessibility on Route 13 in 
the province of Corrientes. 

Year 4  Lower number of impassable days. 

Reduction of the average area affected 
annually by fire. 

Year 4  Average area affected by fire in the 
province of Chubut. 

Diversification of markets and/or products 
in regions served by the program. 

Annual  Number of business initiatives that 
increase sales by at least 20%. 

Users who adopt technologies for 
adaptation to climate change. 

Annual  Number of agricultural and livestock 
producers adopting pressurized irrigation 
technologies. 

1.36 Economic viability of the program. Overall analysis of the program yields an 
average weighted EIRR of 20.6% for a time horizon of 20 years. The benefits include 
marginal changes to productivity and increases in the area under irrigation. The 
costs include the total investment in the program, opportunity costs for training the 
farmers; operation and maintenance; and additional investment on the plot (see 
Annex). At a discount rate of 12%, overall net present value (NPV) is 
US$77.7 million. The sensitivity analysis considered: (i) modification of investment 
costs; (ii) changes in crop yields; (iii) changes in the costs of investment 
sustainability; (iv) delays in benefit realization; and (v) technology adoption rates. 
For a 30% increase in costs, the NPV is US$52.3 million, and the EIRR is 16.9%. 
For a three-year delay in benefit realization, the NPV is US$77.7 million and EIRR 
is 17.1%. For an adoption rate of 70%, the EIRR is 15.5%, with NPV of 
US$28.3 million.  

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments and costs  

2.1 The program’s cost is US$131,426,000, of which the Bank will finance 
US$100 million, chargeable to the Ordinary Capital in United States dollars under 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
CCLIP AR-X1006.5 The needed for the works and interventions analyzed accounts 
for 100% of the available financing. It will be structured as an investment loan, with 
an execution period of four years, taking into consideration that the major works to 
be financed are all at the stage of executable projects ready for public tender, and 
that the annual disbursements under PROSAP III over the last four years have 
demonstrated execution levels in keeping with the proposed planning.  

 

Table 6. Program cost and financing (in US$) 

Investment categories* IDB 
Local 

contribution 
Total % 

1. Component 1: Support investments 80,200,000 26,476,000 106,676,000 81 

1.1  Strengthening public infrastructure 73,000,000 26,476,000 99,476,000 76 

1.2 Minor works 7,200,000 0 7,200,000 5 

2. Component 2: Support Services  14,400,000 3,600,000 18,000,000 14 

2.1  Technology modernization fund 5,600,000 1,400,000 7,000,000 5 

2.2  Territorial development initiatives 6,400,000 1,600,000 8,000,000 6 

2.3  Provincial institutional strengthening 2,400,000 600,000 3,000,000 2 

3.  Management, monitoring, and evaluation 5,400,000 1,350,000 6,750,000 5 

3.1  Management 5,013,900 1,253,475 6,267,375 5 

3.1  Monitoring and evaluation (includes 
environmental and social) 

378,000 94,500 472,500 0 

3.2  Audits 8,100 2,025 10,125 0 

Total 100,000,000 31,426,000 131,426,000 100 

Percentage 76 24 100   

 

2.2 Bank financing will be disbursed according to the timetable provided in Table 7 and 
detailed in the Multiyear Execution Plan. 

 

Table 7. Estimated disbursement timetable (in thousands of US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total % 

IDB 23,626.00 33,530.00 34,194.00 8,650.00 100,000.00 76% 

Local 7,513.00 10,631.60 10,797.60 2,483.80 31,426.00 24% 

Total 31,139.00 44,161.60 44,991.60 11,133.80 131,426.00 100% 

% 24% 34% 34% 8% 100%  

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), and pursuant to the applied safeguards forms, this 
program has been classified as a category “B” operation. This program is designed 
to promote better management of natural resources related to agricultural production 
and improve producers’ climate resilience and adaptation. Irrigation projects 

                                                
5  Total financing of the CCLIP (AR-X1006) was set at US$600 million, of which US$200 million were executed 

under the first operation (1956/OC-AR) and US$230 million were allocated to the second operation 
(2573/OC-AR), leaving US$170 million available. In the context of programming loans with the Bank for 2016, 
the government has decided to allocate US$100 million to the financing of this third operation, leaving a 
remainder of US$70 million. No additional operations are expected. 



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
internalize measures for adapting to hydrometeorological and climate change risks 
(e.g., expanding drainage for rural roads, reviewing hydrological series for irrigation 
works), as well as elements of sustainability and water use efficiency. Another 
benefit is climate change mitigation through the project to improve rural roads in 
Corrientes by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 69.9 tons of CO2 equivalent 
thanks to reductions in fuel consumption, or an emissions cut of 43.2% from the 
scenario without the project. 

2.4 The execution of the PROSAP program is governed by the program Operating 
Regulations and the respective Environmental and Social Manual (ESM), with 
updated guides for environmental and social evaluation, including involuntary 
resettlement and mitigation and control procedures, as well as public consultation 
and monitoring and evaluation. In line with directive B.14 of Operational Policy 
OP-703, during preparation, an independent socioenvironmental review of the 
execution of PROSAP III was conducted. It found that the executing agencies had 
improved their socioenvironmental management capacity, and no 
socioenvironmental liabilities were identified. 

2.5 All of the infrastructure projects have socioenvironmental impact studies and 
environmental and social management plans that comply with IDB policies. The 
program Operating Regulations and ESM were reviewed mainly to incorporate 
gender equality opportunities and actions to prevent and adapt to the risks from 
disasters and climate change. Also, monitoring measures were strengthened by 
defining evaluation and monitoring indicators. Where applicable, projects include 
plans to ensure that indigenous peoples share in the projects’ benefits, in keeping 
with Operational Policy OP-765. Plans are also in place to address effects on assets, 
in keeping with Operational Policy OP-710. Likewise, all the projects include plans 
for pest management in their training and assistance programs, as well as plans for 
taking action on gender with a view toward increasing the participation of women in 
training programs, technical assistance, and other services, consistent with 
Operational Policy OP-761 of the Bank. 

2.6 Participatory consultative meetings were held in the areas to benefit from the 
projects as part of the design process. Prior to the Bank’s no objection for contracting 
the works, where necessary, the provinces will submit the pertinent environmental 
permits granted by the corresponding authorities. As established in the program 
Operating Regulations, prior to issuing the public tender for the works, the URC will 
present evidence to the Bank that it has obtained those permits. The environmental 
and social studies are available for consultation at the URC/PROSAP and Bank 
websites. The environmental and social management report (ESMR) summarizes 
the outcomes of and recommendations for environmental and social management 
to ensure the operation’s environmental and social sustainability. The borrower 
agrees to carry out—through the executing agency—the program activities in 
accordance with the environmental and social standards and recommendations 
included in the program Operating Regulations, including its ESM and the program’s 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The special contractual 
conditions on environmental and social management are detailed in paragraph 6.4 
of the ESMR. 

http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746


 - 15 - 
 
 

 
C. Fiduciary risks  

2.7 The main fiduciary risks identified are associated with processes of interaction 
between the national and provincial levels, which are often complex. These risks 
include: (i) delays in procurement processes; (ii) delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by the provinces and deficient quality thereof; and 
(iii) delays in providing accounting information to the Bank. Experience with 
execution has demonstrated that these risks are medium, that the executing agency 
has adequate execution capacity, and that the executing agency has been able to 
manage the aforementioned risks effectively in previous operations. The following 
were agreed upon as the main mitigation measures: (i) quarterly update and 
management of the procurement plan; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 2.3: 
Provincial Institution Strengthening; and (iii) permanent 65% flexibility for justification 
of expenses for disbursement of advances of funds (see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks and special issues  

2.8 An inherent risk involved in rural infrastructure works is weak commitment by 
beneficiaries to operating and maintaining the infrastructure works. The main 
mitigation measure for this comes in the framework of participatory processes for 
local empowerment, as well as the implementation of training and technical 
assistance programs. Also, the risks associated with changes to the national and 
provincial government are: weak interagency coordination between the program’s 
executing agencies, as well as scattered and uncoordinated implementation of 
external financing for agricultural projects The main mitigation measure is thus the 
implementation of targeted training plans for the provincial execution units. 

2.9 Regarding the program’s overall sustainability, at the level of the provincial 
governments and producer organizations, PROSAP has been able to build 
management mechanisms and secure commitments to ensure the operation and 
maintenance of the works. It has also been able to consolidate the capacities and 
processes developed in Component 2 (See program Operating Regulations).  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower is the Argentine Republic, and the Ministry of Agroindustry will be the 
executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC). The URC will be 
responsible for the execution, administration, and supervision of the program. Within 
it, the Program and Project Management Area will be in charge of executing the 
activities of the projects financed under the program. It will also have support from 
the crosscutting support areas and units that are part of the URC. 

3.2 The Ministry of Agroindustry is responsible for the local counterpart of the national 
projects. The URC’s main responsibilities include: preparing the budget and 
controlling and supervising fulfillment of the local contribution by the provinces and 
other participating agencies; supervising and coordinating the preparation of the 
AWPs, procurement plans, and financial plans; preparing and verifying 
disbursement requests; supervising work and providing legal and administrative 
support to the subexecuting agencies in procurement processes; paying contractors 
and suppliers; coordinating all program activities with the provinces and other 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
beneficiaries; monitoring and evaluating project and program activities; and 
commissioning and serving as counterpart for the external audit. 

3.3 The program’s execution is governed by the program Operating Regulations, which 
contain the details required to guide and regulate program operations, including the 
requirements for transferring resources to the provincial projects. The program 
Operating Regulations and their annexes also describe the specific execution 
mechanism for each component. As a special condition precedent to the first 
disbursement of loan proceeds, the executing agency, through the URC, will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the ESM. The review 
will include updating the description of the program’s components and excluding 
investment projects with Category “A” socioenvironmental impacts under the 
environmental and social safeguard policies from eligibility. 

3.4 Component 1 of the program is executed through the URC’s Program and Project 
Management area and its Infrastructure and Services unit, which coordinates the 
relationships with the liaison entities and the units executing the projects at the 
provincial level, as established in the program Operating Regulations. For each 
case, specific planning, execution, monitoring, and evaluation functions are 
established for the projects. Component 2 of the program is executed by the 
Program and Project Management area through its Competitiveness unit and 
through NRC. The process for executing this component includes the following 
phases: identification and eligibility of clusters and territorial initiatives based on 
prioritization criteria; preparation and evaluation of specific plans for improving 
competitiveness; and implementation, monitoring, and technical evaluation of the 
projects. The execution of both components is supported by the following 
crosscutting areas of the URC: institutional development, environmental 
management, legal issues, internal control, finance and accounting, procurement, 
and management oversight and outcomes. 

3.5 Furthermore, the main fiduciary measures to be applied to the proposed operation 
were agreed upon during preparation. These measures are described in Annex III 
and include aspects of disbursements and audits, as well as thresholds for 
procurement processes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies and procedures as 
set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.6 Monitoring. The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. During project 
execution, the executing agency will prepare and send the Bank a monitoring report 
no later than 60 days from the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus 
on fulfillment of the output indicators and progress on outcomes, identifying 
problems encountered, and corrective measures taken. No later than during the last 
quarter of each year during project execution, the executing agency will submit the 
AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction. 

3.7 Evaluation. The executing agency will conduct two independent evaluations funded 
by the loan proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no 
later than 90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed or two years 
have passed from the date of the Bank’s first disbursement of the loan proceeds, 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756


 - 17 - 
 
 

 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% 
of the loan proceeds have been disbursed by the Bank. These reports will include: 
(i) an evaluation of the quality of the data provided by the monitoring system; (ii) the 
level of fulfillment of the expected outputs, outcomes, and progress on the expected 
impacts as established in the Results Matrix; and (iii) the level of compliance with 
the ESMPs for the program and the investment projects, including a summary of the 
socioenvironmental audits and the progress in the social and environmental 
indicators. 

3.8 Impact evaluation. Evaluation of the program’s impact will have two parts. The 
proposed impact evaluation for public infrastructure will be conducted for two 
irrigation systems and a rural road. Impact estimates will be based on the difference 
in differences method applied to a panel of homes divided into a treatment group 
and a control group. For this, two surveys—a baseline and a final evaluation—are 
planned. The sample size for the treatment group will be 465, as well as 465 for the 
control group (total for the three projects). For the beneficiaries of the public 
investment projects, the control group will be comprised of farmers with no access 
to irrigation systems and/or improved roads. Farmers will be selected at random 
from the lists available in the executing agency’s archives.  

3.9 To evaluate the impact of the NRCs and clusters, the phase-in and difference in 
differences methods will be used. The implementation strategy will identify a 
treatment/control group based on the year in which producers enter the program. 
NRC not involving pressurized irrigation will be included in the evaluation (as they 
are included in the evaluation of public works investment). Thus, 220 NRCs will be 
evaluated. The sample will be 155 producers, selected at random from among the 
NRC. The control group will be defined based on farms that requested NRC but did 
not receive funding. 



counting will be used and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) will 
be followed when applicable in accordance with established national criteria. The 
following financial reports will be required: (i) financial execution plan for up to 
180 days following a request for an advance of funds; (ii) audited annual financial 
statements as stipulated in Article 7.03 paragraph (a) of the General Conditions of 
the loan contract; and (iii) other reports required by the fiduciary specialists.  

 Internal control and internal audit 

6.7 The national internal control body is the Sindicatura General de la Nación [Office of 
the Comptroller General] (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is 
performed through the Internal Audit Unit. The unit, which reports directly to the 
minister, is in charge of conducting audits and making recommendations pursuant 
to the powers granted under Law 24,156 (Financial Administration Act).  

 External control: External financial audit and project reports 

6.8 In 2011, the Bank concluded a diagnostic on the government auditing practices of 
the AGN, the result of which was to validate the AGN as auditor of Bank projects. 

6.9 However, based on the track record of the promptness of audit submissions, in 
October 2014, it was agreed with Argentina to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to match 
its real compliance capacity. Programs 2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, 3255/OC-AR, 
and 2573/OC-AR are being audited by the AGN. 


























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 
 

 
 
 

MALAWI 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT 
(AIYAP) 

 
APPRAISAL REPORT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 
BORROWER:      Government of Malawi  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:                             Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water 

Development  

 

Financing plan 

 

Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

16.00 million  

 

Loan  

EU  1.60 million  Grant 

Government  1.76 million  In- Kind 

TOTAL COST 19.36million  

 

 

Important Financial Information (ADF Loan and EU Grant) 

   

 ADF Loan EU Grant 

Grant/Loan Currency UA EUROS 

Type of Interest N/A N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee 0.5% N/A 

Service Charge 

0.75%on 

disbursement/outstanding 

loan 
N/A 

Tenor 40 years N/A 

Grace Period 10 years N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV value at 18% (USD 3.8 million) 

EIRR (base case) 26%, NPV value at 12% (USD 7.2 million) 

   

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 
Concept Note Approval  

 
February , 2016 

Project Approval September, 2016 

Effectiveness February, 2017 

Completion June, 2022 

Last Disbursement September, 2022 

Last Repayment  



 

iv 

Project Summary  

1 Project Overview  

1.1 The Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project (AIYAP) is to 

deploy irrigation infrastructure as an enabler and facilitator to address the twin problems of food 

insecurity and high rate of youth unemployment within the context of 2011-2016 Malawi Growth and 

Development Strategy (MGDS) which identifies agriculture and food security, irrigation and green belt 

initiatives as drivers of economic growth. Malawi’s agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to the adverse 

impacts of climate change and extreme weather events, such as dry spells, droughts and floods. The 

sector is also characterized by low level of irrigation development, and low uptake of improved farm 

inputs. In addition, low profitability of smallholder agriculture is influenced by weak links to profitable 

markets which make value addition seemingly impossible because of lack of information between the 

farmers and the processors, high transport costs, weak farmer organizations, poor quality control, lack 

of market information, as well as limited participation of the youth in agricultural development and 

businesses. The proposed project, will develop two large scale irrigation schemes at Linga (Nkhata-

Bay) and Dwambazi (Nkhotakota) covering 1945 hectares, targeting 10,000 beneficiaries with special 

focus on the youth (about 50%). The project is to use irrigation infrastructure as an enabler to scale up 

the production of maize, rice, sugar and horticulture production and value chain in project areas in 

particular and Malawi in general.  

 

1.2 The project apart from mitigating the challenges arising from dependency on rain-fed production 

will also promote youth ownership of agribusiness, access to funding/credit through seed funds, loan 

facilities and risk sharing from Micro Finance Institutions, agro -processing, engaging in value addition, 

modern methods of crop diversification and market linkages. Socially, the project by introducing youth 

skill acquisition, entrepreneurship development and job creation will address social vices such abuse, 

prostitution, violent crime etc. In addition, the project will also reduce rural and urban migration as well 

as cross border migration of youth in the targeted areas. It is estimated that within four and half years 

the project will produce 500 Agripreneurs, train about 100 artisans for the maintenance of irrigation 

infrastructure, launching 175 new agribusinesses and employing about 4600 additional persons, 

including out-growers. It is expected that at least 50% of the beneficiaries will be female.  

 

1.3 The project has four components namely (i.) Irrigation Infrastructure & Watershed Management, 

(ii.) Youth Entrepreneurship, market linkages, agro-processing and Value Addition (iii.) Agro-

Cooperative Development and Enhancement and (iv) Project Management and Institutions 

Strengthening.  

2 Needs Assessment:  

The need for the Project is justified by the priorities in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategies 

II (MGDS II: 2011-2016) which emphasizes on agriculture, food security, irrigation and water 

development.  As a consequence, there is an urgent need for transformation of the agriculture sector to 

enhance sustainable growth and break the cycle of food insecurity as espoused in the National Export 

Strategy, 2015 Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework and the draft National Irrigation 

Policy, Green Belt Initiative and the National Agriculture Policy focusing on commercialization of 

agriculture.    In addition, the 2013-2018 Malawi National Export Strategy, identifies agriculture value 

chains driven by private operators including smallholder farmers, youth entrepreneurs, women’s 

groups, MSMEs and large businesses to boost and diversify exports in order to improve Malawi’s 

growth prospects as the bedrock of the economy. The Project is a direct response to GoM’s desire to 

enhance agricultural productivity by promoting irrigated agriculture and dynamize the sector through 

active youth participation in agribusiness for job creation in order to meet the objectives of these 

policies. 

 

 



 

v 

3 Cost and Financing   

The project total cost of AIYAP is estimated at $US27.50 million (UA19.36million), to be financed by 

the Bank UA16 million ADF loan, EU €2 million grant (parallel financing) about  UA 1.6 million and 

Government contribution in kind estimated at UA1.7 million.   

4 Implementation  

The project will have a PIU which staff will be externally recruited through a competitive process and 

serve on full time basis. The project will recruit competitively a Technical Adviser (TA)   at the 

commencement of implementation ENABLE YOUTH sub-component of the project. The TA will work 

with the Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for one year after which 

LUANAR will take over the full implementation of the component. The PIU will be reporting to the 

Principal Secretary for the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a 

Technical Committee comprising Directors of relevant Departments to assist with the implementation. 

The composition of the Committee will be determined by the Government. The Technical Committee 

will report to the Project Steering Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work 

plans and budgets and guide the project on policy matters.  

5 Bank’s Added Value  

The Bank’s intervention in this project will add significant value to the investments already made in 

agriculture and irrigation projects by the Government of Malawi, the Bank and other development 

partners. It will give impetus and acts as boost to the efforts/programmes of the GoM in youth 

development through entrepreneurship in agriculture value chains and agribusiness. The project is in 

line with the TYS 2013-2022 which focusses on inclusive growth and transitioning to green growth. 

The project focus on youth unemployment through skills development and entrepreneurship in is line 

with the TYS. Finally, the Bank’s intervention has the multiplier effect on economic development 

through infrastructure development and private sector development in line with the Malawi Country 

Strategy 2013-2017 and is aligned to three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ i.e. Feed Africa, 

Industrialise Africa, and Improved livelihood. 

6 Knowledge Management  

The knowledge gained through the implementation of several projects and studies in the sector in 

Malawi has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same pattern, the knowledge that will be 

generated by this Project will contribute significantly to the design and implementation of agricultural 

interventions within the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) arrangement and build the 

capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MAIWD) and other 

Ministries particularly the Ministries of Labour, Youth and Manpower Development, and Trade and 

Industries. Consequently, useful information will be generated for similar future interventions. AIYAP 

will, in addition to irrigation development, focus on agro-processing and value addition, agriculture 

cooperative development and agribusiness along agriculture value chains as well as building of 

entrepreneurship skills and generations of bankable projects in agriculture value chains which will 

provide lessons in the post-harvest management, processing and marketing of various crops to inform 

project designs of similar projects in the future. The Bank is a key member of the Donor Committee on 

Agriculture and Food Security (DCAFS) and the lessons learnt from this project will be shared with 

other Development Partners through DCAFS platform. ASWAp, through the Bank, will provide 

information generated from AIYAP to key stakeholders for knowledge sharing and coalition building 

through the agriculture sector working group. The results from the various studies and surveys, 

including the socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired 

knowledge attributes into practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit 

flows.  

 



 

vi 

Results Based Logical Framework 

Country and Project Name: Malawi: Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project 

Purpose of the project: To increase agricultural productivity and incomes of households, develop youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and poverty reduction in the project area. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICA-

TION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicator 
 (including CSI) 

Baseline (2015) Target (2019) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

To Improved standard of living through 

enhancement of income 

. % Reduction in Poverty Level Nkhotakota(44.5), Nkhata Bay (32.1) 

 

Nkhotakota – (40.5), Nkhata Bay (28.1) 

National Statistical 

Office (NSO), 

Integrated Household & 

demographic survey 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions, mid-term and 

end evaluations  

Assumption: Sustained economic 

growth and good governance 

 

Risk #1. Poor Farmers Organisation 

Mitigation: Strengthen of farmers 

unions and cooperatives 

 

Risk 1: Unpredictability of 
agricultural markets due to trade 

restrictions and price controls on 
some items.  

Mitigation: The Government is 

being urged by DPs, to deregulate 
agriculture markets including 

removal of bans and pegging the 

price on some strategic crops such as 

maize.   Enactment of the Goods 

Control Act would help to improve 

market predictability.      

4.5.2  Volatility of the world 

commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys 
accessibility to SADC market and 

the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and 
value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: 

Project cost overruns due to 

exchange rate fluctuations, 

uncertainties in economic situation 
of Malawi and SADC and the rise in 

the cost of materials. 

 Mitigation: Project is costed in 
USD and efficient procurement 

timing to address the increases, as 

well as adequate price contingencies 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

 

2.1.Increased crop production and productivity 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Increase in number youth engaging in farming 

and Agribusiness 

 

2.3.Increase in Household Income 

 

1.1.1 Crop production (t’000) 

 

 

 

 

1.1.2 Crop yield (t/ha) 

 

 

 

1.1.3 %age value added for each crop 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2.1. No of youth in farming and agribusiness 

 

 

2.2 Average annual incremental income of 

farmers (MK) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

1.1.1 Maize (0.51); Beans (0.075); Rice 

(0.85); Tomato (0.135); Onion (0.2); /potato 

(0.125); Sugarcane (0) cassava (2.66). G/nuts 

(0.075), Banana (0). 

 

1.1.2 Maize (2.7); Beans (0.75); Rice (3.0); 

Tomato (9.0); potato (.10.0); Sugar cane (12) 

Cassava (24.5) & G/nuts (0.75). Onion 

(10.5), Banana (15) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (6); Beans (1.5); Rice (6); Tomato 

(0); Onion (0); S/potato (20) Sugar cane (0) 

Cassava (20), G/nuts (2) 

 

 

 

2.2.1 TBD(To be provided with baseline 

survey) 

 

 

2.3.1  MWK 791,349 

 

Project Area (Targets by 2021) 

1.1.1 Maize (4.192) Rice (9.981); Sugarcane 

(3.78); Tomato (2.9) Onion (0.775) G/nuts 

(0.32); Beans (0.18), Cassava (2660) & 

potatoes (0.705). Banana (256) 

 

1.1.2 Maize (6.0); Beans (1.8); Rice (6.0); 

Tomato (20); Onion (15.5); potato (18); Sugar 

Cane (3.78) Cassava (28), G/nuts (2.0), 

Banana(30) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (60); Rice (60) Beans (70); 

Tomato (20); Onion (20) S/potato (80); 

Groundnuts (90); Cassava (100); & Sugar 

cane (100), Banana (256) 

 

 

2.2.1 5000 (50% women) 

 

 

 

2.3.1   MWK 1,575,120 

 

 

 

 



 

vii 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

3. Component 1:   Irrigation Infrastructure  & 

Watershed Management 

3.1 New Irrigation schemes developed. 

3.2 Catchment Management 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Component 2:  Value Addition and Youth 

Entrepreneurship,   

4.1 Youth trained in agribusiness 

4.2 Agribusiness incubations established 

4.3.Youth Agribusiness Established 

4.4 4.4 Market linkages promoted. 
4.5 Agro-processing & value addition supported 

 

5. Component 3. Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for Employability   

5.1 Youth networking formed 

5.2 Cooperative societies developed and formed 

5.3  Total land put into use   

5.4 Total farmer trained 

5.5 Total Artisans trained 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Component 4: Institutional Strengthening 

and Capacity Building  

6.1 Public Sector staff supported 

6.2 M & E established 

6.3 Project Coordination 

 

 

3.1.1 Size of land developed (ha)  

 

3.2.1 No of farmers adopting agro-forestry 

initiative  

3.2.2 No of farmers adopting alternative 

livelihood technologies (% women and youth 

farmers) 

3.2.3 No. of rain water harvesting and soil and 

water conservation  structures  

3.2.4 Number of alternative livelihood 

activities for women 

 

 

4.1.1 No. of youth coordinators trained 

4.2.1 Youth Agripreneur trained 

4.3.1 Number of Agribusiness established 

4.4.1No of private sectors/value addition 

entities networked 

4.5.1No of agro-processing centres developed. 

 

 

5.1 Number of youth market networks  

5.2.1 Number of youth associations & 

cooperatives 

5.2.2 Number of farmer associations and 

cooperatives  

5.3.1 Rain fed crops (ha) 

5.3.2 Irrigated crops (ha) 

5.4.1 Number of staff trained 

5.4.2 Number of farmers trained 

5.5.1 number of local artisans trained 

 

 

6.1.1 No of staff and farmers trained 

6.1.2 Consulting firm recruited 

6.2 No. of M&E systems established and 

operational 

6.3 Tech. asst., vehicles $ equipment procured 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Target Yr 2021) 

3.1.1 (1945ha) 

 

3.2.1  200 (50% female) 

 

3.2.2  1500 (50% female) 

 

3.2.3 500 

 

3.2.4 3(Bee keeping, mushroom&livestock) 

 

 

4.1.1 Youth Coordinators (4 of which 50% 

female)  

4.2.1Youth Agripreneurs (500 of which 50% 

female) 

4.3.1 New Agribusiness established (175 of 

which 50% female beneficiries) 

4.4.1 Number of marketing networks (2) 

 

4.5.1 Centre (2) 

 

 

5.2 youth networks (2) 

5.3.1 Youth WUAs (20); Youth cooperatives 

(20) 

Farmer WUAs (2); Farmser Cooperatives (2) 

 

5.3.1 Area (1945) 

5.3.2 Area (1945) 

5.4.1 Farmers (4,000 with at least 50% being 

women); Youth (5,000 with at least 50% 

being women) 

5.5 Local artisans (50 with at least 50% being 

women) 

 

 

6.1.1 GOM staff (70), Health 

workers(10)Tech. Support(10) 

6.1.2 Consulting firm (4) – including auditor 

6.2 M&E system (1) 

6.3 Project staff appointed (6), Vehicles and 

Equipment (4), Office Equipment(TBD) 

 

QPR 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions Project    

         

 

 

Completion Report, 

Audited financial 

reports 

for the unavoidable increases will is 

provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, 

increased temperature, change in 

length of rainy season, increased 
incidences of drought and floods, 

due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding 
vulnerabilities, assisting the 

communities to select various 

adaptation measures; e.g. rainwater 
harvesting, rotational grazing, using 

drought tolerant varieties e.g. 

cassava, sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing 

counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions 
will largely be in kind in form of 

provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salaries and wages.   
   

 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

ACTIVITIES INPUTS 

Component 1 : Irrigation  Infrastructure and Watershed Management: 

 Sub-component: 

1.1 Irrigation Infrastructure,  

1.2 Watershed management   

 

Component 2: Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship,   

2.1 Youth entrepreneurship  

4.2 Agro-processing  

2.3 Market  linkages 

 

Component 3 : Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability  

3.1  Formation and support to youth farmer cooperatives    

3.2 On farm training and extension services  

3.3 Provision of matching grants for value addition equipment  

3.4 Market access and strengthening business network 

3.5 Training of artisans for maintenance of irrigation schemes 

3.6 crop production 

 

Component 4 

4.1Public Sector and smallholder farmers supported 

4.2 M & E  

4.3 Project management 

 

Component 1 –  UA 13.48  million 

Component 2 –  UA 2.34 million 

Component 3 –  UA 2.14  million 

Component 4 -  UA 1. 4   million 

 TOTAL   UA 19.36          



 

viii 

Project Time Frame  

Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
2021 

 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                          

Appraisal                          

Loan and Grant negotiations and  approval                          

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                         

Publication of  the General Procurement Notice                          

 Recruitment of project staff                         

Project Launching                         

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs / PCUs                         

Signature of agreements with partner entities                          

Irrigation Infraastructure Development and Watershed Management                         

Award of contracts for the project supervision                          

Studies RFPs and bidding documents (BDs) preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities on a number of issues, including on conflict management 

approaches 
            

 
   

 
   

    

Construction infrastructure/management committee                          

Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability Additions                          

RFPs and bidding documents (BDs)preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Construction of infrastructure /management committee                          

Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship                         

Selection of Consultants/Identification of Intern Service Centres                          

Selection of Candidates for Training                         

Commencement of training                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Departture of trainees                          

Monitoring of Youth Progress                          

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                         

Establishment of accounting system and preparation of procedures manual                          

Establishment of the baseline situation and the M&E system                         

Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                         

Capcity building interventions  including on institutions and resilience-building systems                         

Annual financial auditing                          

Mid-term review                         

Completion report                          



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AFDB GROUP TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI FOR AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT (AIYAP) 
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed ADF loan of UA16 

million to finance the Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project.  

 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

 

1.1 Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II. 2011-2016 has identified agriculture, 

irrigation and water development as some of the key priorities and drivers of economic growth and 

poverty alleviation. The Government formulated Agriculture Sector-Wide Approach (ASWAp 2011-

15) as the priority investment plan for the agriculture sector which focusses on (i) food security and risk 

management (ii) commercial agriculture, agro-processing and market development and (iii) sustainable 

land and water management and support services. The Government is implementing a Farm Inputs 

Subsidy Program (FISP) to address the food security problem and developed a National Export Strategy 

to promote crop diversification, value addition and export of agro-based commodities. The National 

Irrigation Policy which is currently at the draft level is aimed at enhancing farmers’ ownership through 

farmer managed irrigation and National Agriculture Policy, whose main objective is to commercialize 

the agriculture sector. In ASWAp, the Government also introduced a Green Belt Initiative (GBI) in 

order to promote irrigation and minimize reliance on rain-fed farming and achieve increased agricultural 

productivity for domestic and international markets. The Government is currently finalising a five year 

National Resilience Plan to break the cycle of food insecurity with irrigation as a key component. 

Regarding youth initiatives, the Government adopted the National Youth Policy in 2013 which 

recognises that the youth represent a vast human resource potential for promoting economic growth and 

if neglected it would be a lost opportunity.   AIYAP will address the twin problems of food insecurity 

and high rate of youth unemployment using irrigation infrastructure as an enabler, which will 

substantially contribute to the achievement of the objectives of these policies and strategies.  

 

1.1.2 The project is aligned with the Bank’s 2013-17 Country Strategy Papers (CSP) Pillars focusing 

on (i) addressing infrastructure bottlenecks to competitiveness and growth and (ii) supporting actions to 

expand private sector investments. While the former covers irrigation infrastructure development and 

agricultural market infrastructures the latter Pillar covers private sector investment and entrepreneurship 

in agro-processing, crop diversification and value chain development which are articulated in AIYAP. 

The country socio-economic indicators are presented in Appendix 2 and it is envisaged that AIYAP will 

contribute to improving these indicators and ultimately achievement of the Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs).  

 

1.1.3 Currently, only 26 percent (104,000 hectares) of the potential irrigable area (408,000 hectares) is 

under irrigation. In order to exploit this potential, Government has developed the National Irrigation 

Master Plan and Investment Framework (NIMPIF). The NIMPIF which was published in February 2015 

confirmed that the plan will be implemented in three phases: Phase I (2015-2020), phase II (2021-2025) 

and Phase III (2026-2035) comprising of approximately 20,000 hectares, 28,500 hectares and 67,500 

hectares of new irrigation schemes in Phases I, II and III respectively. The project is part of the Bank’s 

efforts to support the government of Malawi in the implementation of the Irrigation Master Plan given 

that the targeted sites are among the priority sites identified in the Master Plan which objectives are to: 

(1) accelerate economic growth, (2) reduce rural poverty, (3) improve food security, and (4) increase 

exports.  

 

 

 



 

2 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s involvement  

1.2.1 The Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) 2013-2022, identify agriculture related infrastructure 

development as a key enabler for increased production, productivity and effective utilization of land 

resources. It also identifies agriculture and food security as an area of special emphasis. The 2016 

Bank’s Agriculture strategy: Feed Africa: Strategy For Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-

2025 is targeted at executing the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme 

(CAADP) goals of contributing to elimination of extreme hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and increased 

prosperity, in partnership with alliances including farmers, agribusiness, and civil society, and 

exploiting regional comparative advantages and opportunities for trade and collaboration. The Bank’s 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018 calls for economic empowerment, knowledge and capacity building for 

women.  Furthermore, the Bank’s Fragility strategy “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 

Africa, 2014 – 2019” which aims at effectively assisting countries build resilience to move forward 

towards more stable political and economic development with Youth employment as a special focus, as 

jobs are alternatives to rents or participation in illicit activities associated with fragile situations and 

thus help prevent the outbreak of violence related to critical unemployment.  

 

1.2.2 This project addresses all of the above key Bank strategies and policies as part of broader 

development efforts to achieve sustainable growth and poverty reduction thus, (1)  streamlining of the 

crops along value chains (economic crops) and crops to address food security as well as linking the agri-

prenuers to the value chains, ensuring that sustainable incomes will be achieved for the beneficiaries in 

particular and the country at large, (2)  focusing on youth with special emphasis on targeting women (at 

least 50% of beneficiaries) social and economic empowerment, while protecting the environment 

through various catchment activities, and (3) addressing the objectives of inclusive growth and 

transition to green growth by addressing infrastructure development, private sector development, and 

skills and technology adoption through promotion of irrigation for agriculture intensification and 

diversification.  

 

1.2.3 The project also resonates with three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ by addressing Feed 

Africa, Industrialize Africa, and Improved quality of life for the people of Africa.  At country level, the 

project is aimed at contributing to increase in agricultural exports, import substitution, generation of the 

much needed foreign exchange and job creation especially for the youth.    

 

1.3 Donor coordination 

 
1.3.1 Malawi’s recent progress towards the aid effectiveness agenda under Busan is mixed.  Whilst 

donor alignment with national policies remains strong, the use of the national country system and aid 

on the budget has significantly reduced following suspension of budget support in 2013. 1  Development 

Partners (DPs) are instead channelling the resources earmarked for budget support or basket funding 

through other aid modalities and off budget.2  The GOM is working with DPs to improve aid 

effectiveness guided by the new Development Cooperation Strategy launched late 2014. Successful 

outcome of   on-going PFM reforms will be indispensable in encouraging DPs to increase the use of 

country systems.   The current platform is on the Donor Committee on Agriculture and Food Security 

(DCAFS) as the key form for donor coordination, monitoring of sectoral plans and strategies and 

harmonizing interventions. The Bank is currently chairing the Irrigation Technical Sub-Group.   With 

the provision of Euro 2.00 million EU funding for catchment management in the project, the Bank is 

leveraging on collaboration with other Development Partners in Malawi.   

 

                                                 
1 According to the 2014 Global Partnership Monitoring Surrey, Malawi’s score on the aid on budget aid indicator declined 

from 62 in 2010 to 49 whilst that of use of national country system dropped from 65 to 50. 
2  51 % of planned externally financed development expenditure for FY 2014/15 is off budget.     



 

3 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture 2015/2016 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labor Force   

  Agriculture 30 90 80   

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**   

  
Government 

 

Donors 

 

 

ADB 

WB 
 

6% 

25%   

UA m [UA 1000.3 m] [UA 31.1 m]   DFID 12%   

% 71 29   EU 17%   

      USAID  12%   

     Irish Aid    3%  

    WFP   1%  

  

                                                                                GIZ                                       2% 

                                                                               WFP                                      1% 

                                                                                IFAD                                     6% 

                                                                                JICA                                      2% 

                                                                               FICA                                     3% 

Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups [Y]   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** [M]****   

* as most appropriate ** Years [yy1 to yy2] *** for this sector or sub-sector   

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement    

 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project Objectives: The specific objective of the project is to alleviate poverty in the project area in 

particular and the country in general by contributing  to economic growth and food security through: 

(1) Deploying irrigation infrastructure to scale up improved crop production and productivity leading 

to improve net farm incomes of the project beneficiaries, (2) expansion of opportunities in agriculture 

and agribusiness among the  rural youth in Malawi as a means to advance and improve rural livelihoods 

and economic development, (3) enhancement of import substitution through improved value additions 

and processing, (4) introduction of revolving loan for agriculture purposes will grow and build the 

cluster youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and value chains, and (5) Using cooperative societies as a 

vehicle to transit the smallholders farmers to commercial farmers.  

2.1 Project Components: AIYAP has four main components mainly; (1) Irrigation Infrastructure 

(Dwambazi 945 hectares and Linga 1000 hectares irrigation schemes) and Watershed Management, (2) 
Youth entrepreneurship and Value Addition, (3) Agro-Cooperatives Development and Enhancement, and 

(4) Project Management and Institutions Strengthening.  Table 2.1 below provides a summary of the 

project components and related estimated cost, including contingencies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

4 

Table 2.1: summary of the project components and related estimated cost 

No Component Name Estimated 

Cost  

(UA) 

million 

Component/Sub-component and Activity Description 

 

1 Irrigation Infrastructure 

& Watershed 

Management  

13.48 Irrigation Development: (i) development of two (2) new 

gravity fed irrigation schemes: the works under this 

component will include construction of head works, main 

canal, secondary and tertiary canals, drainage system, and 

on farm roads as described in C.1.2 of the Technical 

Annex; Dwambazi (945 ha) and Linga (1000 ha), covering 

a total area of 1945ha;(ii) formation of two water Users’ 

Associations (WUAs) with 50% women and youth 

representation; (iii) provision of capacity development for 

farmers (men and women), extension agents (tapping on 

female extension to reach women famers), and relevant 

government officials. 

 Catchment Management: (Detail activities in Annex C1) 
(i) improved catchment conservation and development 

programme; (ii) alternative livelihood support; and (iii) 

capacity building and indigenous knowledge management 

systems. The hot spot areas in the catchment will be 

demarcated in consultation with the communities during 

implementation.     

2 Youth entrepreneurship 

and Value Addition and  
2.34  Youth Entrepreneurship, Storage Agro-processing and 

Value Addition  

 Youth Entrepreneurship (50% of female youth) 

 Market Linkages – trade facilitation, linking farmers with 
agro-processors, building bulk commodity network, 

eliminating middlemen, and exerting group effects on 

processors for better prices.  

 

3 Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for 

Employability 

2.14  Formation and support to farmer cooperatives and to 
strengthening the participation of female youth in these 

cooperatives)   

 On farm training and extension services  

 Agriculture Production, 

 Market access and strengthening business network 
linkages between the cooperatives and youth processors, 

and exchange programme with other similar organisations 

in the region and the rest of Africa  

4 Project Management and 

Institutional 

Strengthening  

1.4  Establish project implementation unit 

 Monitoring and Evaluation  

 Capacity building  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

5 

2.2 Technical Solution retained and alternatives explore  

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection or acceptance 

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection/Acceptance 

Alternative 1 

 

Invest in gravity fed irrigation 

system (technical solution 

retained) 

Gravity fed irrigation system have proved to be 

more sustainable in terms of operation and 

maintenance with locally available material, 

requiring minimal training which translates to 

sustainability and profitability of the enterprise. 

Alternative 2 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 3 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 4 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

 

2.3 Project type 

 
AIYAP is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of supporting 

irrigation infrastructure development (civil works) as an enabler of scaling up of high value crop 

production, value chain development, youth skill development in Agribusiness and capacity building 

activities largely funded by ADF 13 Loan and EU Grant resources. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 
2.4.1 The total project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is UA 19.36 million which 
will be financed by: (i) ADF loan (UA 16.00 million covering cost of infrastructure, purchase of 

vehicles, youth training and provision of seed capital, etc. ), EU Grant (UA 1.60 million to finance 

catchment management) and (iii) the GoM and Beneficiaries (UA 1.76 million), through provision of 

office space and salaries for the counterpart staff on the project on the part of Government and provision 

of labour for maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures on the part of beneficiaries. The resources 

from EU will be made available to the project through parallel financing, since the Department of 

Irrigation will be responsible for the management of the resources using the EU procedures.  

2.4.2  The ADF Loan will be used to finance both local costs and foreign costs. The project will 
finance local costs such as training, personnel and operating costs while most of the activities under 

infrastructure development will attract foreign costs as detailed in the summary tables below. The GoM 

does not have the capacity to finance most of the project activities and has therefore committed to 

contribute to the project in kind through staff and office space. The details are indicated in Tables 2.3, 

2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 below. 

  



 

6 

Table 2.3: Project Cost Estimates  

Component Name 
MWK ‘000 UA ‘000 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

Infrastructure development 
      

3,535,269  

          

8,019,617  

      

11,554,886  

      

3,643  

       

8,264  

      

11,907  

Market Linkages, Agro Processing and 

Value Addition 
      

1,458,553  

             

655,039  

        

2,113,592  

      

1,503  

          

675  

        

2,178  

Agro-Cooperatives Development for 

Employability  
      

1,737,066  

             

225,139  

        

1,961,235  

      

1,790  

          

232  

        

2,021  

Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 

Building 
      

1,190,715  

               

98,013  

        

1,289,699  

      

1,227  

          

101  

        

1,329  

Sub Total 
        7,921,604  

              

8,997,808  

        

16,919,412  

          

8,163  

          

9,272  

          

17,435  

Physical Contingency 

         

196,026  

             

844,272  

        

1,040,299  

         

202  

          

870  
         

1,072  

Price Contingency 

         

390,112  

             

437,663  

          

827,775  

         

402  

          

451  
            

853  

Sub Total 

         

586,139  

          

1,281,935  

        

1,868,074  

          

604  

        

1,321  

         

1,925  

Grand Total     8,507,742  

       

10,279,744  

    

18,787,486  

      

8,767  

     

10,593  

      

19,360  

 

Table 2.4: Sources of Finance 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (UA ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

UA % UA % UA % 

ADF 11,200 70 4800 30 16,000 83 

EU 319.2 20 1277 80 1,597 8 

GoM  0 0 1763 100 1,763 9 

Total 11,519   7840   19,360 100 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure  

ADF and EU Categories of Expenditures (UA ‘000) 

  ADF EU 

Categories of expenditures Foreign  Local Total Foreign Local Total 

Works 9,168 2,292 11,460 22.07 5.52 27.59 

Goods 688 0 688 98.72 26.23 124.95 

Services 762 1,778 2,540 0 1,369 1,369 

Operation 0 1,312 1,312 0 78 78 

Total 10,617 5,382 16,000 120.79 1,479.33 1,600.00 

 

  



 

7 

 Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule By Component and Year 

 Totals in UA '000 

Component PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total % 

Irrigation and watershed 

management 3001 5409 4719 174 174 13476 70 

Crop production, Value addition & 

Youth Entrepreneurship 251 1018 356 356 356 2336 12 

Youth Skills Development in 

Agriculture 1287 221 217 211 208 2144 11 

Project management & Institutional 

strengthening 366 259 261 259 261 1405 7 

Total 4905 6907 5552 999 999 19360   

 
2.5. Project’s target area and population: 

2.5.1 Demographic Aspects: According to 2016 data from the Department of Statistics, Malawi has 

an estimated population of nearly 17 million people with women constituting about 51% of the 

population3. The population is characterised as follows: (i) 0 – 10 years (33%); (ii) 10 – 20 years (22%); 

(iii) 20 – 40 years (29%); (iv) 40 – 60 years (10%) and (v) those above 60 years comprise (6%).  The 

districts of Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay have populations of 229,460 and 164,761 respectively with 

combine total land mass of 8330km² representing 9% of country total land mass of 94,080km² 

(excluding Lake Malawi which covers an area of 24,404km²). The targeted beneficiaries are 10,000 

households estimated at 6 person per household. In the two districts only 1 in 30 women and 1 in 10 

men complete secondary education. However, 1 out of 7 women and 1 out of 9 men are unemployed.  

2.5.2 Location: The project is located mostly in the Green Belt Zone covering a total of 2 Districts of 

Nkhota-kota (Dwambazi) and Nkhata-Bay (Linga) Districts in the Central Region. These Districts were 

selected because they were ranked among the Phase 1 projects in the Malawi National Irrigation Master 

Plan. 

2.5.3 Climate: The climate in Malawi ranges from semi-arid in the Lower Shire Valley, semi-arid to 

sub-humid on the plateaux and sub-humid in the highland areas in the northern parts of the country. 

Average rainfall ranges from 763 mm to 1,143 mm per annum (p.a.) with only a few areas receiving 

over 1500 mm of rain annually. Such areas include Mulanje, Nkhata Bay and the northern end of Lake 

Malawi. Rainfall (almost 90%) occurs between the months of December and March, with no rain at all 

between May to October over most of the country. Mean annual temperatures vary with altitude, ranging 

from 25o C in the Lower Shire Valley to 13o C in the highland areas. 

 

2.5.4 The project area like other parts of Malawi is largely a semi-arid country hence greatly 

threatened by droughts and other negative impacts of climate change. The semi-arid nature of the 

country makes it highly fragile and susceptible to environmental degradation hence sustainable 

management of natural resources is not an option but a priority. The area is also prone to flooding which 

has been accelerated by extensive deforestation and tree cutting in most parts of the country which was 

highly experienced in the 1970s and the 1980s during which time annual deforestation rate was 

estimated at 3.5% per annum. Deforestation was and is still caused by (i) expansion for agriculture; (ii) 

demand for fuelwood for both domestic and other uses including industrial production. Soil erosion 

constitutes one of the major types of land degradation in Nkhotakota and Nkhata-Bay area of Malawi. 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
3 Malawi is largely rural. Despite rapid urbanization, nearly 85 percent of the total population of Malawi lives in rural areas. 



 

8 

2.5.5 Water Resources: Water for the irrigation schemes is supplied from Dwambazi and Mazembe 

rivers. Dwambazi is a perennial river with a minimum monthly flow of 3,305 l/s indicating that the 

water available is more than sufficient for the development of Dwambazi irrigation scheme. Mazembe 

River with a minimum monthly flow of 224 l /s demonstrates the need for a water harvesting structure 

to harness the water required to irrigate the Linga scheme. 

2.6 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation  

2.6.1 The ESIA:  

2.6.1.1 During the project preparation, extensive public consultations were carried out to determine the 

environmental and social impacts of the project. The consultations were also aimed at identifying the 

key environmental challenges experienced in the project locations as well as project districts. Meetings 

were held with various departmental heads at the Ministry of Agricultural, Irrigation and Water 

Development, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Labour and Youth Development 

at the ministries’ Headquarters in Lilongwe. Consultative meetings were also held with various heads 

of department at Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay District Headquarters including with the District 

Commissioner of Nkhata Bay District. Further meetings were held with Dwangwa Cane Growers Trust, 

Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd and Senior Officers of Illovo Sugar Company Ltd. Other 

consultative meetings were held with various community leaders led by Senior Chiefs and their deputies 

together with community members, members and executives of Farmers Associations in Linga (Nkhata 

Bay District) and in Dwambazi (in Nkhotakota District). 

2.6.1.2 The reasons for consultative meetings were: (i) to generate a good understanding of the project 

by all stakeholders within the project area; (ii) to enhance ownership of the project by local leadership, 

the community and local farmers; (iii) to understand people’s and agency expectations about the project; 

(iv) to understand and characterise potential environmental, social and economic impacts of the project; 

(v) to acquire, but also advance local benefits that may accrue from the project; and (vi) to enable 

stakeholders involved in the project to provide views, hence participating in or refining project designs. 

In addition, site-specific investigations were also conducted to gain insight to the likely environmental, 

social, and economic impacts of the project. 

2.6.2 Community Participatory Processes: The community participatory processes were organised 

by the officers from the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development as well as the project 

team during the preparation and appraisal mission. Two town hall meetings at each project location 

were held where a range of issues including among others, project details, land issues, community 

development, choice of cropping, farmers associations –development, formations and operations, etc. 

were discussed and agreed upon. The team, also visited the projects sites and the existing farms on the 

land with a view for getting the understanding of the farmers, listen to their concerns – especially land 

distributions and beneficiaries of youth entrepreneurship, how to address them and incorporate them 

into the project design. Over half of the target population is youth and women who are already active in 

the agriculture sector. Most of the youth also own land that has been inherited or allocated by the 

traditional leaders in line with the customary land acquisition. Consultations also involved all relevant 

sector departments at the district and headquarter levels. The key players included the local 

administration structures spearheaded by the local chiefs headed by two Traditional Authorities, one of 

which is a woman and their assistants and included a significant proportion of the community members 

of which youth and women constituted more than 50%. The Mission met and held discussions with 

major private sector players among which are;  Crown Ministries, Illovo Sugar Company, Farmers 

Engineering Services, Public Private Partnership Commission in Blantyre, the Malawi Chamber of 

Commerce, Industry and Cooperative and Telekom Networks Malawi Limited (TNM) – a mobile 

company quoted on Malawi Stock Exchange. The project team held sessions with Civil Society 

Organisations, and Non-governmental Organisations as well as youth entrepreneurship training 

institutions in Malawi  

 

 



 

9 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design  

2.7.1 Experiences, challenges and lessons learnt in the implementation from the Bank’s past and 

current agricultural projects in Malawi have been taken into account in the design of the current project. 

These include the need for proper project orientation, emphasis on farmer group approach, strong M&E 

and capacity building for staff which AIYAP has incorporated by including project launching, regular 

training for implementing staff, emphasis on Cooperatives and Water Users Associations and support 

to M&E. To avoid future land disputes as noted from some of the projects due to inadequate 

consultations, adequate consultations were held with the beneficiaries and other relevant stakeholders 

during preparation and the Bank has received a letter of comfort from the Government confirming the 

support of the locals for the project. In addition, beneficiary farmers registered their names to confirm 

that their pieces of land will be made available for the project activities. Non availability of full studies 

and designs have always led to delays in disbursements and project implementation. To address this 

problems, AIYAP locations were selected based on readiness of the designs, drawings and feasibility 

studies already prepared under the National Irrigation Master Plan. In addition, the sites were also 

selected on the least cost based among the sites which are ready for development. The need for a full 

time Project Coordination Unit was noted from almost all the previous projects, therefore, provision has 

been made for the recruitment of technical experts to support the Project Coordination Team under 

ASWAp Secretariat to fully focus on the planned activities.   

2.7.2 Through the project team interaction with the DP and government officials it was noted that 

youth skill development program were bedevilled by; (1) Lack of transparency in the process of trainees 

selection, (2) In adequate or non-availability of financial support to raise start-up capital, and 

(3)Inadequate post training technical support, and (4) Uncoordinated monitoring processes. All these 

are taken into consideration in the design of AIYAP as a result, the selection processes of the trainees, 

the training as well as provision of seed capital will the carried out by an independent 

consultants/Financial Institutions. In addition the project has already confirmed with organised private 

sector – Ilovo, PressCane, etc. which have agreed to take the trainees as interns. 

2.7.3 The issues of sustainability of the irrigation facilities after project completion in Malawi have 

been highlighted in all the reports. Irrigation is capital intensive and demanding in terms of technical 

capacity. Some of the old irrigation schemes in Malawi have had to be rehabilitated.  By introducing 

value chains and agripreneur it is expected that the farmers will transit to commercial farmers who will 

be able to pay for the maintenance of infrastructure.  The project has built in resilience of the facilities 

to the effect of climate change by addressing the issues of catchment management which will be 

specifically addressed with Euros 2million mobilised from EU.   Furthermore, to enhance sustainability 

of other physical infrastructure, the facilities and resources to be provided for the youth after graduations 

will be on revolving loan basis.  To address the issue of week technical capacity to maintain the 

irrigation infrastructure, resources have been allocated to the training of technicians and artisans for 

maintenance of the infrastructure. More importantly, the project is designed to  enhance ownership of 

the infrastructures by the farmers through Farmers Associations, improving capacities for O&M, and 

importantly, using climate-smart designs (flood regulation, sediment control etc.) which objective is to 

prolong the lifespan of the infrastructures.  

2.7.4 Lessons from the Revised 2015 Country Portfolio Improvement Plan (CPIP) also highlighted 

the: (i) Weak Capacity in Financial Management , (ii)Weak Capacity of Project Implementation Units 

which are precipitated by the staffing configuration and modalities of assigning staff to project 

coordinating units,  (iii) Project Start-Up Delays, and (iv) Weak Procurement Capacity. In order to 

address these challenges, the project has embedded (i) the need to ensure adequate stakeholders 

consultations during project design to ensure ownership and compliance during implementations phase; 

(ii) Project designs and detailed feasibility studies are already in place;(iii) training on the Bank’s rules 

and procedures for consultants and contractors engaged in Bank’s funded projects will be carried out as 

part of the project launch and on regular basis thereafter (iv) baseline and annual targets data are 

established within the first year of a project where this is not available (v) reporting would be based on 

results framework including gender disaggregated data , (vi) supervision missions’ checklist to include 



 

10 

environmental and social management activities and projects’ quarterly reports and (vii) frontloading 

of procurement activities by adopting advance contracting which have been agreed with government.. 

While addressing catchment vulnerability through the catchment management program is valid, this 

doesn’t necessarily confront the challenge of weak technical capacities nor sustainability challenge of 

the irrigation infrastructure alluded to in this  

2.8. Key performance indicators  

2.8.1 The Project Results-Based Logical Framework contains key impact and outcome indicators for 

the monitoring of the performance of the Project. The main outcomes are expected are: (i) Increased 

crop production and productivity; (ii) Increase in number of youth engaging in farming and 

Agribusiness and (iii).Increase in Household Income. Progress towards achieving these outcomes will 

be monitored through the sector monitoring and evaluation system.  

2.8.2 The Project Implementation Unit will prepare quarterly and annual project progress reports 

presenting the progress on output indicators disaggregated by gender where appropriate. Outcome 

indicators will be monitored through PIU’s management system and national statistics. Indicators will 

be updated in the Implementation Progress Report (IPR) and necessary adjustments will be made as 

appropriate. A medium term report (MTR) and Project Completion Report (PCR) will be prepared. All 

of these reports are circulated widely within the Government, the Bank and to other development 

partners.   

 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and financial performance. 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: At full operation, each farmer household will be making an income of MK 
1,575,119.74 (US$2300) per year from the current average income of MK 791,349.11      (US$1150). 

The analysis at the project level has been carried out by comparing with and without project costs, on 

farm crop establishment and operational cost with the benefits. The analysis also covered the benefits 

and costs of processing some proportions of selected crops such as maize, rice, cassava and selected 

horticultural crops such as tomatoes, onions and bananas.  The discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis 

carried out on the net cash-flow gave a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 23%, and a Financial 

Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 3.8 million at an opportunity costs of 18%. The opportunity cost of 

18% takes into account the prevailing high interest rates on commercial loans in the country ranging 

between 42% and 47% with inflation rate of 23% and the bank interest rates on concessional loans. The 

high financial rates of returns are attributed to the benefits accruing to the project from the value chain 

development of three major crops namely rice, maize and sugarcane and other horticultural crops such 

as tomatoes, onion, bananas and chillies. In addition, there are other benefits such as employment 

generation along the value chains, spin off effects of the investments to boost local economy and other 

environmental benefits further justifies the project.  

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave an Economic 
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 26% and the economic Net Present Value is estimated at USD 7.2 

million at an opportunity cost of 12%. The economic values for the goods and services were arrived at 

using a standard conversion factor of 1.1for traded goods and services while the non-traded items were 

estimated using the market prices which were good estimates of the economic values under the 

liberalized market system in the country. The results show high economic internal rates of return due to 

the focus of the project on modernisation and commercialisation of farming in the project areas for the 

selected crops which include horticulture crops. The project will also attract the participation of more 

small medium scale enterprises mostly owned by the youth in the project. The project intervention will 

also enhance productivity through capacity building of the key stakeholders in the project. Sensitivity 

analysis on the effect of increasing investments costs by 10% and reducing crop prices by the same 

margin resulted into decrease of EIRR to 25 and 24 % respectively which means EIRR is more sensitive 

to crop produce price variation. See table 3.2 for details. 

 



 

11 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Figures 

 
FIRR (base case )  23 %,  NPV (base case) (16,5%, USD    USD 3.8 million 

EIRR (base case) : 26  %, NPV (base case) USD 7.2 million 

 

Table 3.2: Results of the Sensitivity Analysis on the EIRR 

Scenario EIRR NPV (USD million, 12%) 

10% increase in crop prices 29 9.7 

10% decrease in crop prices 24 4.7 

10% increase in investment costs 25 5.9 

10% decrease in investment costs 29 8.4 

 

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: 

3.2.1.1 In accordance with the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards Systems (ISS), the project has been 

validated as category 2 by ORQR. This implies that the anticipated negative impacts are minimal and 

can be readily managed in line with measures elaborated in the Environmental and Social Management 

Plan. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and social impacts. Positive 

impacts will include among others: (i) improved environmental and ecological conditions; (ii) increased 

agricultural activities and enhanced agricultural production and outputs; (iii) improved food security 

and nutrition; (iv) enhanced value of agricultural produce through value addition; (v) improved social 

and economic well-being of the beneficiaries through improved economic activities; (vi) enhanced 

agricultural production capacities and skills; (vii) enhanced entrepreneurial and agro-processing skills; 

(viii) improved better quality water flow downstream; (ix) increased employment opportunities; (x) 

improved infrastructure in designated project areas; (x) capacity building including institutional 

strengthening, environment and natural resources management. Negative impacts will include: (i) 

vegetation, habitat and biodiversity loss during the development and construction phase of the project; 

(ii)  generation of solid wastes as a result of excavations during construction works; (iii) compaction of 

soils and destabilization of the geological balance; (iv) chances of threats of increased incidences of 

water-borne diseases and accidental deaths at the water conservation reservoirs; (v) dust, air quality and 

noise pollution; (vi) threats of occupational health and safety; (vii) soil, rivers and wetlands pollution 

from chemical fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals during the operational phase of the project; 

(viii) threats of transmissions of HIV/AIDs and other communicable diseases. The project ESMP for 

the two sites have been developed and posted on the Bank’s website on 9 August 2016.  

 

3.2.1.2 Though the environmental and social assessments of the project based on the African 

Development Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) and the Environmental and Social Assessment 

Procedures, validated the project as Category 2, however according to Schedule A of the Malawi’s 

Environmental Impacts Assessment Guidelines of 1997, development of agricultural land of more than 

10 hectares requires implementation of a full EIA, thus qualifying such projects under Category 1 

Projects. However, this is annulled by Schedule B 2.1 and Schedule D (D.1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, 

D8.1, D8.2, D8.5, D8.6, D8.8 and D10, of the Guidelines because the proposed project has limited and 

reversible negative environmental and social impacts. 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project is classified Category 2 by the Bank’s Climate Change Screening 

System. The design review includes climate change risks and proposal of adaptation measures. Risk 

management and adaptation options are integrated through promotion of gravity irrigation water flows. 

Catchment management programme has been incorporated as part of the climate change resilience 

programme. The proposed project interventions are imbedded with adaptation measures in the irrigation 



 

12 

and land and water management sub-sectors to secure and improve agricultural productivity against 

climate change impacts through enhancement of water supply and basin-wide management. Irrigation 

schemes will help address the challenges due to low rainfall while irrigation systems have been designed 

to control the flooding menace in the target areas. These measures are consistent with Malawi’s National 

Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPAs) and these include: (i) improved early warning systems (ii) 

use of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) improved crop and livestock management 

practices, and diversification of agricultural activities within single farm units, e.g. introduction of agro-

forestry systems 

3.2.3. Gender Analysis: Malawi has a high gender disparity between men and women. The 2014 
female Human Development Index value for Malawi is 0.423 in contrast with 0.467 for males, resulting 

in a GDI value of 0.9074. Only 32% of individual holders of agricultural land in Malawi are women 

despite their significant contribution in the agriculture sector.5 Rural women in Malawi play an 

important role as subsistence farmers,6 and there is increasingly involvement of young female (91% of 

young males works and 96% of young female workers are employed in the agriculture activities).7 Yet 

their productive capacity is hindered by gender inequalities. The gender inequalities in the agriculture 

sector can be attributed to:  

(i)  Limited access to land ownership and land tenure. This has led to gender implications mainly hinge 

around women’s control over the land and agriculture inputs including improved technology, 

extension services, credit and finances. This has affected women’s decisions over the agriculture 

sectors. Sensitisation meetings have been done to promote women participation and ensuring that 

farmer participation will be based on head of household rather than on gender. However, adequate 

safeguard will be put in place to ensure that at least 30% of the women are reached.  

(ii) Low education rate and skills among women’s famers.  Illiteracy is high among rural women and 

gender inequalities persist in secondary education, 1 in 30 women compare to 1 in 10 men 

completed secondary school (reference to point 2.5 in the report). Furthermore, for example adult 

literacy rate in Nkhata Bay is 91% to 76.8 %, male to female respectively. The situation is a bit 

different for youth but still there is differential of 18 % (age of 25 – 34). Addressing female 

education and knowledge in the project would be very crucial for their effective participation. 

Sensitization, extension support and business support services will be provided by the Government 

district officers including the youth and gender officers in order to promote youth and women 

participation and development. In addition, the project include program in capacity development 

in areas of functional literacy, book keeping, business formation etc.   

(iii) Inequalities in rural employment; rural women´s participation in paid employment is hampered by 

a significant domestic work burden. Moreover, rural female workers face a greater burden 

combining domestic and probative workloads compares to their male counterparts, which further 

restrict their agriculture production capacity.  Women generally have limited control over money 

generated from sales of agriculture produce. Moreover, men, more often than not, have the overall 

say on the selection of crop types to be produced which eventually impacts household food security. 

This creates constraints regarding agricultural investments, since in real terms, women tenure 

insecurity is one decisive factor constraining agricultural production.   

(iv) Gender mobility patterns; women are more likely to move shorter distances and within districts.  

This resulted in limited access to markets. The project will promote women participation in agri-

business by providing business development services and also through collaboration with NGOs 

active in the area.  

                                                 
4
Female – male respective: Life expectancy at birth (63.7 - 61.7). Expected years of schooling (10.8 - 10.7), Mean years of schooling (3.4 - 5.20) GNI per 

capita (0.679 - 0,815) HDI values (0.423 0.467).  GDI value Malawi, 0.907. Major gap is realized in yeas if schooling, gross national income, and 

combine with low gender inequality index, which includes participation of women in decision-making. In 2014, the parentage of women in decision 

making position stands at i.e. women held 22.3% of seats in the national parliament. 
5 Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Malawi: An Overview, FAO, 2011.  
6 Ibid. 
7 Ibid.  



 

13 

3.2.4 Finally, the project will take into account these factors and support women famers in the decision 

making process. It is apparent that gender inequality is affecting the agricultural productivity in the 

targeted areas. Women farmers on average outnumber men farmers. However, women are not well 

represented in decision making positions in irrigation schemes in Malawi where women occupy as little 

as 25% of the decision making positions and are often deputies of men. For that reason the project will 

make a deliberate effort to ensure adequate participation of women (at least 40% of beneficiaries) in 

project implementation and will encourage committees and farmer-based groups to include a larger 

quota for women in management, training, community representation and decision-making, and other 

income generating activities. Women, will thus have the opportunity to participate in farm related 

income generating activities and contribute meaningfully to the socio-economic development of their 

communities. The gender perspectives have been integrated into project formulation in line with the 

Malawian Gender Equality Act, 2012 and the National Youth Policy, 2013, and also takes due 

cognizance of the Bank’s Gender Policy. 

3.2.5 Social  The outputs of this project as contained in the logframe will translate into multiple 

positive economic and social outcomes whose indicators include: (i) increased agricultural activities 

and agricultural outputs whose net impacts will include improved living standards, food security and 

improved nutrition; (ii) increased employment opportunities both directly and indirectly by people 

employed during the development works as well as those who will be employed in agro-processing, 

marketing, sale of farm inputs, etc.; (iii) improved agricultural production skills through training; (iv) 

enhanced environmental management skills; (v) improved rural as well as on-farm infrastructure to ease 

transportation; (vi) minimized post-harvest losses through the development of farm and off-farm storage 

facilities as well as processing facilities that will help improve socio-economic well-being of the 

beneficiaries. 

3.2.6 The youth profile in Malawi indicates that out of a population of 17 million people8, more 

than 40% are between 10 to 35 years old. Literacy rates within this age bracket is estimated at 81.8% 

with slightly more males (86.6%) than females (77%) being literate. Although youth constitute a 

significant proportion of the population, they lack basic opportunities that would enable them develop 

to their full potential. This has been compounded by the presence of a range of adverse conditions that 

impinge on the youth; the most perverse, being poverty. Discussions with youth groups indicated that 

lack of appropriate skills and training, limited access to land, lack of value addition equipment and lack 

of financial support are some of the major challenges facing the youth in Malawi. Therefore this project 

has built in activities that will help to address challenges being faced by the youth. The project will 

promote formation of youth farmer cooperatives to engage in agriculture as a business. The project will 

also provide training in entrepreneurship, promote entrepreneurship culture, enhance agro-processing 

and value addition and also improve access to finance through seed funds and credit schemes. 

3.2.7. Involuntary resettlement: There is no involuntary resettlement foreseen under this project. The 

project identified sites do not require land acquisition. The areas are already designated for agricultural 

production. Settlements are outside the scheme areas except in Linga where there are a few homes found 

within the scheme area. These do not pose major problems for the scheme development since the designs 

have already isolated those few homes to be affected which will benefit from the project through 

livelihood activities embedded in the Catchment Management.  

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 
4.1.1 The project will be under ASWAp within MoAIWD, and will be implemented through the 

existing GoM structures. The MoAIWD is currently implementing six Bank’s projects satisfactorily 

which did not have any problems in meeting the pre-condition for first disbursement. To fast tracked 

and kick start the preliminary key activities of the project, the Government had put in place an Interim 

Project Implementation Unit which comprised of - a Project Coordinator (a Chief Irrigation Engineer), 

                                                 
8 Population and Housing Census, 2008 



 

14 

a Procurement Specialists, a Project Accountant, a Monitoring and Evaluation Expert and a Desk Officer 

to support the project. However, in order to fast-track the implementation process, the Project 

Coordinator, Supervising Irrigation Engineer, Cooperative Officer and  Procurement Specialist as well 

as the FM officer will be recruited competitively locally to serve on full time basis. The externally 

recruited staff will sign performance based contract with the GoM. The project has also allocated 

resources to recruitment a lawyer to guide the farmers on legal issues. 

4.1.2 The Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources will implement the ENABLE 

YOUTH sub-component. A Technical Adviser which will serve for one year will be recruited 

competitively at the commencement of ENABLE YOUTH to support the university after which the 

university will take over full implementation of the component. The project will partner with a financial 

institution licensed by Reserved Bank of Malawi on risk sharing of the ENABLE YOUTH sub-

component of the project. The financial institution will be competitively recruited using Quality Based 

Method of Procurement.     

The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development will sign a memorandum of 

understanding with Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for 

selection, training and evaluation of business proposals and recommendation of seed funds for the 

Agripreneurs. The Bank will only release resources for the funding of Youth Agribusiness on the 

recommendation of the LUANAR. A criteria for the selection of the youth will be developed which will 

include the minimum qualification of the Malawi Schools Certificate of Education and targeting the 

youth from the project areas. The Agripreneurs will be provided with modern farming production 

technologies on loan such as tractors and agro-processing equipment for the crops being promoted in 

the area through a Microfinance Institutions upon completion of the training at LUANAR 

4.1.3 The PCT will ensure that project resources are properly accounted for and that all project targets 

are timely delivered. The PCT will be reporting to the Principal Secretary for the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a Technical Committee comprising of 

Directors of relevant Departments. The Technical Committee will report to the Project Steering 

Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work plans and budgets and guide the 

project on policy matters. At field level the PIU will work closely with the District Commissioners 

Office especially the District Agriculture Development Officers, Irrigation Officers and Youth 

Development Officers. Program Managers, Divisional Irrigation Services Officers from Salima and 

Mzuzu Agricultural Development/ISD will provide technical support to the project.  

4.1.4 Steering Committee: The existing ASWAp Executive Management Committee in conjunction 

with members from the Department of Youth, LUANAR and Financial Institution to be recruited as risk 

sharing partner will act as the Project Steering Committee and will have the overall decision making 

responsibility. The Principal Secretary, MoAIWD will chair the Steering Committee. 

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.5 Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 

2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would 

be carried out following: (1) Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and 

Procedures (PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as stipulated under 2003 Public 

Procurement Act (PPA) and 2004 Public Procurement Regulations (PPR using the national Standard 

Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for 

various group of transactions to be entailed under components 3 and 4 under the Project, and (2) Bank 

Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   

Solicitation Documents SDDs, mainly for components 1 and 2 for contracts that are either: (i) above 

the thresholds indicated in Annex B5, Para. B.5.3;2, or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for a specific 

transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case BPM have been found to be the best fit for purpose 



 

15 

for a specific transaction or group of transactions. In order to gain time and specifically to meet the 

requirements of PD2 of 2015, the Interim Project Implementation Unit put in place by the Government 

has commenced the preparation of the procurement documents. In addition, the Government has 

selected to use Advance Procurement.  

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 

the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The 

global rating of risk assessment was Substantial with possibility of reducing to moderate after the 

implementation of the mitigating measures. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. 5.3.8.  

Table 4.1 Procurement Table  

Project Categories  UA ‘000 

NCB OCB OTHERS LCB TOTAL 

     

Works 

 Infrastructure 

 Building  

     

 11050   11050 

 410   410 

Goods 

 Machinery & 
Equip 

 Vehicles 

 Office 
Equipment 

     

 585.03   585.03 

   129.83 129.83 

15.38    15.38 

Services 

 Non Consulting 

 Consulting 

 Financial & 
Procurement 

 LUANAR  

 TA 

 TA –Fin.Inst. 

 African Harvest 

     

1263    1263 

  989.35  989.35 

     

  124.49  124.49 

  364.57  364.57 

  335  335 

  350 

85.00 

 350 

85.00 

Operating Expenses   873.00  873.32 

Salaries and others   991.26  991.26 

 1278.38 12045.03 4112.26 129.83 17566.26 

      

 

4.1.7 Financial Management Arrangements:  

 

4.1.7.1 MOAIWD has prior experience in implementing projects financed by various development 

partners and currently manages a total of three projects funded by the Bank. The Bank-funded projects 

are mainstreamed within the Ministry but the financial management function is performed by 

Consultants working together with Government Accountants. The frequent rotation of Government 

Accountants has hampered the reinforcement of capacity within the Ministry thus necessitating the 

retention of Consultants to support the PIUs. The existing projects have had a number of financial 

management challenges related to the poor quality of quarterly reporting, delays in the preparation of 

annual financial statements, non-compliance with the Bank’s audit submission deadlines, late 

submission of expenditure justification documents and inadequate controls at the district level. 

 



 

16 

4.1.7.2 In order the mitigate the identified FM risks based on prior experience, the project will recruit a 

Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant on a contractual basis to work together with the 

two Accountants designated by the Accountant General. The Financial Management Specialist will have 

primary responsibility for the FM aspects and report to the Project Manager and to the Director of 

Finance at MoAIWD.  The contracted FM consultants will be subjected to annual performance 

evaluations to ensure that they support the borrower’s compliance with the Bank’s financial 

management requirements. 

 

4.1.7.3 The project’s FM will be centrally managed within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in 

MoAIWD. The PIU would coordinate all project FM-related issues. The overall conclusion of the 

assessment is that MoAIWD’s capacity to handle all the FM aspects of the project, satisfies Bank 

minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM guidelines subject to the recruitment on a 

contractual basis of a Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant . The overall FM risk for the 

project is assessed as Moderate (see Annex 1 – Risk Analysis summary).  

 

4.1.8 Financial Reporting and Auditing Arrangement:  

In accordance with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit requirements, the project will be required 

to prepare and submit a quarterly progress report to the Bank not later than forty-five (45) days after the 

end of each calendar quarter. The project will prepare and submit annual financial statements, audited 

by the National Audit Office or an independent private audit firm, together with the auditor’s opinion 

and management letter to the Bank not later than six (6) months after the end of the financial year. The 

detailed auditing arrangements are included in the Technical Annex B.4. 

4.1.9 Internal Audit:  

The Central Internal Audit Unit will be responsible for providing objective assurance and ensuring 

accountability in the utilization of public funds and assets. Various bank rules and guidelines (including 

procurement rules, FM guidelines and disbursement guidelines) would also provide additional guidance. 

The internal controls of the project will be spelt out in the project implementation manual which would 

include sections on accounting and administrative procedures and provide guidance on the day to day 

project FM issues. The internal control environment will be underpinned by the clear definition of roles 

and responsibilities allowing for segregation of duties. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements:  

The project would make use of the Bank’s various disbursement methods including (i) Direct Payment, 

(ii) Special Account (SA) and (iii) Reimbursement methods in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. The Bank will issue a Disbursement 

Letter of which the content will be discussed and agreed with the Government of Malawi (GoM) during 

negotiations.  

 

The government will open a special account which will be denominated in foreign currency, at a bank 

acceptable to the Bank for the Project’s use. A related local currency account will also be opened for 

eligible local currency operating costs.  

4.2 Monitoring  

 
4.2.1 The established ASWAp results framework will be used for M&E of the project performance. 

Support will be provided by the MoAIWD and Ministry Labour, Youth and Manpower Development 

(MLYMD) to undertake their roles in leading the M&E process. The M&E Units will generate gender 

disaggregated data and also assess socio-economic impacts on the target groups. The Environmental 

District Officers and Land Resources Conservation Officers will monitor the social and environmental 

impacts of the project. Project effect and impacts on the target groups will be monitored by constituting 

cross-section samples of beneficiaries. The component will facilitate stakeholder consultations, farmer 

organisation, nutrition and HIV/AIDS messages, promotion of women participation, field 

demonstrations including competitions and short-term consultancies.  

 



 

17 

4.2.2 Milestones 
 

Timeframe Milestone Monitoring process / feedback loop 

Year 0  Preparation of 

procurement packages  

 

Project Approval, 

launching, signature  

GOM, AFDB 

 

 

AFDB Board, GOM 

Year 1 – 5 Implementation  

Year 1 – 5 Oversight  Steering Committee () 

Year 1 – 5 Audit Reports   Annually by PCU 

Year 3 Mid-Term Review   Bank and PCU to monitor  

Year 5 Impact Study   PCU and Regions 

Year 5 Project Completion Report   ASWAP and PCU to monitor; Bank to participate 

 
4.3 Governance  

 

4.3.1 The Agricultural sector in Malawi is repositioning itself to institutionalize transparency and 

good governance as evidenced in earlier detection by the management and ordering of full investigation 

of suspected salary fraud in the ministry. It should be noted that the MAIWD was not involved in the 

Malawi Cashgate of 2013. However, the requisite fiduciary management framework still poise a lot of 

challenges which include lack of qualified and experienced project accounting staff due to high turnover 

or attrition of accounting staff, weak internal controls and non-compliance with key internal control 

procedures within line ministry.  

4.3.2 The 2015 report of Transparency International Corruption Perception Index showed that Malawi 

had slide from 37(88/176) to 31 (112/175) between 1912 and 2015. The overall score of 2015 was below 

Sub-Saharan average of 33 score. However, the overall average score for Malawi’s Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Governance component has been improving slowly between 2004-

2014 with intermittent slight decreases in 2010 (-0.1) and 2014 (-0.13). However, the theft of public 

funds amounting to about US Dollar 50 million in September, 2013 dubbed as Cash gate, exposed high 

level corruption and serious weaknesses in Malawi’s PFM system. The current administration has since 

coming into power shown strong resolve to address the root causes of Cash gate and reform the PFM 

system.  The Government is implementing the PFM Reform Action Plan to restore controls and integrity 

of the PFM system over the short term. The Government also is also implementing a broader Public 

Sector Reform Programme (PSRP) aimed at improving accountability and transparency in public 

service delivery.  Steady progress in reforms is being made as evidenced by recent improvement in 

financial reporting and completion of pay roll audit.  There are on-going efforts to strengthen the 

capacity of key governance institutions, such as the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Office of the Directorate 

of Public Procurement (ODPP) and the National Auditor General’s Office. 

4.4 Sustainability  

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations by 

the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUAs) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs are 

expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. Other 

sustainability of other components - Value Addition and Youth entrepreneurship and Agro-



 

18 

Cooperatives Development for Employability are hinged on making paradigm shift of agriculture from 

development to business/commercial activities.  

4.4.2 The project is financially sustainable. The analysis indicates 23% and 26% FIRR and EIRR 

respectively. It is evident that the farmers will be able to pay for the water usage (which is currently 

estimated at KWA50, 000 per annum) through the Water User Association given that farmers will be 

linked to processors who will be ready to buy their products. In order to strengthen the relationships 

between the two parties,   provisions have been made for legal services. The project also makes 

provision for the training of artisans and technicians for the maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure.  

In addition regarding the irrigation infrastructure, marketing of value added products, provision of 

institutional support and development of strong farmer groups will work in synergy to ensure 

sustainability. In particular it is expected that, under AIYAP, the farmers who will be organized in 

Farmer Associations/Cooperative Societies will operate as farming businesses. Cooperative and 

Extension Officers will be recruited to provide technical supports in farms management, operation and 

maintenance.  The analysis also indicates that the young entrepreneurs will be able to service their loans, 

as well as obtain handsome net profits for re-investments in running of their farms.    

4.5 Risk management  

 

4.5.1 One major risk is the unpredictability of agricultural markets due to trade restrictions and price 

controls on some items. The Government is being urged by DPs, for instance to deregulate agriculture 

markets including removal of bans and pegging the price on some strategic crops such as maize.   

Enactment of the Goods Control Act would help to improve market predictability.  However, there is 

already a guaranteed market for sugarcane production by linking the farmers with Dwangwa Cane 

Growers Trust and Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd.     

4.5.2  Volatility of the world commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys accessibility to SADC market and the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: Project cost overruns due to exchange rate fluctuations, uncertainties in 

economic situation of Malawi and SADC and the rise in the cost of materials. 

Mitigation: Project is costed in USD and efficient procurement timing to address the increases, as well 

as adequate price contingencies for the unavoidable increases will is provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, increased temperature, change in length of rainy season, increased 

incidences of drought and floods, due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding vulnerabilities, assisting the communities to select various adaptation 

measures; e.g. rainwater harvesting, rotational grazing, using drought tolerant varieties e.g. cassava, 

sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions will be largely be in kind in form of provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salary and wages, allowances (including per diem of staff), payment of all utility bills, office 

equipment and payment of hotel bills for staff seconded to the project.  

 
4.6 Knowledge building  
 

4.6.1 The knowledge gained and lessons learnt through the implementation of various agricultural 

projects in Malawi, government policies as well as studies carried out in the sector have been duly 

applied in designing this project. Similarly, the knowledge that will be generated through 

implementation of this Project will be synergised with other projects on ground such as SIVAP and 

AISP to achieve maximum result. The results from the various studies and other surveys, including the 

socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired knowledge into 

practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit flows. 

 



 

19 

4.6.2 At the project level, the project implementation review, quarterly progress reports, audit, sector 

M&E and completion reports will also provide information on various aspects of the project for further 

diagnosis. The knowledge obtained will be shared within the Bank and with other development partners 

as well as with RMCs. 

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal instrument  

The Project will be financed by an ADF loan.  

5.2 Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement: The entry into force of 

the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 

12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loans and Guarantee Agreements of the ADF. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan: The obligation of the Bank to make 

the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon entry into force of Loan Agreement in 

accordance with 5.2.1 above and the submission by the Borrower of evidence in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the opening of a special account in a bank acceptable to the Bank into which 

the proceeds of the Loan will be deposited.   

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to: (a) establish a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU) within six months of the entry into force of the Loan Agreement.. 

 

5.2.4 Undertaking: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to implement the project in 

compliance with national legislations and in accordance with the Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) and submit to the Bank on an annual basis an acceptable 

Environmental and Social Monitoring Report. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  

 
VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposed ADF loan of UA16 million 

to the Government of Malawi for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 



 











































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

PROJECT: TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

COUNTRY : TANZANIA 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:   United Republic of Tanzania  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank 

 

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source UA Million USD Million Instrument 

African Development Fund 67.27 93.51 Loan 

 

 

ADF Key financing information 

     

Interest Rate  None 

Service Charge 0.75%   

Commitment Fee 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Grace Period 10 years  

  

Timeframe - Main Milestones 

 

Project concept note clearance 05 September 2016 

Project approval 14 December 2016 

Signing of loan agreement 31 January 2017 

Last repayment December 2057 

 



 

iii 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The objective of the present project, which involves a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) to be on-lent to the Tanzania 

Agricultural Development Bank (TADB), is to contribute to the development of the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania. The agriculture sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of Tanzania and has a 

very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land and the availability of inland water 

resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic 

development and poverty reduction. Specifically, in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable 

Development Goals and the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow 

at over 10% per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% per 

annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates have recently 

declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. A major problem facing the agriculture 

sector is the unavailability of medium to long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural 

production, processing and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-

needed funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from the ADF 

to the URT will be passed on to the TADB as a loan thereby enabling this institution to assist Tanzania in 

achieving its development goals by extending much-needed funding to the agriculture sector. 

Project Beneficiaries: Tanzania is heavily dependent on agriculture which accounts for 26% of GDP and 
35% of foreign currency earnings. The country has a dual agricultural economy, the smallholder farmers and 

the commercial/large-scale farmers. The smallholder farmers dominate the agriculture sector and account for 

most of the food produced in Tanzania. These farmers are expected to be the main beneficiaries of the project. 

The project will also benefit women as they represent the majority of the smallholder farmers in Tanzania. 

Women will benefit from having a portion of the funding specifically dedicated to them as well as from the 

establishment of a mentoring program to build and enhance their skills. The project will thus have positive social 

and gender pay-offs. 

Project Rationale: The project is consistent with the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which 

emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring basic food security, ii) improving 

household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. The National Five-Year Development Plan 

(FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture 

sector policies and strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the Southern Agricultural 

Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative, all call for increased commercialization of agriculture. The 

latest national development initiative, the Big Results Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the 

agriculture sector which are maize, rice and sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. 

The project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and strategies including: i) the Bank’s Country 

Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020), ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), iii) the Bank’s High 

5s, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18). 

Bank Value Added: The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national development finance 

institutions (DFIs) in Africa. Through this operation, the Bank Group will not only provide the United 

Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand 

its operations and outreach, but will also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI 

through the proposed technical assistance program (TA Program) which will be funded with a portion of the 

funds that will be made available to the TADB. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has 

fed into the design of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. 

Institutional Development and Knowledge Building: The project will add to the body of knowledge 

already acquired within the Bank Group following numerous interventions to support agriculture as well 

as DFIs across Africa. The Bank Group will ensure that knowledge from the operation is captured through 

adequate monitoring and evaluation of its outputs and outcomes, supervision missions, mid-term review, 

stakeholder consultations and project completion reports at the end of the operation. 



 

iv 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced growth rate of the 
agriculture sector and increased 

contribution to GDP. 

Annual growth rate of the of 
agriculture sector. 

 

Contribution of the agriculture 

sector to GDP. 

3.2% (Q2 2016). 

 

 

26% (Q2 2016). 

10% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

33% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

IMF’s Article IV Consultation 
Staff Reports. 

IMF’s World and Regional 

Economic Outlook reports. 

National Bureau of Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

S
 

Outcome 1. Increased income of 

farmers. 

Mean per capita income of 

farmers in the beneficiary areas. 

USD 466 p.a. USD 600 p.a. by 2020. Household and Economic 

Survey Reports. 

 

National Bureau of Statistics 
and ASDP. 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries. 

 

Tanzania Revenue Authority. 

Risks  

 The proceeds of the ADF loan not deployed successfully thereby 
jeopardizing the financial success of the project and the achievement of 

its development outcomes. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to the successful implementation of the TA 
Program and enhancing the capacity of its clients. 

 The TADB is expected to finance viable borrowers as a result of its TA-
enhanced lending operations. 

Outcome 2. Increased agricultural 

production and productivity 

(yields) of the targeted agriculture 
value chains. 

 

Note that the basis of the 
estimates are the baseline 

numbers and targets outlined in 

Tanzania’s Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP). 

Average annual productivity of 

maize (Metric tons per hectare, 

MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.6 of MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 40% by 2020. 

Total annual production of maize 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

6,734,438 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual productivity of 

paddy (MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.8 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 50% by 2020. 

Total annual production of paddy 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

1,681,125 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual yield of 

sunflower (MT/ha) 

Yield of 1.6 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 25% by 2020. 

Outcome 3. Increased exports. Volume of exported maize in 

metric tons. 

1,056,559 metric tons in 

2014 

Increase of 15% by 2020. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1. Funding extended to 

the agriculture sector from the 
proceeds of the ADF loan. 

Total volume of funding 

disbursed to the agriculture sector 
including the proportion 

benefitting women. 

NA At least UA 67.27 million 

disbursed including 20% 
specifically to women in 

agriculture. 

The financial statements and 

operational reports of the 
TADB. 

 

Bank Group regular supervision 
and monitoring reports. 

Risks 

 Insufficient demand for funding from the agriculture sector. 

 Consultants not recruited and TA Program not implemented. 

 Mentoring program not established and lack of interest from TADB’s 
larger clients to mentor women. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to strengthening its own capacity with the 
disbursement of the second tranche of the ADF loan conditional on the 

implementation of 2 of the 3 components of the TA Program. 

 The TADB is committed to building the capacity of its clients including 
through the proposed mentoring program for women. 

 TADB’s larger clients will be incentivized to mentor women. 

Output 2. Implementation of the 

TA Program for building the 

capacity of the TADB. 

Number of components of the TA 

Program implemented by the 

TADB. 

NA Full implementation of the 

TA Program including 

training of at least 50 staff. 

Output 3. Implementation of the 

mentoring program for women. 

Number of women benefitting 

from the mentoring program. 

NA At least 880 women 

benefitting from the 
mentoring program. 



 

v 

Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Provision of funding from the African Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania to support the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank. 

 

 Technical assistance program (TA Program) to build and strengthen the capacity of the TADB. 

INPUT: 

Funding from the ADF for an amount of UA 67.27 million to be passed on by 

the United Republic of Tanzania to the TADB as a loan. The terms and 

conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in line with those 
of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which will 

be Tanzanian Shilling. 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF 

TANZANIA TO SUPPORT THE TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 

BANK 

Management submits the following report and recommendation for a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) which will be on-lent to 

the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank (TADB). The loan is for an amount of UA 67.27 

million. The present appraisal report1 focuses principally on assessing the TADB since the 

proceeds of the ADF loan are to be passed on by the URT to this national development finance 

institution (DFI) in the form of a loan. The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to 

the TADB will be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan 

currency which will be Tanzanian Shilling. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. The agricultural sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of 
Tanzania2 and has a very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land3 

and the availability of inland water resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if 

Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. Specifically, 

in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 

Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow at over 10% 

per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% 

per annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates 

have recently declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. 

1.2. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of medium to 
long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural production, processing 

and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-needed 

funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from 

the ADF to the URT will be used to support the TADB thereby enabling this institution to assist 

Tanzania in achieving its development goals and inclusive growth by extending much-needed 

funding to the agricultural sector. 

1.3. The present project is aligned with Tanzania’s key priorities. In highlighting the 
importance of the agriculture sector and to address the challenges facing it, the Tanzania 

Development Vision 2025 emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring 

basic food security, ii) improving household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. 

                                                 

1 The present report has been prepared based on information provided by the URT and the TADB before, during 

and after the AfDB’s appraisal mission to Tanzania from the 5th to 8th of September 2016. During the mission, a 

series of meetings were held with senior government officials at the Ministry of Finance and Planning, Ministry 

of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Office of Treasury Registrar, Agriculture Council of Tanzania and the 

Bank of Tanzania. Extensive discussions were also held with the senior management and technical staff of the 

TADB. Furthermore, the appraisal report is informed by the lessons learnt from supporting similar projects in 

other African countries. 

2 The ongoing portfolio in Tanzania, as of September 2016, comprises 24 operations with total net commitment 

of UA 1.36 billion. The portfolio consists of 20 public sector operations and 4 private sector operations. Public 

sector operations (mostly infrastructure: transport, power and water supply and sanitation) represent 86.45% of 

the portfolio while private sector operations make up the remaining 13.55%. The ongoing operations are financed 

through various instruments. ADF loans account for 52% while AfDB public sector loans represent 27% and 

private sector loans account for 14%. ADF grants and various AfDB administered trust funds account for the 

remaining 7% of the financing. See Appendix II for additional information on the portfolio. 

3 Agricultural Land in Tanzania was last measured at 396,500 sq.km in 2016 (44.8% of total land area) versus 

369,744 sq.km in 2008 representing an increase of 7% over the period. 



 

2 

The National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the 

agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture sector policies and 

strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the 

Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative all call for increased 

commercialization of agriculture. The latest national development initiative, the Big Results 

Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the agriculture sector which are maize, rice and 

sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. One of the three “big 

ideas” for agriculture under the BRN is delivery of 25 commercial and out-grower investments, 

16 for sugar and 9 for rice. 

1.4. The present project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and 
strategies. These include: i) the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020) 

which calls for unlocking the country’s productive capacity to promote various key sectors 

including agriculture, ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly its operational 

focus areas (private sector development), areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food 

security) and the promotion of inclusive growth by offering support to smallholder farmers, iii) 

the Bank’s High 5s especially Industrialize Africa, Feed Africa and Improve the quality of life 

for Africans, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality. 

2. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

The Economy 

2.1. Tanzania’s economy is one of the fastest growing among large Sub-Saharan 
African countries (Figure 1). Real GDP growth is expected to remain around 7% in 2016 and 

2017 (in line with 2015), according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), supported by 

continued investment in infrastructure, manufacturing and tourism. Better availability and 

reliability of power supply, a rapidly expanding services sector and an improvement in the 

country’s terms of trade due to lower oil prices are also factors that are stimulating growth. 

Furthermore, Tanzania holds significant growth potential in every major sector of the economy, 

including agriculture, manufacturing, services, tourism and mining. GDP growth is expected 

to be driven by the construction, transport, communications and financial services sectors. 

Recent offshore natural gas discoveries are projected to expand the country’s export base and 

help to further diversify the economy. 

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate Forecast 

 

Sources: IMF, Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Moody’s Investors Service. 

2.2. Tanzania has been able to weather recent risk aversion to emerging markets and 
financial market volatility, which led to a 24% depreciation in the local currency against 

the US Dollar in 2015, thanks to its diversified economy and net oil import position. As a 



 

3 

net oil importer, Tanzania is benefitting from the decline in global oil prices, its external 

position has improved and lower pump prices are supporting domestic consumption and 

growth. 

2.3. Relatively low wealth levels and widespread poverty are constraints on economic 
growth. However, while significant infrastructure bottlenecks hamper the country’s full 

growth potential. Tanzania is also less competitive, has lower productivity and provides a less 

favorable business environment than some of its regional peers such as Kenya and Rwanda. 

The Banking Sector 

2.4. With total assets approaching TZS 28.5 trillion at end of 2015 (USD 13.08 billion), 
Tanzania’s banking sector is the seventh largest in sub-Saharan Africa, behind South 

Africa, Nigeria, Angola, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana. Banking assets rose at an annual rate 

of 21% between 2005 and 2015, compared with average nominal GDP growth of 17% over the 

same period. The banking system, however, remains small in a global and regional context. 

Banking system assets are estimated at around 31.3% of GDP as of December 2015 (Figure 2) 

due to low per capita income, fairly low banking penetration and low transaction volumes. 

Figure 2. Banking System Assets as a Percentage of GDP 

 
Sources: Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Bank of Tanzania. 

2.5. Lending growth grew at an annual rate of 27% between 2005 and 2015, with 
particularly high loan growth prior to 2009 levelling off to 21% over the past five years 

(Figure 3). The expansion covered most economic sectors, but the agricultural, hunting, 

forestry and fishing sectors have slowed recently to a five-year annual growth rate of 11%. 

Rapid growth continues in trade (25%), building, construction, real estate and leasing (32%), 

education (48%), health (53%), and mining and quarrying (52%). Personal and other services 

grew less aggressively over the past five years (20% annual growth rate), but have recently 

picked up with 46% growth in 2015 alone. 

Figure 3. Lending Growth Rates 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 



 

4 

2.6. Loan books cover a wide range of sectors and segments (Figure 4), a reflection of 
the diversification of the Tanzanian economy. 

Figure 4. Sector Composition as of December 2015 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 

2.7. The banking sector plays a dominant role in the financial system with banks 
having around a 71.3% market share as of the end of March 2016. Pension funds accounted 

for 26.5%, insurance companies for 1.9% and collective investment schemes for 0.5%. Four 

banks account for around half of system assets. These are: CRDB Bank, National Microfinance 

Bank, National Bank of Commerce and Standard Chartered Bank Tanzania. A total of 36 

commercial banks and 12 community banks operate in the country ensuring some level of 

competition. Concentration remains high, however, as smaller banks and community banks 

generally lack extensive branch networks and are unable to compete with larger banks, often 

leading to weaker financial profiles. 

2.8. Non-performing loans (NPLs), defined as 90 days past due, have remained high 
over the past few years, ranging between 6.5% and 9.3% of gross loans since 2011. Despite 

robust growth in the economy since then, NPLs remain elevated and stood at 8.4% of total 

loans as of March 2016. Weaknesses in certain economic sectors are to blame, including the 

inherently volatile agricultural sector which accounts for the highest NPLs. The agricultural 

sector is a top priority for development by the Government of Tanzania but problem loans are 

rife. This is due to the inherent volatility of the sector given its dependence on commodity 

prices and vulnerability to droughts. This, combined with a tendency for the commercial banks 

to extend loans with short-term maturities and high interest rates, results in a higher propensity 

to default in the agriculture sector compared to other sectors. In fact, the little funding that is 

currently offered to the agriculture sector is not considered as suitable given its high interest 

rates and short-term maturities and does not necessarily contribute to the development of the 

sector either as it does not provide the flexibility to accommodate the inherently seasonal and 

cyclical nature of agriculture. 

The Agriculture Sector 

2.9. Agriculture in Tanzania is an important sector of the economy as it accounts for 
26% of the country’s GDP and employs 67% of its population. The sector is also an 

important source of export revenues. Despite its significance to livelihoods and to the overall 

economy, the agriculture sector remains hampered by widespread underinvestment. As a result 

it continues to operate largely at subsistence levels and its potential to bring commercialization 

to scale remains for the most part unrealized. 



 

5 

2.10. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of finance 
(particularly medium to long-term) to support agricultural production, processing and 

marketing. As of December 2015, a mere 8% of commercial banks’ lending went to the sector 

with most of which went to large companies operating in Tanzania. As a result of this 

underinvestment, production in the agriculture sector has not increased significantly over the 

past decades. 

2.11. In Tanzania, there is huge potential to produce both food and non-food crops for 
the domestic and export markets if access to term (medium to long-term) finance is 

improved. The availability of such finance will enable farmers to reduce their exposure to the 

cyclicality and seasonality of agriculture, to make investments in crops with long gestations 

periods and to acquire farm machinery and inputs, irrigation equipment, storage and processing 

facilities thereby transforming the sector and increasing its contribution towards economic 

growth. Access to term finance is critical for the growth of the agriculture sector and the shift 

from subsistence to commercial agricultural production. 

2.12. The commercial banks in Tanzania are reluctant to expand their lending to the 
agriculture sector which they view as risky. This deprives the sector of the much-needed 

funds to boost production, processing and marketing. The commercial banks tend to fund 

themselves with short-term deposits limiting their incentive to extend term finance to a sector 

that they consider as risky although it is not necessarily more risky than other sectors, it is just 

that these banks, having found their niches, have not done enough to adequately structure their 

lending to the sector taking into account risk factors such as seasonal variations which can be 

addressed through the provision of medium to long-term lending. It is against this background, 

and for sustainable economic growth in the country that, the Government of Tanzania has 

decided to establish the TADB so as to address the observed bottlenecks and enhance access 

to credit in the agriculture sector. The TADB has been established as a national DFI with a key 

role of being a catalyst for delivery of credit facilities for the development of agriculture in 

Tanzania. However, the TADB alone cannot satisfy the significant demand for credit of the 

entire sector and this is why it aims to focus on particular actors as well as on a set of high 

potential value chains in which investments can produce results within a short timeframe. The 

TADB will also take a holistic approach and finance the entire value chain namely production, 

processing and marketing. 

2.13. It is worth noting that in 2005, the Government of Tanzania implemented the 
recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) of the IMF 

which was undertaken in 2003. It was recognized that lack of long-term financing was among 

the stumbling blocks in the growth of the economy. Among the activities that were earmarked 

for implementation was the establishment of development finance institutions to provide long-

term financing to key economic sectors including agriculture. This led to the establishment of 

a number of credit schemes while the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) was transformed into a 

development finance institution with an agricultural financing window albeit not sufficient to 

address the needs of the agriculture sector hence the establishment of the TADB. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the needs of the agriculture sector in Tanzania provides a 

strong justification for Government intervention particularly through a dedicated DFI whose 

mandate is to specifically serve the agriculture sector. 

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

3.1. As previously stated, among the major problems facing the agriculture sector in 
Tanzania is the availability and cost of term finance to support agricultural production, 

processing and marketing. As of December 2015, credit to the agriculture sector accounted 

for only 8% of total lending by the commercial banks. Most of this lending was to large 

enterprises operating in the sector. In fact, despite rapid growth of the financial sector in 



 

6 

Tanzania, access to credit and other financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in 

the agriculture sector especially the smallholder farmers for whom funding from the banks is 

simply out of reach. This essentially underlines the rationale for public intervention as the 

financial system has not been able to adequately address gaps in the provision of finance to the 

agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

3.2. The Bank Group is to intervene to provide resources from the African 
Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania which will utilize the borrowed 

resources to extend a loan to the TADB which is a state-owned DFI established as part of 

the second pillar of the country’s Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009. The TADB, whose 

design has been informed by an in-depth review of global experiences relating to successful 

national DFIs, is meant to play a critical role in alleviating the financing constraints that hamper 

the growth of Tanzania’s agriculture sector. 

3.3. The TADB was officially launched and started operations in 2015. It is structured 
to deliver medium and long-term funding through wholesale and direct lending as well as 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments to address the financing gaps in the agriculture value 

chains. 

3.4. The TADB has been focusing on a set of high potential value chains within the 
national priorities. The fourteen value chains of focus fall under eight agriculture sub-sectors 

as follows: cereals (maize and rice), industrial commodities (sugarcane and cashew nuts), 

oilseeds (sunflower and sesame), horticulture (vegetables, fruits and spices), livestock (diary 

and beef), poultry, fisheries and forestry. Overtime, the TADB will support other value chains 

as more funds are made available to it including from the ADF. 

3.5. The TADB will predominantly target smallholder farmers who carry out essential 
agricultural-related economic activities within the value chains of focus (understanding 

that serving the smallholder farmers directly will be challenging, the TADB aims to reach 

them through their farmer organizations). These farmers will be targeted through funding 

as well as technical assistance which the TADB will implement by working closely with 

Business Development Services (BDS) providers across Tanzania. The ultimate objective in 

doing so is to enable these farmers to make the transition from subsistence to commercial 

farming in an effective and sustainable manner. That said, the TADB will also target other 

medium and large scale farmers as well as the agro-processors, among others. Furthermore, the 

TADB will finance infrastructure development for irrigation, storage/warehousing and 

transport. 

3.6. The pricing of TADB’s facilities will take into account its developmental mandate 
as well as the objective of maintaining sustainable operations. This national DFI will aim 

to extend funding with affordable interest rates for agriculture production, processing and value 

addition. As part of its mandate to develop agriculture, it will aim to maintain low interest rates 

for the smallholder farmers based on its cost of funds plus a sufficient margin to cover operating 

expenses and generate a profit to facilitate sustainability of operations. Given that smallholder 

farmers are potentially one of Tanzania’s most powerful sources of economic growth, the 

TADB will thus contribute to inclusive growth as well as sustained poverty alleviation. The 

provision of long-term funding in local currency to the smallholder farmers will also have a 

positive impact on affordability. Extending loan tenors will have a beneficial impact on the 

cash flows of the borrowers, thus allowing them to expand their borrowing capacity and 

businesses. For the larger clients, the TADB will extend financing on market confirming terms, 

nevertheless. This is important as sustainability is paramount and the viability of the products 

that the TADB provides will be crucial to its success. 

 

 



 

7 

3.7. The TADB is currently wholly-owned by the Government of Tanzania and is run 
by a board comprised mostly of independent non-executive directors appointed through 

a competitive process. The board has three committees namely the board business committee, 

the board human resource and administration committee and the board audit, risk and 

compliance committee. Each committee is assigned specific focus areas and specialized 

functions in the operations of the TADB. The managing director is in charge of the TADB’s 

day-to-day affairs supported by a senior management team. The TADB has begun operations 

with 45 staff and expects to continue recruiting staff based on the needs and expansion of 

business operations to reach a total of 150 by 2020. The TADB operates from its head office 

in Dar es Salaam and overtime expects to open a number of offices in relevant areas of the 

country for reaching out to potential customers. Finally, its structure is as follows: 

 

Figure 5. Organization Structure 

 

3.8. The TADB’s authorized share capital is Tanzania Shilling (TZS) 800 billion (USD 
367.16 million). In order to enable the TADB to start carrying out its functions, the 

Government of Tanzania has so far injected TZS 60 billion (USD 27.54 million) as its initial 

capital contribution. However, this limited funding base is hindering the TADB’s ability to 

fully achieve its objectives including extending medium to long-term loans to the agriculture 

sector especially the loans needed for infrastructure development. It is against this background 

that the URT is requesting a loan from the ADF in an amount of UA 67.27 million (USD 93.51 

million, TZS 204.38 billion) whose proceeds will be on-lent to the TADB thereby enabling it 

to expand its operations and outreach. 

 



 

8 

3.9. The borrowed funds are expected to be deployed by the TADB towards funding a 
technical assistance program (TA Program) and supporting complementary activities 

which are expected to have a positive impact on productivity in the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania: 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agricultural infrastructure 
development (e.g. warehousing facilities and irrigation schemes to provide reliable 

access to water to absorb shocks caused by climatic variability); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for access to agricultural inputs 
(financing access to quality seeds, fertilizers and pesticides); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding to agro-processing industries; 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agro-mechanization (e.g. 
tractors, harvesters and irrigation equipment); and 

 Building resilience and capacity to absorb costs by having a portion of the funds 
invested in low risk/high return instruments in order to absorb the high transaction costs 

associated with financing smallholder agriculture at low interest rates. 

3.10. The TADB has been established to promote the transformation of the agriculture 
sector from subsistence to commercial farming by offering loans to the sector at 

affordable interest rates. Affordable interest rates have been identified to be a key driver to 

unlock the potentials of smallholder farmers. The agricultural sector in Tanzania has been 

characterized with low returns and therefore low interest rates for loans are needed to assist in 

enabling start up projects to take off. Lending at low interest rates to the smallholder farmers 

can nevertheless restrict the ability of the TADB to generate profits and can also result into 

operating losses which can deplete capital and endanger the long-term sustainability of the 

institution. To address this issue, the TADB intends to deploy the following measures in order 

to preserve capital and ensure funding sustainability: 

 Adequate pricing of loans to ensure that the overall yields remain positive: The 
TADB intends to recover all costs of financial intermediation (including administrative 

expenses, borrowing costs and provisions against expected losses) and to earn an 

appropriate return on capital. In its pricing policy, the TADB will charge a margin over 

the base rate plus fees and commissions to recover the administrative and operating 

costs incurred in generating, implementing and monitoring a loan as well as the cost of 

capital employed. While the smallholder farmers will be charged low interest rates, the 

TADB expects to compensate for this by charging the larger clients interest rates that 

are essentially market confirming. This cross-subsidization will enable the TADB to 

assist the smallholder farmers while generating positive returns to ensure sustainability. 

In addition, the TADB will diversify its portfolio by placing a small portion of its funds 

in government securities that offer risk free returns. Such diversification will lower the 

risk profile of the TADB’s portfolio while at the same time enhance its return; and 

 Moderating and controlling the issuance of new loans and advances: Issuance of 
new loans and advances will be subject to the availability of funding and compliance 

with existing capital adequacy regulations which require banks not to increase their risk 

weighted assets above the regulatory thresholds in relation to the size of core capital. 

In order to ensure compliance, the TADB’s Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) 

will continually review its liquidity and capital adequacy and ascertain its ability to 

continue with the issuance of new loans. The TADB may temporarily withhold issuance 

of new loans and advances if liquidity and capital adequacy ratios are breached and if 

other circumstances are deemed necessary such as a deteriorating loan portfolio and 

high level of non-performing loans. 



 

9 

3.11. Furthermore, the TADB’s funding strategy has been developed in order to outline 
the potential sources of funding. While commercial banks mainly rely on short-term customer 

deposits as the key source of funding, the TADB’s funding will come from the main 

shareholder and from concessionary borrowings from international DFIs, at least in the first 

few years of operations. This will contribute to ensuring that the TADB’s funds are low-cost 

putting it in a position to extend affordable loans to its target beneficiaries particularly the 

smallholder farmers to whom funding must be affordable to pursue profitable agriculture 

activities to transform their lives into improved standards. 

Technical Assistance 

3.12. As agreed with the TADB and the Tanzanian authorities during the appraisal 
mission, a portion of the proposed funding of UA 1.0 million (equivalent to USD 1.39 

million) will be utilized to fund a TA Program to further enhance and strengthen the 

capacity of this institution. The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national 

development finance institutions in Africa. Through this present project, the Bank Group will 

not only provide the United Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to 

further support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand its operations and outreach, but will 

also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI through the proposed 

TA Program. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has fed into the design 

of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. The main 

components are provided below and are based on a preliminary assessment of the TADB. 

However, once the funds are disbursed, the TADB will be expected to implement the TA 

Program beginning with a thorough needs assessments to further fine-tune the list of areas that 

need to be enhanced and strengthened. That said, the below components will serve as a good 

guide for implementation: 

 Component 1: Process and System Improvements 

This will include support to the TADB in key areas such as asset and liability 

management, risk management, corporate and capital planning, credit underwriting, 

risk based pricing, product development and costing and the enhancement and/or 

development of relevant strategies, procedures, policies and guidelines (especially 

those that relate to internal control systems and audit, code of conduct, financial 

management and accounting and procurement); 

 Component 2: Information Technology (IT) 

This component will cover the IT needs of the TADB in terms of banking software and 

systems in order to enhance outputs and functionalities. It will also cover the TADB’s 

IT infrastructure and management information system (MIS) for portfolio management 

and monitoring including the tracking of the development outcomes of its lending 

activities; and 

 Component 3: Building staff capacity 

This component will entail training staff in key areas such as risk analysis, risk 

management, credit underwriting, asset and liability management, use of new IT/MIS 

and environmental and social risks management. Evidently, the needs assessment will 

provide a more comprehensive list of the needs of the staff of the TADB. Further, to 

ensure maximum impact for this component, the training that will be provided to the 

staff of the TADB will be done primarily on the premises of the TADB or on location 

in Dar es Salaam as to ensure that: i) most of the staff are trained and ii) that the 

resources of this component are not unnecessarily spent on travel. 

 



 

10 

3.13. The TA Program is designed to strengthen the capacity of the TADB. This is 
intended to contribute to building a sound banking business so that this national DFI is not only 

used as an intermediary to channel financing to the agriculture sector in Tanzania, but also to 

build institutional development of a DFI to enable sustainable lending and provide a strong 

demonstration effect. 

Gender Impact 

3.14. Tanzania’s constitution guarantees equality of men and women and supports 
women’s full participation in social, economic and political life. The Government of 

Tanzania has also taken steps to mainstream gender perspectives in sector policies, strategies 

and programs. In agriculture, even though the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative does not specifically 

address gender, pillar 8 of its implementation framework (Science, Technology and Human 

Resources for Kilimo Kwanza) calls for mainstreaming gender in Kilimo Kwanza and 

developing programs to strengthen the position of women in agriculture. 

3.15. Agriculture is a major source of livelihood for most rural populations in Tanzania. 
Women comprise a large proportion of the agricultural labor force yet women farmers are 

consistently found to be less productive than male farmers. There are several barriers that 

hinder their performance. These include limited access to finance as well as inadequate skills 

to run and manage operations and businesses. This project is therefore expected to contribute 

to narrowing the financing gap for women in the agriculture sector while also enhancing their 

skills and capacity. 

3.16. During the appraisal mission, the mission team emphasized the need for the TADB 
to continue targeting and supporting women as beneficiaries considering their critical 

role in the agriculture sector. More concretely, following discussions with the TADB, it has 

been agreed that the project will include the following key actions to support women in 

agriculture: 

 As the TADB scales up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania through the 
mobilized ADF funds, at least 20% of these resources will be specifically dedicated 

by it towards supporting women in agriculture. This is in addition to the already 

existing access by women to funding from the TADB (i.e. the remaining 80% will still 

go to both men and women); 

 The TADB will put in place a mentoring program for women in agriculture to 
enhance their technical, farming and managerial skills. The mentoring would 

consist of linking women with the TADB’s larger and more experienced clients from 

whom they can benefit and learn. That said, for the mentoring to work, it is critical to 

put in place an effective incentivization scheme for the mentors including, but not 

limited to, small reductions in their cost of borrowing; and 

 At the institutional level, while the TADB has designated a staff member as a 
gender champion, this action is not supported by an institutional policy or 

strategy. During the appraisal mission, it was established that the TADB’s credit policy 

does not explicitly mention women. To address these gaps, the TADB will develop a 

gender policy that will guide how it addresses gender issues internally and externally 

with its clients. Furthermore, the TADB will review its credit policy to reflect its 

commitment to advancing the empowerment of women. The Bank Group will support 

the TADB to develop a Gender Policy which will need to be in place prior to the 

disbursement of the funds. 

 

 



 

11 

Social Issues 

3.17. The funds to be provided to the TADB are expected to contribute towards 
economic empowerment of small scale farmers, entrepreneurship and employment 

creation. These funds are expected to contribute to growth of small businesses, income 

generation, household savings and a surge in value addition activities. The TADB maintains a 

tiered pricing framework whereby it provides funding at low interest rates to the smallholder 

farmers while it charges more to the larger and more established corporate entities in the 

agriculture sector. This cross-subsidization enables the TADB to provide affordable funding to 

the smaller farmers while generating sufficient income to sustain its business. Financial literacy 

among rural farmers and especially women has been identified as a major challenge and the 

TADB is in the process of setting up a technical assistance fund which will focus on capacity 

development for the small farmers. 

Environment Impact 

3.18. The project has been classified as Category FI-B in line with the Bank Group’s 
assessment procedures. The TADB’s portfolio and the proposed investments to be supported 

with financing from the ADF are considered medium risk with limited adverse environmental 

or social impacts that are largely reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures. 

3.19. At the request of the AfDB and with its guidance and input, the TADB has 
developed and approved an Environmental and Social (E&S) Policy and an 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which will provide the 

procedures and workflow that will be followed for each investment by the institution to 

manage all levels of environmental and social risks. The proposed investments will be 

screened, reviewed and evaluated against national laws and regulations, the Bank Group’s 

Exclusion List and Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) as well as other applicable performance 

standards or safeguard requirements (specifically those pertinent to the agriculture sector 

including land issues, water management, pollution and climate risks). 

Lessons Learned Reflected in Project Design 

3.20. The AfDB has learned numerous lessons from its work with national and regional 
DFIs from across Africa as well as in its experience providing technical assistance 

programs. These lessons, and the manner in which they have been taken into account in the 

current operation, are: 

Lesson How it will be addressed 

National DFIs across Africa face common 

challenges including: 

 Emphasis placed on loan approvals and 
disbursements over loan quality resulting in 

high non-performing loans 

 Weak administrative systems, procedures 
and reporting systems; and 

 Insufficient human resource capacity. 

The proposed technical assistance program is 

expected to contribute to achieving the 

following key objectives: 

 Enhanced credit underwriting processes 
and skills; 

 Improved IT and management information 
systems for portfolio reporting and 

monitoring; and 

 Skilled staff through relevant trainings. 

3.21. In addition to the above, during the appraisal mission, extensive discussions were 
held with the senior management of the TADB as well as with government officials on the 

need to ensure that the institution, which is newly established, is encouraged to operate 

based on internationally recognized good practice principles that are considered as key 

for success and long-term sustainability. These principles have been identified by the AfDB 

as well as sister institutions such as the World Bank and include: 



 

12 

 While the TADB is currently owned by the Government of Tanzania, it was 
favorably noted that the aim of the authorities, over the medium to long-term, is 

to attract reputable investors to be shareholders in the institution. This is important 

as the shareholding structures of DFIs are moving away from 100% state ownership 

towards mixed public-private capital structures. This will be expected to strengthen the 

governance of the TADB. It was also noted that the governance of the TADB has been 

designed with a board of directors that is predominately composed of independent 

directors selected based on a competitive process. Indeed, as per the TADB’s 

memorandum and articles of association (MEMARTS), the board is designed to consist 

of between 7 and 9 directors, the majority of whom meant to be non-executive and non-

government officials. As per the MEMARTS, the directors are also to be selected to be 

qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, expertise, integrity and 

stature. This is key as it contributes to enhancing performance and minimizing political 

interference. The governance of the TADB was thoroughly discussed, including with 

senior government officials, and it was agreed to ensure independence of both the 

management and the board with their recruitment based on merit only; 

 The need to ensure that the TADB is operationally and financially sustainable with 
overall pricing that reflects costs and credit risk. While the smallholder farmers will 

be provided with funding that is concessional, the TADB will make up for this by 

charging its larger borrowers interest rates that will be market-conforming as well as 

funding itself with low cost liabilities which will help in absorbing the high transaction 

costs associated with serving the smallholder farmers; 

 The importance of putting in place strong administrative systems, procedures, 
policies and guidelines and this is what the TA Program will address. The TA 

Program will also address staff capacity and skills; 

 The importance of avoiding credit misallocation and politically motivated lending 
and to this end, it was agreed that the funding to be provided to the TADB will not 

be utilized for onward lending to ineligible persons. Advancing loans to them will 

lead to automatic acceleration of the loan and cancellation of undisbursed amounts4; 

 During the appraisal mission, it was noted that the TADB is subject to prudential 
regulation and supervision by the Bank of Tanzania under its guidelines for 

development finance institutions. This was also viewed positively as independent 

regulation and supervision by the financial sector regulator rather than a line ministry 

with conflicts of interest enforces disciplined management; and 

 In addition, it was agreed that the TADB should aim as much as possible to operate 
as a wholesale lending institution as international experience has shown that 

wholesale-only development finance institutions that provide funding through 

                                                 
4 Ineligible Persons means the following persons who are ineligible to access funding extended with the proceeds of 

the ADF loan: 

a) Politically Exposed Persons defined as: head of state or head of government and their deputies, if any; cabinet 
minister of central or local government; member of a legislature of central or local government; deputy minister 

or equivalent rank; ambassador or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador; military officer with a rank of general 

or above; chief executive officer of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank; head of a government agency; 

judge; and senior official of a political party represented in a central state or local government legislature; 

b) Civil servants with the position of director, or its equivalent, and above employed by central, state or local 
government; 

c) Directors and senior management of the TADB; and 

d) Any related parties of the persons falling under clauses a) through c) above. 



 

13 

eligible financial institutions5 perform better than those that engage in retail 

operations. A wholesale approach is particularly appropriate with respect to financing 

underfunded segments. Retail development finance institutions are also perceived by 

their retail borrowers as entities that do not need to be repaid as they are owned by 

governments. While the TADB has been established to focus principally on wholesale 

lending activities, it is currently carrying out retail lending although it is expected to 

move towards wholesale lending as more funding is provided to it. The TADB is 

committed to this and will ensure that the funding from the ADF is extended through 

eligible financial institutions. It is worth noting that while extending funding through 

wholesale lending, the TADB will work with financial institutions which will be 

incentivized to enter the agriculture sector or expand service to it by augmenting their 

capacity and by providing them with long-term funding combined with technical 

assistance to increase the attractiveness of the agriculture sector and/or make 

commercial bank credit feasible. Thus, rather than replacing markets, the TADB will 

enhance them by providing term financing to financial institutions for on-lending 

(providing maturities that are otherwise unavailable to the financial institutions) and 

technical assistance to strengthen the financial institutions’ capacity to serve the 

agriculture sector. Furthermore, by working with such financial institutions, the 

TADB’s capital will essentially be protected as the capital of the financial institutions 

will stand between the TADB and any credit losses6.  

3.22. It is worth highlighting that the TADB has been incorporated as a public limited 
company under the Companies Act no. 2 of 2002 and not through an act of parliament. 
This is key for avoiding political interference since the key reporting relationship will be with 

the shareholders and not with the national assembly and the presidency as is the case when the 

establishment of a company is through an Act of Parliament. Furthermore, as stated earlier, 

while the Government of Tanzania is currently the sole shareholder, their intention is to bring 

in additional equity investors overtime so that the shareholding structure of the TADB moves 

away from 100% state ownership towards a mixed public-private capital structure. If this is 

achieved, the governance of the institution will be further strengthened. 

4. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 

Procurement Arrangements 

4.1. All procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance 
with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations and Methodology for 

its Implementation, dated October 2015. The various activities under the TA Program of the 

equivalent of UA 1 million involve the procurement of both goods and consultancy services. 

In the case of consultancy services, the procurement will be carried out on the basis of the 

                                                 
5 The following are minimum eligibility criteria for the financial institutions: i) must be duly licensed and at least 

two years in operation, ii) owners and board of directors should be “fit and proper”, iii) must have qualified and 

experienced management, adequate organization and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile, iv) must be 

in “good standing” with its supervisory authority and remain in compliance at all times, v) must have well defined 

policies and written procedures for management of all types of financial risks, vi) x) must have adequate internal 

audits and controls for its specific risk profile and vii) must have adequate management information systems. 

6 While extending funding through financial institutions, the TADB will need to ensure that the end beneficiaries 

(especially the smallholder farmers) are able to gain access to funding that is affordable in addition to having long 

tenors. To this end, the TADB will explore various mechanisms including auctioning credit to the financial 

institutions especially those serving the smallholder farmers. In order to put competitive pressure on the spreads 

offered by the financial institutions to the final borrowers, the TADB’s interest rates will be determined by an 

auction process under which the financial institutions will compete on the basis of the spreads they propose to 

offer to their borrowers. This innovative approach will ensure that the affordability of the funds being extended 

by the TADB. 



 

14 

Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) method. In particular, the TADB will be required to 

select and engage consultant(s) based on a transparent and competitive process, including well 

developed terms of reference, international advertising, short-listing and a robust evaluation 

process. An evaluation report prepared by the TADB will have to be accepted by the Bank 

Group within 14 calendar days, before recruiting the consultant(s). The procurement of goods, 

related to the IT upgrades component of the TA Program, will need to conform to established 

commercial practices acceptable to the Bank Group so that such procedures result in 

competitive market prices for the goods. The TADB will need to ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures which will be periodically reviewed for compliance. For 

the rest of the funding, the procurement of goods, works and services by the TADB’s target 

beneficiaries will need to conform to established commercial practices acceptable to the Bank 

Group so that such procedures result in competitive market prices for the goods, works and 

services and meet the needs of the TADB’s beneficiaries. The TADB will ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures and the Bank Group will periodically review the TADB’s 

compliance in ensuring that such procedures are followed by its target beneficiaries. 

Monitoring, Financial Management and Audit Arrangements 

4.2. The Bank Group conducted an assessment on the adequacy of the financial 
management systems of the TADB, the Executing Agency, based on the Bank’s 2014 

Financial Management Implementation Guidelines and concluded that the overall risk is 

Moderate. The TADB will be monitored, supervised and evaluated regularly by the Bank 

Group. It will prepare annual financial statements in accordance with International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS). The financial statements will include in the notes to the accounts 

the disbursement of the proceeds of the ADF loan by the URT to the TADB and will be audited 

by the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) or a private audit firm appointed by the CAG in 

accordance with the United Republic of Tanzania statutory requirements by applying 

International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions which are acceptable by the Bank. 

Within six months after the end of each financial year, the TADB will be required to submit a 

copy of its audited financial statements together with the management letter on the weaknesses 

identified by the auditors and the TADB’s management responses and implementation plan of 

the auditor’s recommendations. Furthermore, the TADB is licensed and supervised by the 

central bank and required to meet prudential requirements as regards to capital adequacy, loan 

provisioning and recognition of loan losses as well as other relevant regulations. These will be 

regularly verified by the Bank Group. Relevant to this, the URT should ensure that the TADB 

at all times maintains in full force and effect an operating license from the central bank and all 

such other consents, licenses, approvals, authorizations and exemptions required under the laws 

of Tanzania for the TADB to carry out its business and perform its obligations under this 

present project.  

Sustainability 

4.3. The TADB’s viability is viewed positively for a number of reasons including its 
sound corporate governance and prudent lending strategy. Also, as an institution that is 

expected to focus principally on wholesale lending, this will contribute to preserving the quality 

of its assets and capital. Further, the TADB will be subject to limited liquidity risk as it funds 

itself through long-term funding and not through short-term deposits. In addition, the TADB 

will be subject to prudential regulation and supervision by the central bank, which will enforce 

requirements similar to those applied to commercial banks. Furthermore, the proposed 

technical assistance program will play a key role in strengthening the capacity and enhancing 

the performance of the institution. 

 

 



 

15 

4.4. The long-term sustainability and success of the TADB hinge on its ability to 
mobilize additional capital from the Government7 and other investors as well as low-cost 

debt liabilities from international DFIs. To fund itself, the TADB will also explore the 

possibility of issuing bonds in the local capital market after building a track record of operations 

and thoroughly assessing the market conditions to establish the depth of liquidity as these will 

influence the success rates and costs of the bonds. The importance of mobilizing low cost 

funding is fully recognized by the TADB as articulated in its funding strategy. This, combined 

with its determination to generate positive returns from its lending activities, should ensure that 

any advantage that may accrue to the TADB in being able to fund itself with low cost liabilities 

be accrued by it as a contribution to its equity. 

Risk Management 

4.5. Potential risks are rated as mostly Medium and are expected to be mitigated as 
outlined below: 

 

Potential Risk Rating Mitigation Measures 

High operational costs 

associated with reaching 

out to smallholder 

farmers. 

Medium The TADB will implement measures to minimize costs including reaching smallholder 

farmers through wholesale lending by working with eligible financial institutions and 

developing innovative products and services such as mobile banking. 

Impact of lending at low 

interest rates on financial 

sustainability. 

Medium The TADB is fully aware of the importance of sustainability and while the smallholder 

farmers will be supported with affordable loans, the institution will aim to balance its 

portfolio by also targeting larger clients to whom the funds will be priced based on market 

confirming terms. Additionally, the TADB will invest a portion of its funds in low 

risk/high return government securities to further support the cross subsidization of the 

smallholder farmers. Finally, the TADB expects to continue funding itself through the 

mobilization of low-cost funds. 

The TADB unable to 

effectively intermediate 

the funds extended to it. 

Medium The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two equal tranches 

to ensure that it is able to absorb the resources made available to it and effectively 

intermediate them. 

The TA Program is not 

implemented properly by 

the TADB. 

Low to 

Medium 

The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two tranches and 

the disbursement of the second tranche will be conditional on the TADB having 

successfully implemented two of the three components of the TA Program. The TADB is 

also strongly committed to ensuring that the TA Program is successfully implemented. 

Funds extended to 

ineligible persons. 

Low to 

Medium 

The TADB will be required to ensure that the funds are not on-lent to ineligible persons. 

Lending to such persons will result in the accelerated repayment of the ADF loan. 

Political capture of the 

TADB.  

Medium 

to High 

This risk is primarily managed with an innovative governance structure. While the TADB 

will be majority government-owned, its MEMARTS provides that the majority of 

directors should be non-executive and non-government officials chosen based on a 

competitive and transparent process. Cognizant that governance failures contributed to 

thwarting the effectiveness of existing DFIs across Africa, the Tanzanian authorities are 

fully committed to a robust governance structure for the TADB. In addition to providing 

comfort as regards the strategic direction of the TADB, the MEMARTS requires that the 

directors should be qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, 

expertise, integrity and stature. The TADB will also be subject to regulation, licensing 

and supervision by the central bank, thus further strengthening the governance 

arrangements as well as due diligence as regards to its operational and financial capacity. 

Finally, the Bank Group will ensure continuous supervision of all key operational aspects 

to ensure good governance.  

                                                 
7 While the Government is committed to injecting additional equity into the TADB, it must scale up its efforts. 

The TADB’s MEMARTS provides that the initial paid-up capital of the institution is TZS 100 billion to be raised 

gradually to TZS 800 billion. The Government will need to significantly scale up its efforts to mobilize additional 

equity for the TADB to ensure that it complies with the MEMARTS. 



 

16 

Knowledge Building 

4.6. The present operation is expected to generate considerable knowledge and 
experience that will add value and build up lessons for the design and management of 

similar projects across Africa. The lessons learnt will be documented including those on 

supporting smallholder farmers especially women. Bank supervision missions, quarterly and 

annual progress reports, mid-term review, audit and completion reports will also provide an 

opportunity to capture knowledge on relevant aspects of this project. As a new institution, the 

TADB will benefit from working with the Bank Group to learn about its procedures and 

safeguards which it can incorporate to enhance itself. The Bank Group will share the lessons 

learnt from the experience of implementing this project in Tanzania. 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. The proceeds of the loan from the African Development Fund to be provided to 
the United Republic of Tanzania will be made available to the TADB by way of a loan in 

accordance with the Bank Group’s On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; 

ADF/BD/WP/90/38). The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will 

be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which 

will be Tanzanian Shilling. This structure is essentially innovative as it enables the Bank Group 

to support a national development finance institution without being exposed to the risks that 

would be associated with direct lending to such an institution. Plus, it is deploying a debt 

instrument to a country whose credit rating is much better than the rating that would be 

applicable to a direct loan to the beneficiary institution. 

5.2. The legal instrument to be used for this project is a loan agreement between the 
United Republic of Tanzania and the African Development Fund. This loan agreement will 

enter into force subject to fulfilment by the United Republic of Tanzania of the provisions of 

section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to the African Development Fund Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements. 

5.3. The ADF loan will be extended to the URT and its proceeds transferred by the 
URT to the TADB as a loan on the same terms and conditions (except for the loan 

currency). The URT will sign a loan agreement with the ADF while the URT and the TADB 

will sign an on-lending agreement. 

5.4. The proceeds of the ADF loan will be disbursed in two equal tranches upon 
fulfillment of agreed disbursement triggers. The obligation of the African Development Fund 

to make the disbursement of the first tranche will be conditional upon entry into force of the loan 

agreement and the submission by the URT and the TADB of evidence of the fulfillment of the 

following conditions, each in form and substance satisfactory to the African Development Fund: 

 The opening by the United Republic of Tanzania of a special United States Dollar 
denominated account at the central bank of Tanzania for the deposit of the proceeds of the 

ADF loan. The opening of the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank 

confirming that the said account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 The opening by the TADB of a special Tanzanian Shilling denominated account at the 
central bank of Tanzania for the deposit by the URT of the proceeds of its loan to the TADB 

(the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in local currency meaning that the URT will 

take on the foreign exchange risk to which the TADB will not be exposed). The opening of 

the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank confirming that the said 

account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 An on-lending agreement between the URT and the TADB, relating to the loan from 
the URT to the TADB whose amount is equal to the loan from the ADF to the URT, in 

form and substance acceptable to the ADF, has been duly executed by the parties thereto. 



 

17 

The execution of the on-lending agreement shall be supported by a legal opinion issued to 

the ADF by a legal counsel acceptable to the ADF confirming that the on-lending 

agreement between the TADB and the URT, has been duly authorized, ratified and 

executed on behalf of the URT and the TADB and constitutes legal, valid and binding 

obligation of such parties; and 

 The TADB has adopted a Gender Policy in form and substance acceptable to the 
African Development Fund. 

5.5. The obligation of the ADF to disburse the second tranche of the ADF loan will be 
conditional on the following conditions: 

 Submission by the TADB of evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the AfDB 
Group, that it has successfully implemented components 1 and 2 of the TA Program (noting 

that component 3 involves training staff which is a continuous activity). By linking the 

disbursement of the second tranche to the implementation of the TA Program, the Bank 

Group will be in a position to exercise due diligence as regards to progress; and 

 Supervision by the Bank Group of the utilization of the first tranche of the ADF loan 
and satisfaction that the funds were effectively deployed including towards supporting 

women through funding and the proposed mentoring program. 

5.6. In addition, for the disbursement of the two tranches of the ADF loan, the United 
Republic of Tanzania will be required to ensure that the funds are passed on to the TADB 

within a maximum of 14 calendar days of the URT receiving the funds from the ADF. 
Any delays will result in calls for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the ADF 

loan. Additional events that may call for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the 

ADF loan will include the following: i) violation of signed agreements or regulations affecting 

the ability of the TADB to fulfill its mandate or that affect its financial sustainability, ii) the 

TADB’s license has been withdrawn, revoked, amended or suspended, or its renewal has been 

withheld, so as to materially and adversely affect the ability of the TADB to carry out its 

functions and iii) extension of funding to ineligible persons. 

5.7. Finally, this present project complies with all the applicable AfDB Group policies 
including the On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; ADF/BD/WP/90/38) referred to 

earlier in paragraph 5.1. 

6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION 

6.1. The proposed loan from the ADF to the United Republic of Tanzania, to be utilized 
by the URT to support the TADB, will contribute to enabling this national DFI to scale 

up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania. This institution is expected to play a key 

role in facilitating attainment of sustainable food self-sufficiency and food security in Tanzania 

and in promoting and supporting the transformation of agriculture from subsistence to 

commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to inclusive economic 

growth and poverty reduction. 

6.2. The Government of Tanzania is fully committed to the success of the TADB and has 
demonstrated this through the capital that it has injected so far from its own budget and its 

current efforts to mobilize additional funding from new sources including the ADF. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the funding needs of the agriculture sector provides a strong 

justification for Government intervention through the proposed borrowing from the ADF. This 

outside funding will enable the Government of Tanzania to support the TADB while providing 

it with the fiscal space for more spending in sectors and projects critical to the country’s 

development (including infrastructure projects planned to facilitate trade and industrialization). 

6.3. In the light of the foregoing, Management recommends that, for the purposes stipulated 



 

18 

in this report, the Board of Directors of the African Development Fund approves the proposed 

ADF loan of UA 67.27 million (equivalent to USD 93.51 million) to the United Republic of 

Tanzania. 

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme


Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$11.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$7.96 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.43 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$270,000

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic

Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).

2. The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.

3. Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.

4. Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.

5. Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.

6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.

7. Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.

8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.

9. Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.

10. In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP

11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.

12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.

13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma

and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.

15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.

B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in

the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.

17. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:

(a) Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.

(b) Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.

(c) Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.

C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils

(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.

19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).

20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the

Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.

1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.

26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.

27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.

29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support

missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this

total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning 2 142 71 247 8 637 21 3 025

2. Implementation of
investment plans 4 755 77 265 4 1 139 18 6 159

3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination 1 055 54 253 13 650 33 1 959

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143

B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide

US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles and equipment 188 84 36 16 224 2
2. Training 614 84 117 16 731 7
3. Consultancy services 2 904 66 500 11 982 22 4 385 39
4. Grants (for sub-projects) 3 202 78 265 6 660 16 4 128 37
5. Salaries 534 50 534 50 1 068 10
6. Operating expenses 510 84 97 16 607 5

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of

annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.

34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.

D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national

policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.

36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.

37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.

38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,

climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.

40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.

42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.

43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.

44. Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.

45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.

47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.

48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

9

assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.

49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).

50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the

development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.

52. In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.

53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).

Innovations and scaling upC.
54. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project

builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.

Policy engagementD.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is

aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

10

Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the
Livestock Cooperatives Development Project
in the Central-Eastern Region


Republic of Cuba

Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the
Central-Eastern Region

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Cuba

Executing agency: Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment,
delegated to the Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$50 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.9 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.9 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a
grace period of three years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Cofinancier: French Development Agency

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$10 million (CUP 10 million as per official exchange
rate of the Central Bank of Cuba)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in
the Central-Eastern Region as contained in paragraph 58.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock
Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern
Region

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cuba is a middle-income country that in 2014 had a population of 11.2 million,

23 per cent living in rural areas. In 2014, Cuba’s nominal gross domestic product
(GDP) was US$80,656 million, equivalent to a GDP per capita of US$7,186.
However, care must be taken when analysing per capita GDP in view of the
country’s regulated dual monetary system, in which the Cuban Peso (CUP) and the
Cuban Convertible Peso (CUC) coexist. According to the World Food Programme
(WFP), between 60 per cent and 75 per cent of households’ income is spent on
food, which is high compared to other middle-income countries (the average is
between 20 per cent and 45 per cent).

2. With social policies guaranteeing food and nutritional security, and targeting the
most vulnerable populations, Cuba has made major strides in eradicating extreme
poverty and hunger. It is the only country in Latin America and the Caribbean to
have eliminated severe infant malnutrition. According to the 2015 Human
Development Report, Cuba is advanced in terms of human development, with a
score of 0.769, ranking 67th out of 188 countries. Cuba’s score is above average for
countries rated as high in human development (0.744).

3. Cuba’s agricultural sector accounts for about 4 per cent of its GDP but employs
approximately 20 per cent of the workforce, 16 per cent of whom are women. The
agricultural sector is in transition, with an increasing role played by private
cooperatives and individual farmers, which account for over 90 per cent of
agricultural production on 70 per cent of the land. While the state purchased
80 per cent of national production in 2007, this figure decreased to 60 per cent in
2012. Growing domestic food markets and demand from the increasing tourist
sector are providing opportunities for local producers; however producers must
enhance the quality and quantity of their production in order to serve these
markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
4. Food security is a strategic priority for the Cuban Government. The agricultural

sector’s current productivity is well below the country’s potential, considering the
availability of natural resources and human and technological capital. As a result,
local food production is insufficient to cover demand and Cuba is highly dependent
on food imports.

5. A decline of productivity in Cuba’s livestock sector was caused by gradual
decapitalization since the 1990s. As a result, the livestock sector changed from an
advanced production system based on the intensive use of inputs to a dispersed
system of pastoralism. National milk production fell from 982 million litres in 1989
to 434 million litres in 2014, and meat production decreased from 271 thousand
tons in 1990 to 119 thousand tons in 2014.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

6. Improving agricultural productivity is therefore at the core of Cuba’s public policy
agenda. Since April 2011, Cuba has begun a series of political, institutional and
economic reforms known as the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. These
guidelines call for a gradual transformation of the agricultural sector by introducing
more market incentives and private-sector production, and reducing controls on
prices and wages.

7. As outlined in the country strategy note, IFAD can play an important role in
supporting the transformation of Cuba’s agricultural sector by supporting
smallholders organized into private cooperatives, who represent the productive
backbone of the sector. In order to meet the challenges of changing economic
conditions and benefit from new opportunities, these smallholders need productive
assets, inputs and capacity-building.

8. The Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern Region
(PRODEGAN) aims to support private cooperatives comprised of smallholders
managing dual-purpose cattle and focused on milk and meat production. The
Government currently imports nearly 50,000 tons of milk powder per year to cover
50 percent of local demand in a world market characterized by volatile prices.

9. The proposed project builds upon the experience gained from the ongoing
Cooperative Rural Development Project in the Oriental Region (PRODECOR), which
focuses on production of maize and beans in the eastern provinces of Las Tunas,
Holguín, Granma and Santiago de Cuba. As in PRODECOR, the focus of this project
is on increasing the productivity of private cooperatives through participatory
development plans and improved service provision.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
10. The project area encompasses the province of Camagüey, in which four priority

municipalities have been selected: Guaímaro, Sibanicú, Camagüey and Jimaguayú.
These municipalities comprise 45 per cent of the province’s cattle population and
57 per cent of its milk production. The area was selected because of its long
tradition of livestock production, its productive potential, the presence of processing
plants with spare capacity and the concentration of cooperatives that are already
integrated into existing value chains.

11. Since the 1990s, the economy in Camagüey province has suffered because of a
decline in the livestock sector caused by decreasing investments, a lack of inputs,
limited technical assistance, land degradation and the effects of climate change and
variability. The proposed project aims to reverse this trend.

12. PRODEGAN will directly benefit 11,500 rural families organized in 105 cooperatives,
for a total of 34,500 direct beneficiaries. These direct beneficiaries will include:
(i) members of cooperatives producing meat, milk and dairy products such as
cheese; (ii) wage-earning rural workers employed by the cooperatives; and
(iii) technicians employed by the service providers of livestock cooperatives.

13. The cooperatives average between 60 and 140 members; women represent
13 per cent of cooperative membership and young people 11 per cent. PRODEGAN
will focus on reaching women (at least 20 per cent) and youth (at least 15
per cent), and will support their inclusion in cooperatives’ decision-making and
productive activities.

14. Three types of cooperatives exist in Cuba. Credit and service cooperatives, created
in 1963, are characterized by individual land ownership and comprise
approximately 60 per cent of the cooperatives in the area; they are considered to
be the most efficient form of cooperative. Basic cooperative production units are
former state farms transformed in 1993. Characterized by collective ownership
structures, they comprise approximately 30 per cent of cooperatives in the area. In
agricultural production cooperatives, which were created in 1975, individuals



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

voluntarily agree on collective ownership (they comprise approximately 10 per cent
of the cooperatives in the area).

B. Project development objective
15. The development objective of the project is to promote the sustainable growth of

the livestock sector by increasing the production and sale of milk and meat, raising
the incomes of beneficiary families in cooperatives. The main outcomes for the
primary target group will be: (i) higher average net incomes for members of
participating cooperatives; (ii) increased delivery of cold milk from cooperatives to
the industry from 17 million litres to 47 million liters per year; and (iii) increased
sale of beef by cooperatives from 5,000 tons to 6,000 tons per year.

C. Components/outcomes
16. PRODEGAN has three inter-linked technical components and one component for

project management. The main focus of component 1 is on strengthening milk and
meat producing cooperatives, which currently have significant manual labour
capacity, high mortality and low birth rates of cattle, insufficient pastures and
limited water availability. Through component 2, service providers in the project
area will be strengthened in order to free up land, increase water availability,
improve artificial insemination and veterinary services, and build cooperatives’
capacity. Finally, in order to ensure sufficient capacity to collect and process the
increased milk and meat produced, agro-industry in the project area will be
supported through component 3. The main expected outcomes of each component
are detailed below:

(a) Component 1: Strengthening smallholder livestock cooperatives. By
implementing cooperative development plans (CDPs), livestock farmers will
increase their cattle populations and milk and meat production in a
sustainable manner. The project also aims to improve their managerial and
organizational capacities, with a focus on gender. Specific outcomes will
include: (i) an increase in annual milk production per lactating cow from
600 liters to 1,300 liters; (ii) decreased mortality of herds from 7 per cent to
4 per cent; and (iii) an increase in the percentage of women in managerial
positions within cooperatives from 14 per cent to 20 per cent.

(b) Component 2: Strengthening service providers. The project is expected
to enable service providers to substantially improve the frequency and quality
of their services, including technical assistance and provision of quality inputs.
Specifically: (i) the percentage of pregnant inseminated cows is expected to
increase from 45 per cent to 60 per cent; (ii) improved pastureland in the
project area will increase from 4,000 hectare to 8,000 hectare per year; and
(iii) 200 water-capture infrastructures will be rehabilitated.

(c) Component 3: Strengthening agro-industry. Through component 3, milk
and meat transport and industry processing capacity will be strengthened; the
exact outcomes will be defined by a value chain study. Expected outcomes
include: (i) an increase in transport capacity for the collection of milk; and
(ii) an increase of the processing capacity of the meat industry in Camagüey.

(d) Component 4: Project management and coordination. This component
consists of project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities. It includes the development of strategy and operational guidelines,
and the responsibility for technically sound project implementation. The M&E
system will be an important input into the knowledge management agenda of
IFAD’s country programme, which is the basis for IFAD’s dialogue with the
Government on rural development.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

17. In line with experience from PRODECOR, the implementation approach is based on
the definition of community-driven CDPs. Through these plans, livestock farmers
will assess their strengths and weaknesses, and the opportunities and threats they
face, and define the most appropriate development strategy for their cooperatives.

18. In parallel with the development of the first CDPs, a participatory value chain
analysis will be carried out involving major stakeholders in the livestock sector. The
objective of this study is to identify the main weaknesses and entry points in the
milk and meat value chains in order to guide the development of
service-strengthening plans.

19. It is foreseen that cooperatives, most service providers and agro-industry
stakeholders will finance their investments through bank loans in the local currency
– mainly from the Bank for Credit and Trade. A similar mechanism is currently
being implemented through PRODECOR. Service providers such as environmental
agencies, institutes for land and water, and the University of Camagüey, which
cannot utilize credit, will be supported through budgetary allocations by the
Government.

20. The CDPs and service-strengthening plans are expected to be formulated over a
three-year period and each will have a time horizon of two to three years. The
overall duration of the project is expected to be six years.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment will act as legal

representative of the borrower. The responsibility for execution will be delegated to
the Ministry of Agriculture, which regulates all activities related to milk and meat
production. Within the Ministry of Agriculture, the responsible agency will be the
Livestock Business Group, which is responsible for providing production and
business services to livestock cooperatives. The Ministry of Agriculture will also
coordinate agro-industry investments with the Ministry of Food Industry and the
Food Industry Business Group.

22. In order to benefit from lessons learned, a national coordination office for IFAD
projects in Cuba will be established at the Ministry of Agriculture, employing staff
from PRODECOR. This office will be in charge of: (i) supporting the definition of
participatory development plans; (ii) administration, financial management and
procurement; (iii) planning and M&E; and (iv) knowledge management, including
South-South cooperation, exchanges, seminars and studies.

23. In addition, a technical implementation unit will be established within the Livestock
Business Group with a main office in Havana and a local office in Camagüey.

24. An investment evaluation committee will be set up to evaluate the individual
investment plans of cooperatives, service providers and agro-industry stakeholders.
In addition, a national project steering committee will be established to approve
annual workplans and budgets, and provide strategic guidance. Both committees
will be comprised of representatives from government ministries; IFAD will be an
observer on the national project steering committee.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. A planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be established to provide
timely information on project performance and support continuous improvement of
project management. The system will be designed and launched during the first six
months of implementation, benefitting from the experience of PRODECOR. Its
purpose is to: (i) generate updated information on project goals, outputs, results
and impact; and (ii) facilitate learning, the exchange of experiences and best
practices, and the dissemination of project results.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

26. A midterm review will be conducted to: (i) assess the cost recovery of the service
providers; (ii) evaluate the performance of the different types of cooperatives; and
(iii) analyse the performance and impact of the reference farms. As a result of this
midterm review, any necessary adjustments will be discussed with the Government.

27. The National Statistics and Information Office is expected to participate in the
development of the baseline survey, midterm review and final impact study.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by the national office for the management of IFAD-funded
projects within the Ministry of Agriculture. This arrangement will capitalize on the
experience gained by PRODECOR staff and is expected to promote project
readiness. This project will utilize the same accounting system as PRODECOR,
which complies with minimum IFAD requirements.

29. The financial management and procurement systems used by public entities in
Cuba are in line with national regulatory authorities including the Office of the
Comptroller General, the Ministry of Finance and Pricing, the Ministry of Economy
and Planning, and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment.
Compliance with the standards and procedures governing these systems is
mandatory for all government agencies. This requirement also applies to the
Livestock Business Group, the national coordination office and technical
implementation unit.

30. Based on Cuba’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 47 and IFAD’s experience in the country, the project’s fiduciary risk has
been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in this section, along with
implementation support, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risks.

31. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in euros at the Bank
for Credit and Trade exclusively for the loan proceeds. Operating accounts in
convertible pesos will be opened at the same bank and administered by the national
coordination office.

32. Audit. The project team will submit annual consolidated financial statements
compliant with international standards. The annual consolidated financial
statements will be independently audited in line with terms of reference approved
by IFAD and in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD’s
Guidelines on Project Audits. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within
six months from the end of the each fiscal year.

33. Procurement. Goods from abroad will be procured using the services of the
Caribbean Citrus Anonymous Society, the Ministry of Agriculture’s specialized
import-export agency. The delivery of external acquisitions and domestic
procurement will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture’s Business Logistics
Group and the Livestock Insurance and Services Company. The national
coordination office will be required to seek IFAD’s approval on a no-objection basis
before replacing the procurement agency. Minor purchases will be handled by the
national coordination office, which will apply the provisions and regulations detailed
in the project operating manual in accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

34. Governance. To promote good governance, IFAD applies a policy of zero tolerance
against fraud, corruption and misconduct.

E. Supervision
35. PRODEGAN will be directly supervised by IFAD in line with its policy on supervision

and implementation support. As the lead agency, IFAD will also supervise
implementation of the portion of the project financed by French Development
Agency (AFD) based on an agreement between AFD and IFAD. AFD will participate
in supervision missions and will approve all annual workplans and budgets,
procurement plans, terms of reference, reports of external evaluations and
requirements for annual audit reports related to AFD financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. The first supervision mission is planned for the first year of the project and will
focus on operational and financial progress achieved during initial implementation.
It will include a review and assessment of the project’s financial management
arrangements. Subsequent supervision missions will take place annually, including
field visits to verify progress and evaluate any implementation problems.

37. Implementation-support activities during the first 18 months are expected to
include:(i) supporting the fulfilment of conditions for the first disbursement;
(ii) organizing a start-up workshop; (iii) training staff of the national coordination
office and technical implementation unit in the preparation of annual workplans and
budgets, procurement plans and withdrawal applications, and fiduciary
requirements and procurement procedures; (iv) supporting the preparation of an
implementation strategy, value chain study and progress reports for each project
component; and (v) supporting the design and set-up of the planning, M&E and
knowledge management system.

F. Exceptions to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing and IFAD’s operating policies

38. Expenses incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date
of entry into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a
ceiling of EUR 300,000 for activities related to: (i) adjustments to the accounting
system; (ii) the start-up workshop; (iii) the baseline survey and gender
methodology; (iv) the value chain study; and (v) equipping and operating the
national coordination office and the technical implementation unit. Depending on
the nature of expenditures, the costs of these activities will be charged against the
relevant categories of expenditures indicated in the financing agreement.

39. In addition, it was agreed with the Government of Cuba that as an exception to
section 14.04(a) of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing,
the number of arbitrators will be three, and the provisions of article 9 of the
Arbitration Rules 2012 of the Permanent Court of Arbitration will apply.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
40. The base cost of the project is US$47.5 million, plus estimated contingencies, for a

total cost of US$50 million. Of the total cost, 5 per cent is for physical contingencies
and price increases.
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart1 Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Strengthening smallholder
livestock cooperatives 7 940 67 18 485 66 4 512 45 30 937 62
2. Strengthening service
providers 2 412 20 5 615 20 2 131 21 10 158 20
3. Strengthening agro-industry - - 4 000 14 2 000 20 6 000 12
4. Project management and
coordination 1 548 13 - - 1 357 14 2 905 6

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

1 In accordance with the Agreement Establishing IFAD and the General Conditions for Agricultural Development
Financing, IFAD usually calculates the value of government contributions using the exchange rate published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, Cuba is not a member of the IMF. According to the Central Bank of Cuba
and the United Nations Operational Rates of Exchange, the exchange rate of US$/CUP is 1:1, and is therefore the rate
used in this document for the US dollars value of the government contribution expressed in local currency. There is no
actual rate for foreign currency transaction to and from CUP within the country, and the exchange rate from CUP to CUC
used for private transactions in the country is significantly different than the US$/CUP rate. The actual value of the
government contribution will be subject to external audit based on expenditures incurred.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan denominated in euros (equivalent

to approximately to US$11.9 million); (ii) a loan from AFD for EUR 25 million
(equivalent to approximately US$28.1 million); and (iii) a counterpart contribution
from the Government estimated at US$10 million.

42. IFAD and AFD loans will cofinance components 1 and 2; external financing of
component 3 (strengthening agro-industry) will be provided by AFD; and
component 4 (project management) will be financed by IFAD. The borrower’s
contribution will cofinance all components and taxes.
Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and materials 10 415 88 27 589 98 5 162 51 43 166 86
2. Consultancies 685 6 193 1 58 1 936 2
3. Training 190 2 318 1 3 616 36 4 124 8
4. Operating costs 610 4 - - 1 164 12 1 774 4

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
43. The main benefits expected from the project are: (i) an increase in domestic milk

and meat production and sales (which reduces the need for imports); (ii) the
strengthening of actors along the milk and meat value chains; and (iii) an increase
in the participation of women and youth, ensuring a better quality of life for
cooperative members.

44. The financial analysis shows that considering prices in Cuba’s livestock sector, the
proposed investments are financially viable. The financial rate of return ranges from
38 per cent to 87 per cent (whereby credit and service cooperatives have higher
rates of return than cooperatives characterized by common ownership structures).

45. The economic analysis, which considers economic prices and costs, shows that the
proposed project is competitive with imports, with an economic rate of return of
14.8 per cent and a net present value of US$26 million.

D. Sustainability
46. The project design is based on the sustainable development of the cooperative

organizations, with support also extended to service providers and local
agro-industry. Measures to promote sustainability include: (i) a special budget
dedicated to increasing the participation of women and youth, enabling the
sustainable development of human capital; (ii) integrating the area’s main
environmental agencies as service providers in order to ensure the sustainable
management of natural resources and the adoption of climate change adaptation
measures; and (iii) involving local financial institutions (especially the Bank for
Credit and Trade) as loan providers to ensure the financial sustainability of the
investment plans.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Risk identification and mitigation
47. The main identified risks and mitigation measures are described below:

Main risks Mitigation strategy

Changes in Cuba’s current
policy framework could lead to
changes in relative prices.

The project will strengthen the productive, organizational and
entrepreneurial capacities of participating cooperatives, increasing their
adaptive capacities to possible market changes. This will be achieved
through capacity-building and the sustainable provision of equipment and
inputs to increase their productivity and competitiveness.

Climate variability poses a risk
to project activities.

To ensure the sustainable management of natural resources, the
formulation and implementation of CDPs will take into consideration the
environmental context in which cooperatives operate; the Government’s
environmental agencies will be involved in this process.

A lack of understanding of the
project strategy, methodology
and implementation procedures
may have adverse effects on
implementation.

The establishment of a single coordination office with experience from
the PRODECOR project will allow the project to benefit from the lessons
learned in terms of methodology, administration, financial management,
procurement and M&E.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. The project is consistent with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, and aims to
increase rural people’s productive capacities while supporting market participation
and strengthening the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their
activities. The project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by
applying geographical targeting (by province, municipality and cooperative),
self-targeting (through participatory development plans) and social targeting
(focused on women and youth); (ii) gender, through its strategy aimed at closing
the gender gap and increasing women’s participation in cooperatives;
(iii) environmental and natural resource management, by supporting
climate-resilient production and the sustainable management of land and water
resources; and (iv) rural finance, by providing access to rural financial services.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The proposed project is aligned with the Government’s agricultural sector reform

agenda, as outlined in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. This includes:
(i) fostering the autonomy and productivity of cooperatives; (ii) supporting free
competition by facilitating producers’ direct access to inputs, equipment and
markets; (iii) reducing the amount of unproductive land and increasing agricultural
yields in an environmentally sustainable manner; and (iv) ensuring that banking
services are available to the agro-industry sector. In addition, the project is aligned
with Cuba’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change since it includes climate change
adaptation activities and mitigation measures (e.g. renewable energy sources).

50. IFAD has engaged with development partners such as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), WFP, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) and the European Union to ensure that the project is aligned with their
activities in the country. The project’s integrated approach, which considers value
chains and long-term environmental sustainability, is based on lessons learned
from two projects on environmental investments in milk production managed by
UNDP and financed by the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
51. The main innovations that the project will introduce are: (i) the establishment of

"service cooperatives" providing support to other cooperatives (e.g. hay and
ensilage services, and equipment maintenance); (ii) 10 reference farms for
observing and disseminating new technologies (four of which will develop



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

innovative environmental practices such as automatic meteorological systems,
solar-powered electric fences and biodigesters); and (iii) the establishment of
10 hectare of silvo-pastoral areas for each cooperative. Other innovations will be
demand driven, emerging from cooperatives’ development plans. These innovations
will be disseminated through knowledge-sharing activities.

52. If the project successfully meets its objectives, it could be scaled up to other
municipalities in Camagüey province and the neighboring provinces of Ciego de
Ávila and Las Tunas – potentially doubling the number of beneficiaries.

Policy engagementD.
53. Policy dialogue will be driven by the national project steering committee, which will

include representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Foreign Trade
and Foreign Investment, the Ministry of Food Industry, the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Environment, the Ministry of Economy and Planning, the National
Institute of Water Resources, the National Statistics and Information Office, the
Central Bank of Cuba and the Bank for Credit and Trade, with IFAD and AFD as
observers. This dialogue will cover: (i) lessons learned from project innovations and
their potential for scale-up; (ii) the results of efforts to increase the participation of
women and youth in the livestock sector; (iii) progress in establishing a financing
mechanism with the Bank for Credit and Trade; and (iv) any risks related to the
Cuban economy’s gradual liberalization and changes in relative prices, along with
mitigation strategies.

54. M&E and knowledge management activities during project implementation will
assist both the Government and IFAD in making better use of the policies for the
cooperative sector as detailed in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
55. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Cuba and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

56. The Republic of Cuba is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

57. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
58. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Cuba in an amount equivalent to ten million nine hundred
thousand euros (10,900,000) (equivalent to US$11.9 million), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value
Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

Republic of Ecuador

Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture
and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$35.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$25.7 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of six years, with an interest rate per annum
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$5.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain
Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA), as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Ecuador is classified as an upper middle-income country. In 2015

the country posted GDP growth of 4.1 per cent, with inflation and external debt of
4.0 per cent and 20.4 per cent, respectively. With sustained growth over the past
decade has come an expansion in the public sector, broad-based reforms and social
programmes, and upgraded infrastructure, particularly roads. This modernization
process has been funded largely with oil revenues. However, the gradual decline in
oil prices since 2014, difficulty accessing new sources of financing and dollar
appreciation have affected the general government budget, which was cut by
2.2 per cent of GDP in 2016.

2. The economic deceleration and contraction in domestic demand contributed to
pushing up poverty from 22.5 per cent to 23.3 per cent between 2014 and 2015,
resulting in a rise in rural poverty from 35.3 per cent to 39.3 per cent. Despite the
progress made on inequality, poverty and expanding access to services, the gaps
between urban and rural and vulnerable people – indigenous, Montubian and
Afro-Ecuadorean people – are even more marked. In addition, the current
macro-economic situation places this progress in jeopardy. Many of the families
who have risen above the poverty threshold are in a vulnerable situation that could
easily revert to absolute poverty.

3. In this context, one of this administration’s priority objectives is to make a shift in
production patterns by promoting the value chain approach and adding value to
commodities in order to boost exports.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The project originated in the realization by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) that providing production support is not
sufficient to enable smallholder farmers to overcome poverty. What is needed is to
identify promising subsectors and act along the entire value chain to distribute
returns more fairly. To contribute to sustainable rural development it is crucial to
seek institutional partnerships with the private sector, in order to match supply to
demand and enable smallholder producers to benefit from market opportunities and
raise their incomes. The project’s collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and
Productivity (MIPRO) is a response to these needs, and the partnership with IFAD is
taking place in the context of major government policies.

5. The project is aligned with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP), which are as follows: (i) to improve access to
assets and resources to support the diversification of Ecuador's rural economy by
promoting, inter alia, associational initiatives and investments that generate
employment and income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (ii) build the



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

capacities of poor rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to enable them to
participate in and benefit from the formulation of inclusive, pro-poor production
policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The selected area includes 65 cantons in the provinces of Orellana, Napo

(Amazonia), Imbabura (Sierra Norte), Cotopaxi, Chimborazo, Bolívar and
Tungurahua (Sierra Centro), Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí and Esmeraldas (Costa), the
latter two seriously affected by the earthquake earlier in 2016.

7. The selection criteria included the incidence of poverty in terms of unmet basic
needs and consumption; the presence of vulnerable groups; production volumes in
the selected subsectors; and the existence of smallholder producers organizations
(SPOs) in the value chains considered, with access to collection and/or processing
infrastructure.

8. The project target group comprises approximately 20,000 rural smallholder
producer families deriving most of their family incomes directly from one of the
selected subsectors – fine flavour or flavour cacao, blackberries and golden
berries – and are living near the poverty line.

9. The smallholder producers considered include people of mixed race (Montubians
from the Coastal area), and indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people. The social
targeting criteria are intended to promote the inclusion of smallholder producer
families and limit resource capture by non-needy families, and to adapt the project
to regional characteristics.

B. Project development objective
10. The goal of the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

is to improve the living conditions of smallholder families in strategic sectors. The
development objective is to improve the incomes of smallholder families producing
cacao, blackberries and golden berries within the project area.

11. The aim is to generate an increase in the margins derived from value addition and
redistribute income within the priority value chains so that profits reach smallholder
producers.

C. Components/outcomes
12. Component 1: Promoting partnerships1 by smallholder producers with the

agribusiness sector and markets. The objective is to forge win-win partnerships
between smallholder producers and agro-industrial enterprises, to enhance the
impact and sustainability of business initiatives supported within the selected value
chains. The expected outcome is better market access for the targeted smallholder
producers. Activities include: promoting commercial partnerships among value
chain actors; promoting trade in the selected subsectors; building competencies
and capacities for partnerships; and promoting access to financial products and
services.

13. Component 2: Building sustainable production, associational and
entrepreneurial capacities of smallholder producers. The objective is to
improve the capacities of targeted smallholder producers to boost productivity,
enhance quality, generate value added, and improve management and governance
of their production organizations or family enterprises. This component will
cofinance the execution of gap-closing plans. Activities include: promoting

1 Minga (mink'a or minga in quechua) means collective work done for the community; minca derives from
the quechua minccacuni, "to ask for help while promising something"). It refers to a pre-Columbian tradition of voluntary
community or collective work for a common (social) or reciprocal purpose. In Ecuador the term "minga" has been used
in the term “Gran Minga del Cacao nacional”, part of the MAGAP National Programme.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agricultural and post-harvest good practices; building entrepreneurial, associational
and gender equality capacities; and generating capacities to access financial
services.

14. Component 3: Knowledge development, management and administration.
This component consists of a planning, M&E, knowledge management, and
management and administration systems.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. Ecuador’s export agriculture sector, which provides 25 per cent of total

employment, plays a dominant role in the economy and contributed 36 per cent of
GDP in 2015, but continues to be a two-tier system. On one hand is a dynamic and
industrialized sector of medium-sized and large enterprises engaging in intensive
monocropping of banana, flowers and African palm. On the other, holding potential
for improvement – in cacao, coffee and fruit – is a sector composed of smallholder
producers who are the country’s poorest and do not as yet participate in value
chains with strong demand from domestic and international markets.

16. The fine flavour cacao and non-traditional Andean fruit (blackberry and golden
berry) value chains were selected on the basis of rising broad-based demand on
domestic and global markets, high potential for improvement, producers living in
conditions of poverty and vulnerability, and areas with high poverty rates.

17. IFAD will contribute significant value added under this project on the basis of past
experience in the cacao sector through public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)
with local governments and cacao processors; previous projects in Ecuador; and
agro-enterprise operating models. The analysis done by IFAD shows the need for
flexibility and adaptability to different contexts. Moreover, three cases in the cacao
sector – in the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Sao Tome and
Principe – have shown that an immediately operational and market-oriented private
sector allows for greater efficiency in projects.

18. The selected value chains feature similar constraints on allowing producers to
garner a larger share of the benefits. These are both endogenous – relating to
production, productivity, quality, traceability, certification and lack of business
capacity – and exogenous – a high level of intermediation, lack of recognition for
weight and quality of the products, and volatile prices. This creates an obstacle to
achieving stable quality in the supply of raw or processed materials, and to building
trust between members, and between members and buyers.

19. The project has been designed around the structure of the selected value chains,
both associational and individual, to address all bottlenecks identified within
them: at the production stage for Andean fruit, and in processing and marketing,
the main links in the chain, in the case of cacao. The strategic orientation set out by
MAGAP and MIPRO calls for linking producers’ associations to business demand both
on the domestic market and for export, including niche markets such as the organic
and fair trade segments. The strategy follows the 4P model, which consists of
building partnerships between the public sector, the private sector and smallholder
producers, represented by their leaders, with intermediation and facilitation by the
public sector, represented by the executing agencies MAGAP and MIPRO. To reflect
Ecuador's diverse realities, the model has been adapted to different
modalities. Through these, the aim is to facilitate and support the matching of
supply and demand so that supply responds to the requirements of demand, better
prices are obtained in recognition of quality and the level of intermediation is
lowered.

20. The greatest possible number of targeted beneficiaries will be reached by adopting
differentiated approaches. The project calls for: (i) an economies of scale approach



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

by supporting selected SPOs in providing timely marketing and other services to
member and non-member providers; (ii) a family business approach in the form of
support for individual smallholder producers to enable them, through their leaders,
to participate in partnerships with enterprises; (iii) a women in development and
youth approach to ensure that opportunities to access project resources and
services are available equally to women and men involved in the cacao, blackberry
and golden berry production chains, by setting gender and age quotas for
beneficiaries and introducing affirmative action measures; and (iv) a vulnerable
population approach by including indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people among
the targeted producers.

21. The operating strategy contemplates two kinds of complementary support: support
for off-farm activities managed by organizations with at least one collection centre,
in the form of subsidies (nonreimbursable transfers) conditional upon the fulfilment
of terms agreed under the 4P partnership; and direct on-farm support for individual
smallholder producers, considering their family businesses as rural
microenterprises. The objective is for activities by organizations and farms to
conform to conditions demanded by the market and for producers to gain greater
capacities, empower themselves and strengthen their links with organizations and
agribusinesses.

B. Organizational framework
22. The executing agency is MAGAP, through a project executing unit (PEU) within the

organizational structure of MAGAP that will provide administration, coordination,
supervision, support and M&E, together with MIPRO and pursuant to a specific
agreement.

23. Project implementation will be outsourced to an operator. MAGAP will be
responsible for relations with the National Planning and Development Secretariat
(SENPLADES), the Ministry of Finance and IFAD in connection with budget
allocation, withdrawal requests and reports on the project’s technical and financial
progress.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
24. The project will perform planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management

(PMELKM) functions in accordance with national and MAGAP provisions on PMELKM
and IFAD guidelines contained in the Project M&E Manual and General Conditions
for Financing. A conceptual and methodological document will be prepared outlining
the main orientations of PMELKM, highlighting the respective responsibilities of
MAGAP, MIPRO and the operator, the schedule of activities and the expected
outcomes.

25. The main approach guiding the planning and M&E functions is the managing for
development results (MfDR) approach, which calls for obtaining observable and
verifiable change for the target group. MfDR falls within the MAGAP’s governing for
results (GfR) initiative whereby MAGAP generates information on previously
established indicators. MfDR will be applied in project execution and in planning and
M&E by adopting the following principles: effectiveness in achieving objectives;
quality in serving people’s needs; transparency and accountability;
complementarity with other public agencies; citizen participation; learning
promotion; and continuity through institutional strengthening.

26. This methodology is supported by an automated tool to systematize and monitor
results. SENPLADES engages in medium- and long-term M&E in connection with the
quantifiable targets set in the National Development Plan. The coordinating
ministries monitor short-term commitments through the Managing for Governance
System (SIGOB).

27. The planning and M&E system will conform to the requirements of the M&E
subsystems of GfR, the Public Administration Secretariat, SIGOB, the Ministry of



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Production, Employment and Competitiveness and the Integrated Financial
Management System (SIGEF) of the Ministry of Finance.

28. An impact assessment plan has been agreed upon with the Government of Ecuador.
The quasi-experimental methodology will allow for a comparison of results by
producers and SPOs benefiting from the project (treatment group) with similar
producers and organizations that have not received any benefits (control group).
The intention is to measure the project’s causal impact on indicators of interest,
such as household income, production and sales, and other variables.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
29. Financial management. Financial management will take place through the PEU

financial unit which, in coordination with the MAGAP Financial Administration
Coordination Office, will be responsible for proper administration of the resources.
The main responsibilities of the PEU financial unit will be as follows: (i) ensure that
the project has adequate liquidity and prepare withdrawal requests; (ii) review the
Plan of Action (POA) and prepare the annual procurement plan; (iii) make the
necessary arrangements for yearly budget allocations; (iv) manage disbursements
to the operator; (v) review the operator’s financial statements and relevant
documentation and monitor the operator’s financial management; (vi) prepare
annual financial statements and deliver them to IFAD; (vii) contract the audit firm
and deliver the annual audit report to IFAD; and (viii) ensure fulfilment of the
fiduciary conditions of the financial agreement.

30. Operationally, the project will be implemented by an operator selected by MAGAP
under a competitive and transparent process based on national public contracting
regulations and in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project procurement. IFAD
will evaluate the proposed operator’s financial management before the contracting
process is finalized. The findings of the financial management evaluation will be one
of the criteria considered by IFAD in issuing its non objection to contracting the
operator.

31. Based on the country’s rating of 32 on the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index, as well as IFAD’s experience in the country, the project fiduciary
risk is considered moderate. The financial management arrangements provided for
this project, together with close implementation support by IFAD, are considered
sufficient to mitigate this fiduciary risk.

32. Flow of funds. The borrower will open and maintain two designated accounts in
United States dollars exclusively for advance deposit of the loan and grant
proceeds, respectively.

33. Audit. The project will prepare annual consolidated financial statements in
accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The
consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by an independent
private auditor in accordance with IFAD Project audit guidlines and international
auditing standards. All of the project accounts will be audited, including all financing
sources. The auditor’s terms of reference will include a detailed review of the
financial transactions carried out by th eoperator and all relevant documentation.
The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the first six months following the
end of the fiscal year under review.

34. Procurement. Procurement will take place in accordance with the Organic Law on
the National Public Procurement System and regulations, provided they are
compatible with IFADs’ procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
35. IFAD will provide support for project implementation in the manner deemed most

advisable by the parties, seeking to improve effectiveness and ensure that the
objectives and desired outcomes are achieved. In addition, IFAD, in coordination



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

with MAGAP and MIPRO, will supervise the project directly, in accordance with the
Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support.

36. The implementation support and supervision plan will seek to contribute to reaching
the targets set and will monitor compliance with the commitments, provisions and
standards set forth in the financing agreement and operating manual. Support will
be provided from the time of formulation, taking advantage of the various
phases – review, negotiation, approval – for proper preparation of start-up. Among
other activities, plans call for providing support as follows: start-up workshop,
annual supervisión (two per year at the initial stage), midterm review and closing
workshop, and ongoing activities in support of execution. The plan will initially focus
on ensuring operating capacity for project management; preparing annual
workplans and procurement plans; and consolidate financial management
arrangements.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total cost of the project has been estimated at US$35.2 million, covering two

operating components and a project management component: (i) promoting
smallholder partnerships with agribusiness and markets, US$8.3 million
(24 per cent); (ii) building sustainable production, associational and entrepreneurial
capacities among smallholders, US$20.6 million (59 per cent); and (iii) knowledge
development, management and administration, US$6.3 million (18 per cent). Costs
have been calculated at current prices, taking into account the selected area.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promoting smallholder
partnerships with
agribusiness and markets 7 024 27 - - 1 144 20 100 3 8 268 24
2. Building sustainable
production, associational
and entrepreneurial
capacities among
smallholders 14 860 58 - - 2 226 39 3 503 97 20 588 59
3. Knowledge development,
management and
administration 3 776 15 250 100 2 274 40 - - 6 300 18

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by: the IFAD loan for US$25.7 million (73 per cent of

total project cost; the IFAD grant for US$0.3 million (1 per cent); a contribution by
the Government for US$5.6 million (16 per cent); and cash contributions by
beneficiaries for US$3.6 million (10 per cent). Detailed allocations by source of
financing and category of expenditure are shown in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Project costs by category of expenditure and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 636 2 - - 103 2 71 2 810 2
2. Equipment, materials
and vehicles 499 2 - - 81 1 37 1 582 2
3. Consulting and training 8 682 34 250 100 1 261 22 1 398 39 3 761 11
4. Grants and subsidies 12 853 50 - - 2 092 37 2 097 58 17 042 48
5. Salaries and operating
costs 2 992 12 - - 2 106 37 - - 5 098 14

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. In the farm models, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is higher than the

discount rate and the financial net present value (FNPV), at an average of
US$3,000, demonstrates the project's financial feasibility to a 10-year horizon.

40. Strengthening the associations and improving their production capacities is
expected to generate the following benefits: an increase in household assets of
19 per cent over the baseline, and an average increase in incomes of
21 per cent. This gives an idea of the prospects for the associations' sustainability,
improved access to value chains and better negotiating power with buyers.

41. The cost estimate done for economic feasibility took into account adjustments for
transfers to direct beneficiaries, strengthening of organizations, investments in
upgrading infrastructure and equipment; adjustments to price contingencies;
adjustments to value-added taxes to reflect transfer payments; adjustments to
economic prices for inputs, tradable goods and the social discount rate.

42. The results obtained show that the project is economically feasible, with an
economic IRR of 28.50 per cent; economic NPV of incremental net return of
US$23.9 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.77.

43. The project’s sensitivity analysis and economic feasibility indicators show that it is
more sensitive to a price reduction where with a fall of 10 per cent the EIRR falls to
12.18 per cent and a reduction in returns where a fall of 14 per cent causes a fall in
EIRR to 12.51 per cent. In addition, with a reduction in returns of
20 per cent the EIRR is 22.94 per cent and a cost increase of 20 per cent leads to
an EIRR 22.94 per cent. In terms of delays, the project can withstand two years
and still maintain positive returns above the discount rate.

D. Sustainability
44. The project will promote a match between supply and demand of quality products,

and will make use of existing financial services available in the marketplace, adapt
them to potential demand and enable the two parties to negotiate the services they
need and the prerequisites for accessing such services, with support and mediation
from the Government in its capacity as intermediary. This matching of supply and
demand will serve as the basis for the partnerships and will contribute to their long-
term sustainability, even after the project's conclusion.

45. Success in terms of the scope of goal and objectives, sustainability and replicability,
lies in strengthening the actors involved and their partnerships: SPOs and both
female and male members, both formal and comercial; enterprises; and
institutions. This institutional strengthening and consolidation of capacities for
analysis, training, marketing and formulation of proposals will be achieved with
training and advisory assistance, and with the same participation and shared



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

responsibility of the target groups and their involvement in the project M&E
process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s socio-environmental classification is B in accordance with IFAD's

Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. The project will not
finance activities covered by category A of IFAD’s environmental policy. All of the
risks and adverse environmental and social impacts are avoidable.

47. The climate vulnerability classification is moderate. The project is in line with the
National Climate Change Plan 2015-2018, which prioritizes agricultura, water
management, ecosystems, energy and capacity-building in environmental risk
management.

48. The main risks identified with a medium or high probability of occurring are given
below.

Risk Probability Mitigation strategy
No timely fiscal allocation and no
adequate countryl counterpart
contribution

Medium  MAGAP, MIPRO and IFA will exert all their influence to
ensure that the required amount is allocated in a timely
manner.
 Minimum country counterpart is set in view of the current
macroeconomic context and budget us in Ecuador

Demand for financing from collection
centres is limited given difficulties
meeting the requirements of financial
institutions

Medium Training and technical assistance (component 3) will support
organizations and overcome barriers in financial idiom,
procedures and consultations to meet requirements

Financial institutions are not interested
in financing producers’ organizations

Medium Training and assistance to financial institutions should
underscore promotion of the three agroindustrial value
chains and report on l inkages and opportunities for serving
this market niche

Liquidity in the financial sector
continues to fall to levels that do not
allow for earmarking resources to
these segments

High More emphasis will need to be given to international banks,
especially in the case of the export of products.

Unforeseen losses as a result of
market instability, sudden contraction
in demand, unusual drops in global
prices and the lack of a mechanism to
differentiate prices in the International
Coffee Organization and global
commodity exchanges, as well as
extreme climate events.

High The project promotes moving producers closer to
compensation mechanisms that can cover, albeit in part,
unforeseen losses for any of the reasons indicated
(emergency fund, insurance)

Main environmental risks: use of
agrochemicals, loss of genetic
biodiversity of cacao, improper
management of solid and liquid waste

Medium Financing investments at the collection level will be
conditional on developing an environmental profile, in
accordance with national environmental regulations, and
compliance by business plans with the sustainable
environmental management principles set forth in the
Operating Manual, the Guide on Coffee Growing Best
Practices, and the Cacao Post-harvest Best Practices
Manual (MAGAP)

Cadmium content in Ecuadorean
cacao not permitted in the European
and U.S. markets

Medium Field tests to identify the main causes, pilot interventions and
generalization of practices that limit the fixing of cadmium in
cacao

Main climate risks: reduced availability
of water during dry months (Sierra);
lower yields and plant production
capacity (Sierra); higher likelihood of
floods and landslides (Costa and
Amazonía);2 increase and distribution
of pests and their vectors

Medium Funded infrastructure should take the minimum
considerations of environmental safeguards and include a
localization analysis. Construction of infrastructure will
include the principles of labour security, risk analysis
(seismic risks), and will take place outside areas of flooding,
landslides or geological faults

2 Flooding and landslides are among the primary four threats to the country in the provinces of the Coast region, and to a
lesser extent in the Sierra and Amazon regions.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
49. The project complies with the main IFAD policies on targeting rural poor people,

gender equality and women’s empowerment, implementation in relation to
indigenous peoples, natural resources management and environment, and strategy
on climate change.

B. Harmonization and alignment
50. The project is fully aligned with the priority government policy to effect a shift in

production patters, as set forth in the National Plan for Good Living 2013-2017, and
with three of the main government policies: the National Strategy for Equality and
Poverty Eradication (ENIEP, SENPLADES, 2014); Ecuadorean Agricultural Policy and
Sustainable Territorial Rural Development 2015-2025 (MAGAP, 2016). In addition,
the project will directly address the COSOP strategic objectives based on the results
for 2014-2018.

51. Linkages were developed with other donors through their initiatives in support of
the private sector (Multilateral Investment Fund of the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Development Bank of Latin America) during implementation of the
project to improve private investment.

52. Also, within the framework of collaboration among the Rome-based agencies, the
project will be supported by FAO in developing and implementing the nutrition pilot
in the cantons prioritized for their higher incidence of malnutrition and integrated
disease and pest management.

C. Innovation and scaling up
53. The innovation by the project is to put forward the 4P model, adapted to the

diverse realities of Ecuador, as the central thrust of the approach, and seeks to
replicate successful partnership models.

54. Knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and capitalize on
knowledge accumulated during project execution, with the goal of disseminating
best practices and practical knowledge available in the project territories.

D. Policy engagement
55. The compilation of experiences and learnings, and exchanges between actors

responsable for MAGAP and MIPRO and their members, will contribute to improving
their operations, and will serve as practical information on the use and functionality
of public policies, helping with reform as needed. The project will build the
capacities of these actors and the leaders of beneficiary organizations.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
56. A financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

57. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recomendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in the amount of twenty-five million six hundred and sixty
thousand United States dollars (US$25,660,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Ecuador in the amount of two hundred and fifty thousand United States
dollars (US$250,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the
Fisheries Resources Management Programme


The State of Eritrea

Fisheries Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: The State of Eritrea

Executing agency: Ministry of Marine Resources

Total programme cost: US$32.12 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 10.75 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15 million)

Cofinanciers: Federal Republic of Germany

Global Environment Facility (GEF)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Amount of cofinancing: Germany: US$5.97 million

GEF: US$7.89 million

FAO: US$500,000

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of recipient: US$1.42 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.35 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries Resources Management Programme as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries
Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Strategic context. More than two decades after attaining its independence in

1993, Eritrea is still faced with many development challenges. The main economic
sectors have yet to fully recover, resulting in high unemployment, few
income-generation opportunities, an unsupportive business environment for
investment, and weak macroeconomic conditions. The country is prone to periodic
droughts and remains dependent on rainfed agriculture, which makes it highly
vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.

2. On the Human Development Index,1 Eritrea scored 0.391, ranking 186th out of
188 countries in 2014. The country also scored poorly on the Global Hunger Index2
with a score of 33.8 in 2014. Nonetheless, recent economic performance has been
positive, driven mainly by the mining sector. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was estimated at 2 per cent in 2014 and 2.1 per cent in 2015 – double that
of 2013. The current GDP composition is services (59.9 per cent),
non-manufacturing (17.3 per cent), agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and
fisheries (16.9 per cent), and industry (5.9 per cent). Exports increased in 2014
and 2015, but the current account balance is estimated to have deteriorated from
0.2 per cent of GDP in 2014 to -1.2 per cent in 2015, and is forecast to be
1.5 per cent of GDP in 2016. This is partly due to decreases in both remittances
and the "development and recovery" tax (a 2 per cent tax levied on the Eritrean
diaspora). Based on International Monetary Fund Article IV 2009,3 Eritrea was at
the pre-decision point for becoming a heavily indebted poor country (HIPC) and
therefore may be eligible for HIPC multilateral debt relief. Eritrea is classified as
"red" by the Debt Sustainability Framework and is therefore entitled to 100 per
cent grant financing.

3. Agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing are mainstays for most Eritreans, with
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the population relying on these subsectors
for their livelihoods; they also account for between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of
commodity exports. However, these subsectors are affected by highly variable
climatic conditions, inefficient rain-fed subsistence farming systems, limited
resource allocation and low profit margins. The fact that over 80 per cent of poor
people live in rural areas and depend on agriculture suggests that increasing
agricultural production and productivity would have a significant impact on poverty.
Eritrea has 26 per cent arable land, but only 4 per cent is under cultivation. Mining
is becoming important and is the main attraction for foreign investment. The

1 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report 2015 (http://hdr.undp.org/en/2015-report).
2 The Global Hunger Index, produced by the International Food Policy Research Institute, is an aggregated measure of:
overall undernourishment; child wasting; child stunting; and child mortality (http://www.ifpri.org/topic/global-hunger-index).
3

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/071813.pdf: Only information for 2009 is available from the IMF; since then,
there has been no agreement with Eritrea’s Government on mission dates or modalities for the next Article IV.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

growth outlook is promising if Eritrea exploits all its opportunities for trade and
opens its economy to foreign investment in sectors other than mining.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
country strategic opportunities programme

4. Eritrea has substantial and relatively underexploited marine and fisheries
resources, comprising nearly 1,000 fish species. These fisheries exist in an
unpolluted and undercapitalized marine environment; the fisheries sector
contributes only about 3 per cent of the country's GDP. The maximum sustainable
yield (MSY) of Eritrea’s Red Sea fisheries has been estimated by several sources at
80,000 tons per year (some fisheries experts provide a more conservative MSY
range of between 40,000 and 80,000 tons per year since there has been no recent
stock assessment). Small pelagic fisheries account for about half of this MSY and
are currently underutilized. Recorded total fish catches rarely exceed 10,000 tons
per year, of which fewer than 2,000 tons are caught by small-scale fishers.

5. This programme will support Eritrea’s Government in ensuring that the country’s
marine fishery resources are utilized in a sustainable manner to improve the
livelihoods of coastal communities. Specifically, the Fisheries Resources
Management Programme (FReMP) will: (i) support increased fish production while
ensuring that production levels do not exceed historical MSY estimates (for small
pelagic fish, it will be limited to 19,000 tons per year); (ii) support the Ministry of
Marine Resources in monitoring and enforcement; (iii) update MSY estimates and
adjust targets when needed; and (iv) invest in restoration and protection of the
ecosystem.

6. The projected total fish production represents an estimated gross first sales
value-at-landing of approximately US$50 million. This involves a huge investment
in fishing, processing and other support services like boat building, supply of
fishing gear, cold storage, production of ice and packaging material, and
opportunities in fish distribution and marketing. FReMP will mainly target fishers
who use traditional motorized wooden boats (along with a few using improved
motorized fiberglass boats). Other beneficiaries will include "foot fishers" who do
not own any fishing assets. The programme will address many limiting factors and
contribute to increased productivity, production and improved livelihoods of the
target beneficiaries. Eritrea’s mangrove forests also offer opportunities for
supplementing livelihoods with honey production, fodder for small livestock, and
fuelwood, ensuring the viability of fisheries over the long term.

7. Inland fisheries and aquaculture present another investment opportunity for
increased fish production, incomes and nutrition. The Government, with support
from other development partners, has established over 330 reservoirs, of which
70 are stocked with fish species including tilapia, carp and catfish. However, the
country’s inland fisheries resources are not widely exploited since many local
communities are: unaware of the nutritional benefits; they lack fishing skills and
equipment; and fishing is not part of their tradition. In addition, there are
opportunities for engaging in aquaculture using cages placed within water
reservoirs or in external ponds drawing water from the reservoirs. FReMP will
target 15 water reservoirs to demonstrate good practices and test successful
models that can be replicated and scaled up in the other reservoirs. The
programme will also assist in developing climate-resilient conservation plans for
the water reservoirs, which will lead to improved crop and livestock production,
and enhance rural populations’ nutrition and incomes.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. Programme Area. FReMP will be national in scope, targeting all six zobas

(regions) in Eritrea's coastal and inland areas. There will be a special focus on



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

marine fish landing sites, inland water reservoirs for aquaculture and fish markets.
On the Red Sea coast, it will target the Northern Red Sea and Southern Red Sea
zobas. In the inland zobas of Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka, and Maekel, the
programme will be site-specific, operating in selected water reservoirs with high
fishery production potential.

9. Target Group. The target group consists of: (i) small-scale fishers (men and
women small boat owners, crew members and foot fishers) who will participate
either as individuals or as cooperatives; and (ii) rural smallholder farmers involved
in subsistence agriculture and small livestock-keeping around inland water
reservoirs, and those involved in rehabilitating their catchment areas, who are
interested in economic activities along the inland fisheries supply chain; (iii) youth
entrepreneurs (fishers and non-fishers) interested in establishing business
enterprises or cooperatives that respond to market demand for fishery products
and services; (iv) women, especially women-headed households, who will account
for at least 30 per cent of the programme’s beneficiaries; and (v) demobilized
soldiers and internally displaced persons.

B. Programme development objective
10. Programme goal and development objective. FReMP will be implemented over

a seven-year period from 2017 to 2023. The programme’s goal is to contribute to
household food and nutrition security, and alleviate rural poverty. Its development
objective is to increase incomes and improve nutrition among targeted
beneficiaries, and promote the sustainable management of natural resources. In
pursuit of this objective, FReMP will support marine and inland small-scale fishers
to produce a surplus (within the MSY of the fisheries) for the market. To achieve
this, it will forge sustainable partnerships with various actors along the fish
production and marketing value chain. The aim will be to transform Eritrea’s
small-scale fisheries sector from subsistence to a sustainable commercial industry.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Develop sustainable fisheries systems. This component will

support the establishment of necessary infrastructure and technologies for
production and post-harvest operations, marketing, and consumption of both
marine and inland fisheries. It will be achieved through three sub-components:

(i) Development of marine fisheries production and post-harvest systems;

(ii) Development and sustainable utilization of inland fisheries; and

(iii) Market development and promotion of fish consumption.

12. Component 2: Fisheries enterprise support services. This component seeks
to: (i) promote the development and build capacity of cooperatives and other
enterprise groups; and (ii) strengthen input-provision services to ensure that
legally constituted cooperatives and enterprise groups have access to the inputs
required to undertake economically viable and sustainable fish-related businesses.
These objectives will be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Entrepreneurial capacity development; and

(ii) Strengthening of input supply services.

13. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and implementation support.
The objectives of this cross-cutting component are to: (i) ensure that the
institutions responsible for implementing and overseeing the programme’s various
implementation processes have the capacity to effectively carry out their duties;
and (ii) manage and facilitate the programme in an efficient and effective manner
by coordinating planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and sharing, progress reporting, and liaising with other stakeholders. These
objectives are to be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Marine Resources and other implementing
agencies for the development of the fisheries sector; and

(ii) Programme coordination and implementation support services.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

14. The programme’s overall approach is to strengthen production systems and market
linkages. FReMP will use communities as an entry point, engaging local institutions
in participatory planning for sustainable fisheries development. The programme will
be implemented through – and fully embedded in – the Government’s
decentralized system, and sustainability will be a central aspect of the programme
approach. The programme will support enterprises in engaging with markets in
order to increase returns on their investments and establish public and private
mechanisms to ensure continuity of benefits. Gender will be mainstreamed across
the programme by: (i) ensuring that gender issues are considered in policy
dialogue and staff training; (ii) establishing programme work plans that are gender
sensitive and identifying gender focal points at the national and zoba levels;
(iii) promoting women’s participation in programme activities, particularly those
focused on small pelagic fish production and market linkages; and (iv) closely
monitoring gender empowerment.

B. Organizational framework
15. The management, coordination and implementation of FReMP will involve various

government institutions and private-sector entities. The Ministry of Marine
Resources will be the lead executing agency and will be supported by: (i) a
programme steering committee chaired by the minister responsible for fisheries
and with representation from ministries with direct relevance to the programme
goal and development objective; and (ii) an adequately staffed national
programme coordination office (NPCO). At the zoba level, FReMP will be
implemented, managed and coordinated through the zoba administration systems.
Zoba programme coordination offices will be established in all the six zobas to
strengthen programme management and coordination.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning. Annual work plans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will be the key instruments

for implementation and operational control. AWP/Bs will be prepared for all
programme participants, starting with the primary stakeholders at the community
level. These plans will identify activities according to needs and priorities through a
participatory planning process.

17. The NPCO will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate the AWP/Bs from the six
zobas and all other programme areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Marine
Resources. The NPCO will submit the consolidated AWP/Bs to the programme’s
technical committee for review and endorsement before submitting them to the
programme steering committee for approval and to IFAD for review on a "no
objection" basis. In order to facilitate the proper preparation of AWP/Bs, training
will be provided at programme start-up.

18. Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E will be embedded in the institutional
strengthening and implementation support component, coordinated by the NPCO.
This system will reach all implementers at the national and zoba levels, and will be
supported by additional professional staff, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will feed into the Ministry of Marine Resources management
information system and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

19. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management
will be based on the programme’s M&E system, especially on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. The
national-level M&E team will liaise with zoba-level counterparts to develop a
learning and knowledge management system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The proposed financial management arrangements for

FReMP have been assessed as medium risk. Therefore it is recommended that the
Laccie accounting software be used instead of the Government’s financial
management system. The NPCO, which will be the accounting hub, has gained
experience through the Fisheries Development Programme (FDP) in the
implementation of IFAD-funded projects. In addition, the Laccie accounting
software was specifically designed for donor-funded projects and is able to
generate the required financial reports.

21. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened at the Central Bank of
Eritrea to receive the proceeds from the IFAD grant, and Germany and GEF
contributions. A programme operating account at a bank acceptable to IFAD will
be operated in accordance with Government regulations. To facilitate
traceability of funds, each zoba will have a dedicated operating account to
receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved AWP/Bs, which will be
accounted for prior to any request for subsequent advances.

22. Audits. The Government’s audit processes will be used for FReMP. As was the case
for FDP, Eritrea’s Auditor-General will have the discretion to undertake the audit or
to appoint an independent private audit firm acceptable to IFAD. Either way, the
auditor’s terms of reference will require IFAD's "no objection" review on an annual
basis. The Ministry of Marine Resources’ internal auditors will include FReMP in their
annual rolling internal audit plans and issue formal reports at least twice each year.

23. Procurement. All procurement funded by the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent that they are
consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. The country’s legal and
regulatory framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently
robust. There are checks and balances within the system to ensure that public
procurement is undertaken transparently and competitively. Lessons learned from
FDP indicate that a programme-specific procurement officer should be recruited to
strengthen: (i) records management; (ii) contract management; (iii) the
integration of procurement into budget formulation; and (iv) reporting.

24. Transparency, governance and anti-corruption. The Government will maintain
a governance and anti-corruption framework throughout the programme
implementation period to mitigate the risk of fraud and corruption, and promote
effective utilization of programme funds. Specific measures to mitigate identified
fiduciary risks will include: (i) use of the Laccie accounting system at the NPCO to
reduce the risk of human error; (ii) checks and balances in contracting and
administration; (iii) the integration of FReMP into internal audit plans within all
zobas; (iv) activity-tagged transfers to zobas instead of general cash releases;
(v) maintaining the current statement of expenditure ceiling used in other
IFAD-funded projects in Eritrea, given the inherent risk; (vi) adequate staffing
arrangements; and (vii) continued capacity building of the cooperative credit unit
to handle the asset financing.

E. Supervision
25. FReMP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and Eritrea’s Government. The frequency

and composition of missions will be determined by actual requirements through
collaboration with IFAD and the Government. Preferably, supervision missions will
take place every six months. Supervision will not be seen as a general inspection



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned,
and to jointly reflect on improving implementation and increasing the likelihood of
achieving the programme’s development objective.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. Programme costs. The total programme costs over seven years, including

contingencies, taxes and duties, are estimated to be US$32.12 million as detailed
in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Develop sustainable
fisheries systems 4 958 40.4 6 508 53.0 - - 26 0.2 286 2.3 504 4.1 12 284 38.2
2. Fisheries enterprise
support services 3 376 31.4 128 1.2 - - 5 940 55.3 445 4.1 846 7.9 10 735 33.4
3. Institutional
strengthening and
implementation
support 6 666 73.2 1 254 13.8 500 5.5 - - 686 7.5 - - 9 105 28.3

Total programme
costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

B. Programme financing
27. The total combined FReMP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$32.12 million
(ERN 481.8 million). The programme will be financed by the Government, the IFAD
grant, Germany, GEF, FAO and beneficiary contributions. IFAD has confirmed a
grant equivalent to US$15 million from the Tenth Replenishment of IFAD’s
Resources (IFAD10), which represents 46.7 per cent of the total programme cost.
Germany will contribute US$5.96 million (18.6 per cent of the total programme
cost); GEF has committed US$7.89 million (24.6 per cent); FAO will contribute
US$500,000 (1.6 per cent); and beneficiaries will contribute approximately
US$1.35 million (4.2 per cent of the total programme cost) through their
participation in construction, setting up fishery sites and purchasing inputs like
fishing gear. The Government will finance the taxes and duties (US$1.42 million,
representing 4.4 per cent of total costs). Details of the financing arrangements are
shown in table 2.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs
A. Works 3 367 32.8 6 155 59.9 - - 26 0.3 227 2.2 504 4.9 10 279 32.0

B. Vehicles 1 707 72.1 54 2.3 - - - - 605 25.6 - - 2 367 7.4

C. Equipment and materials 2 206 22.5 353 3.6 - - 5 929 60.4 487 5.0 845 8.6 9 820 30.6

D. Consultancies 562 38.3 356 24.3 500 34.1 - - 48 3.3 - - 1 466 4.6

E. Training 4 187 86.7 629 13.0 - - 10 0.2 1 - 1 - 4 829 15.0

Total
investment costs 12 029 41.8 7 548 26.2 500 1.7 5 966 20.7 1 368 4.8 1 351 4.7 28 761 89.5

II. Recurrent costs
A. Salaries and allowances 1 370 80.0 343 20.0 - - - - - - - - 1 713 5.3

B. Operating costs 1 601 97.0 - - - - - - 50 3.0 - - 1 650 5.1
Total recurrent costs 2 971 88.3 343 10.2 - - - - 50 1.5 - - 3 363 10.5
Total programme costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. Benefits and Beneficiaries. FReMP will target 17,500 households

(87,500 people) through 600 groups. The cost per beneficiary is US$361 (about
US$1,800 per household). The programme will provide direct support to inland
fishing cooperatives, small pelagic fishing enterprises, fish value-addition
enterprises (e.g. fish drying), fish mongers and traders, fish marketing, provision
of inputs through the cooperative support unit and the establishment of a
sustainable ice plant.

29. Expected benefits include: (i) increases in the production and quality of
marketable fish; (ii) higher prices for producers and traders as a result of the
aggregation of fish products and improved marketing processes; (iii) increased
community-level resource rental revenues; (iv) consumer benefits such as
enhanced availability and affordability of fish products by reducing inefficiencies
along the value chain; and (v) empowered government systems that have
benefited from capacity development.

30. Economic analysis. The programme has the potential to generate an economic
rate of return of 17 per cent over a ten-year period.

31. Impact indicators. FReMP is expected to facilitate the development of sustainable
production, processing and market linkages for marine and inland fisheries, and
deliver increased volumes of fish to consumers. This will: generate employment,
especially for youth and women; increase incomes of small-scale fishers in Eritrea’s
coastal and inland communities; increase the volume and quality of marketed fish
in coastal and inland areas; and enhance food and nutrition security in the target
communities.

D. Sustainability
32. Institutional sustainability. The participatory programme design process and

the bottom-up planning approach will ensure that programme implementation
modalities respond to the target communities’ concerns, sector-specific priorities,
national development policies and strategies, and the national institutional
framework. The approach creates ownership and builds the foundation for
sustainability after the programme ends. FReMP implementation will be fully
embedded within the Government’s institutional framework at all levels and the
Government has committed to continue this integration after programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

implementation. The institutional building-capacity approach encompasses
government institutions at various levels as well as cooperatives and enterprise
groups to ensure that skills continue to support programme-initiated activities after
completion.

33. Economic/income sustainability. The programme will build the capacity of
target groups in business plan development for their subprojects and prudent
financial management; enterprise groups will be linked to markets. The financial
analysis of the programme indicates that members of different enterprise groups
will improve their incomes and earn good returns on their investments. These
financial benefits on investments in the sector, coupled with improved access to
inputs, will promote sustainability and enhance replicability and scaling up. The
availability of a revolving fund through the cooperative credit unit will provide
opportunities for highly performing enterprise groups to expand their businesses in
the long run.

34. Environmental and climatic sustainability. The programme will promote
environmentally sustainable fishing practices by adopting a precautionary
approach, which involves promoting and enforcing good fisheries management
practices. FReMP’s interventions will support: adaptation to climate change through
investing in "climate buffers", which include watershed management; increasing
water and soil retention to reduce the impacts of drought and extreme rainfall; and
rehabilitation and planting of mangroves to safeguard their important role in the
coastal ecosystem. This approach also integrates expected climate change impacts
and utilizes these data in feasibility studies for infrastructure.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Several potential risks could undermine the programme’s success if they are not

mitigated. Delayed programme start-up, slow disbursements during the early years
of implementation and high staff turnover have been recurrent problems in the
portfolio. To mitigate these risks, FReMP will operate with similar institutional
arrangements as FDP and will be managed by the same experienced programme
management unit. Expansion of fishing activities, if not properly controlled, could
lead to overexploitation of fish resources beyond the MSY for both marine and
inland fisheries. Mitigation measures include: (i) setting conservative catch levels
below historical MSY estimates (19,000 tons per year for small pelagics);
(ii) supporting the Ministry of Fisheries Resources in monitoring, control and
surveillance capacity; (iii) updating MSY estimates and adjusting targets when
needed; and (iv) investing in restoration and protection of the ecosystem. For
inland fisheries, the programme will facilitate the establishment of fishing
cooperatives with standard codes of fishing and environmental practice. The
programme will also support a hatchery to restock water reservoirs as necessary.
In addition, extension agents from the Ministry of Marine Resources and fishing
cooperatives will receive training in stocking and sustainable harvesting.

36. Based on Eritrea's 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 18, the country’s inherent risk is high. The fiduciary risk has been
assessed as medium due to the introduction of mitigation measures highlighted
above.

37. Climate risks. The programme’s sensitivity to the impacts of climate change is
assessed as moderate. The greatest risk relates to the unknown impact of
increasing sea temperatures on marine fish resources. Through its monitoring
activities, the programme will be able to adjust to changes in fish stocks. At the
design stage, there were no data available to carry out an in-depth climate risk
assessment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The design of FReMP is compliant with: (i) IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025;
(ii) Reaching the Rural Poor: IFAD Policy on Targeting; and (iii) IFAD Policy on
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. In addition, the nutrition focus of the
programme is aligned with the Government’s strategy on food security and
nutrition, and IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and action
plans on mainstreaming nutrition. FReMP will be implemented in compliance with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy, and IFAD's Climate
Change Strategy. Climate change adaptation measures are integrated into
programme activities in order to address the inherent risks resulting from a
changing climate and the potential multiplication of these effects on ecosystems.
As an extra safeguard, IFAD has developed a complaints procedure on alleged
non-compliance with its social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects
of its social, environmental and climate assessment procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The programme is fully aligned with Government investment priorities as defined in

the Eritrea Food Security Strategy, the Eritrea Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper and the five year (2013-2017) strategic development plans for the country’s
agriculture and fisheries sectors. It will be fully embedded in the Government’s
decentralized institutional framework and delivery mechanisms. Links between the
steering and technical committees as well as among the management teams will
ensure coordination, collaboration, learning and scaling up of good practices.
Operational linkages between the Ministry of Marine Resources and other relevant
ministries, and other development partners in the fisheries sector are expected to
result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. Innovation. Eritrea’s small pelagic fisheries present opportunities for introducing

new techniques and innovative products and recipes. Novel techniques and fish
products to be piloted include solar-dried assortments, pickling, fish powder,
protein concentrates, salted-pressed sundried fish snacks, fermented products, fish
oil, fish sauces and different fish recipes. Successful products will be introduced to
fish processing and marketing enterprise groups for commercial uptake. The
programme will also pilot new technologies to boost fish production.

41. Scaling up. Experiences from FDP will be used to guide programme interventions,
especially the formation of cooperatives and enterprise groups, capacity
development and input financing. FDP established an asset-financing model, which
has become instrumental in sustaining the country’s small-scale fishing sector,
particularly for large fish along the coasts. FReMP will scale up this proven model
for sustainable access to fishing inputs and replicate it in small pelagic fish and
inland fisheries supply chains. Enterprise groups at different links in these chains
will be able to access the inputs they need to undertake economically viable and
sustainable fish-related businesses.

42. The programme will pilot mariculture – the cultivation of marine organisms for food
– and aquaculture development activities in marine and inland systems, with the
objective of demonstrating their technical and economic viability. The inland
fisheries intervention will target up to 15 water reservoirs to generate good
practices that are replicable in the remaining water reservoirs across the country.

Policy engagementD.
43. The programme presents an opportunity to: (i) test new approaches, models and

technologies within small pelagic inland fisheries and coastal areas; and (ii) support
the Government’s own efforts to analyse the effectiveness of its fisheries policies,



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

including those on sustainable production and management of fisheries resources.
Lessons learned through the programme will be used to inform Government-led
dialogue around national policies. The programme will maintain policy engagement
around fish product marketing systems and related legal and regulatory
frameworks, particularly regarding the role of the National Fisheries Corporation
and fisher cooperatives in the pricing of fish products.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the State of Eritrea and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as appendix I.

45. The State of Eritrea is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the State of Eritrea in an amount equivalent to ten million seven
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 10.75 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation
Development Programme – Phase II
(PASIDP II)

Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources

Total programme cost: US$145.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 72,950,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$102 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1,080,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$1.5 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund grant:

SDR 7,870,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$11 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$18.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$12.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.18

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Federal Democratic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II), as contained in
paragraph 43.

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. During the last decade, the Government of Ethiopia has achieved impressive results

in economic growth and poverty reduction. Broad-based gross domestic product
growth averaged 10.8 per cent each year between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, and
annual population growth was 3 per cent. This strong economic growth was driven
by significant public investment and expansion of services and agriculture. The
Government committed more than 60 per cent of its total expenditures to
poverty-oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water and road
construction. Ending extreme poverty in Ethiopia requires sustaining current efforts
and ensuring that economic growth is inclusive, especially in the rural areas. Many
non-poor households in Ethiopia are just above the poverty line and vulnerable to
falling into poverty in the case of a significant shock.

2. To sustain the country’s strong economic growth, it is critical to enhance the
productivity of agriculture, particularly farming systems such as small-scale irrigation
with high potential for productivity increases. The Government’s Growth and
Transformation Plan II for 2015/2016-2019/2020 emphasizes the important role of
agriculture as a driver of economic growth.

3. Ethiopia is endowed with a highly diverse agroecological environment spanning from
temperate and moist tropical highlands to hot and arid lowlands, matched by a
diverse sociocultural setting. As much as this heterogeneity has to offer in terms of
natural resources, a common characteristic is environmental fragility. Major
challenges include soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. Climate
change projections for Ethiopia indicate a significant increase in temperature and a
likely increase in droughts, heavy rains and floods, particularly in the lowlands.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD are moving towards a programmatic approach
with a longer-term vision for lending in the Ethiopian small-scale irrigation
subsector. The first phase of the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme (PASIDP), which was implemented between 2008 and 2015, contributed
to reducing the country’s vulnerability to adverse climate risks and drought as well
as rural poverty and food insecurity. The country programme evaluation by the
Independent Office of Evaluation of IFAD recommended financing a second phase of
PASIDP since small-scale irrigation offers great potential for reducing the impact of
climate change, enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty, which are all
aspirations of the Government. This second phase will complete and hone the
intervention model developed in the first phase, and will pilot the geographical



EB 2016/118/R.18

2

expansion that will mainly be undertaken in the third phase, with an ultimate final
vision of scaling up the programme nationwide.

5. PASIDP II is based on the assumption that poor farmers who are provided with
access to a secure irrigation production base and access to markets and services will
be able to produce and market greater volumes of crops in a profitable manner. The
investment will include watersheds contiguous with the irrigation schemes, which
exhibit varying levels of degradation, in order to stabilize them, improve their
productive capacity and enhance their resilience. This will improve farmers’
prosperity, food security and nutrition, enhancing their resilience against external
shocks – including those induced by adverse weather and climate change as
witnessed in 2015 as a result of the El Niño weather phenomenon.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. The programme area of PASIDP II will cover four regions in Ethiopia: (i) Amhara;

(ii) Oromia; (iii) Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region; and (iv) Tigray.
By the time of the midterm review, opportunities to expand the programme
interventions into other regions on a pilot basis will be explored.

7. PASIDP II will benefit 108,750 households, of which: (i) 46,250 utilize small-scale
irrigation schemes and some fields in the adjacent watersheds; (ii) 37,500
households live in and utilize the adjacent watersheds; and (iii) 10,000 benefited
from irrigation support under PASIDP I and will benefit from the agronomic and
market linkages support under PASIDP II. In addition, 15,000 employment
opportunities will be created as a result of the growing labour requirements on farms
and in marketing chains. Within the selected irrigation schemes and adjacent
watersheds, PASIDP II will use a self-targeting approach together with mechanisms
to promote the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups.

B. Programme development objective
8. The programme development objective is to improve income and food security for

rural households on a sustainable basis.

C. Components/outcomes
Component A: Investment in small-scale irrigation infrastructure

9. The expected outcome of component A is that farmers will have access to
sustainable irrigation schemes; the programme aims to develop at least 15,000
hectares (ha) of small-scale irrigation schemes. Subcomponent A.1 will support
(i) the selection of schemes; (ii) feasibility studies and detailed designs; (iii) the
establishment and strengthening of irrigation water users' associations (IWUAs); and
(iv) environmental and social impact studies and management plans. Subcomponent
A.2 will support the development of the selected irrigation schemes, including
multiple-user systems alongside irrigation.

Component B: Investment in capacity for sustainable agriculture
10. The expected outcome of component B is that farmers will have increased

market-oriented skills and capacity for sustainable agriculture. Component B will
support activities designed to ensure that beneficiaries operate in an environment
that is conducive to rural commercial development. Subcomponent B.1 will support
the strengthening of farmers’ cooperatives, the development of agribusiness linkages
and access to financial services. Subcomponent B.2 will: (i) support the
improvement of crop husbandry practices, mainly through farmers’ research groups
and extension support; (ii) facilitate access to improved seeds; (iii) include gender-
sensitive activities; and (iv) promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture. Subcomponent
B.3 will support improved watershed management and promote climate-smart
agriculture.



EB 2016/118/R.18

3

Component C: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and
knowledge management

11. Component C will focus on (i) learning and knowledge management; and
(ii) programme management, monitoring and evaluation.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

12. Programme implementation will be governed by four main principles: (i) alignment
with government systems and procedures, and integration of programme
implementation into decentralized government institutions; (ii) empowerment of
beneficiaries to lead programme implementation through their grass-roots
institutions; (iii) cooperation with private service providers and business entities;
and (iv) partnerships and collaboration with other development partners and
stakeholders in the sector.

B. Organizational framework
13. Programme governance. A national programme steering committee (NPSC) will

provide overall policy and strategic guidance on programme focus, priorities and
institutional strengthening. The NPSC will be chaired by the Minister of State for
Agriculture and Natural Resources, and shall be composed of ministers of state from
relevant sectors including the: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; Ministry
of Trade; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of Finance
and Economic Cooperation; and Ministry of Industry. It will also include executives of
the Federal Cooperative Agency, the Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute and
other institutions aligned with the programme’s strategic focus.

14. Programme management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources will
be the lead implementing agency. The Minister of State for Natural Resources will be
responsible for coordinating implementation with support from the Directorate of
Small-scale Irrigation. A federal programme coordination and management unit
(FPCMU) will ensure: (i) planning, monitoring and evaluation, (ii) stakeholder
coordination at the federal level; and (iii) quality control of investments and cost-
efficiency. The Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency will provide technical
and analytical support, and mobilize service providers for South-South Cooperation
to build capacity in areas of innovation, including support to market access alliances,
promotion of climate-smart innovations and agricultural finance.

15. Regional programme coordination and management units (RPCMUs) will coordinate
investment planning, procurement and coordination of design consultants, works
contractors and capacity-building service providers. At the district and
programme-site levels, implementation will be fully integrated into local government
structures. IWUAs will actively participate in the entire process of irrigation scheme
development, from identification to the final hand-over.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. The programme will be implemented on the basis of approved annual workplans and
budgets, which will be prepared jointly by the FPCMU, RPCMUs, district governments
and implementing partners. The FPCMU will consolidate the budget and present it to
the NPSC for approval pending IFAD’s prior review.

17. In line with the result-based management approach, progress towards programme
outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability will be regularly monitored. Baseline
and impact surveys will be conducted at start-up, midterm and programme
completion to assess the effectiveness of the investment. Feasibility studies for each
irrigation scheme and watershed will provide baseline data to assess performance
and results.



EB 2016/118/R.18

4

18. To improve performance and build local partners’ capacity, the programme will
promote participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. The FPCMU will
facilitate periodic structured discussions to share any issues encountered, solutions
and results. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s
M&E system, particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons
learned during implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. A senior finance manager will be appointed to ensure the use of a consistent,

comprehensive chart of accounts and accounting software at the federal and regional
levels. An accountant will be recruited at the FPMCU and in each region.

20. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. A designated account will be
opened at the National Bank of Ethiopia to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan,
the IFAD grant and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant. A programme operating account will be maintained by the FPCMU in
accordance with government regulations and a separate account will be opened for
the receipt of counterpart funding. The RPCMUs and implementing partners will also
open dedicated bank accounts in their regions to facilitate the transparency of funds.

21. Programme audits. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources internal
audit department will include the programme in its internal audit plans. The Office of
the Federal Auditor General will either directly perform the external audit, request
that the Audit Service Corporation perform it or hire an independent audit firm
acceptable to the Fund. The internal and external audit recommendations will be
reviewed by the NPSC.

22. Retroactive financing and start-up costs. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii)
of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible
expenditures during the preparatory period from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2016
up to the equivalent of US$2 million pre-financed by the Government will be
reimbursed from the IFAD loan after the financing agreement has entered into force
and the conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met. In addition to this
retroactive financing, withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures incurred between the date of entry into force of the Financing
Agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

23. Procurement. The country’s legislative and regulatory framework provides an
adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for
works. Lessons from the previous phase imply that a programme-specific
procurement officer should be recruited to strengthen: records management;
contract management; the integration of procurement into the budget formulation
process; and reporting. Annual procurement plans will be subject to prior review by
IFAD and will serve as tools for planning, implementing and monitoring all the
programme’s procurement activities.

E. Supervision
24. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. Features likely to require

implementation support include: (i) planning and preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes, including the early establishment of IWUAs and facilitating beneficiaries’
active participation; (ii) implementation of an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF); (iii) programme M&E; (iv) procurement; (v) access to finance,
inputs and markets; and (vi) targeting.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
25. Total programme costs over seven years, including contingencies, taxes and duties,

are estimated at US$145.3 million, as presented in the table below. Component A



EB 2016/118/R.18

5

represents 71.9 per cent of the costs, component B 20.5 per cent and component C
7.6 per cent.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Investment in
small-scale irrigation
Infrastructure 82 226 78.7 1 000 1.0 1 287 1.2 4 452 4.3 15 523 14.9 104 489
B. Investment in capacity
for sustainable agriculture 11 571 38.8 - - 8 516 28.6 7 621 25.6 2 108 7.1 29 815
C. Programme
management, M&E and
knowledge management 8 203 74.6 500 4.5 1 196 10.9 - - 1 091 9.9 10 990

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

B. Programme financing
26. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of US$102 million on highly

concessional terms and an IFAD grant of US$1.5 million. An additional grant of
US$11 million (7.6 per cent of the total programme cost) from the ASAP Trust Fund
will support the mainstreaming of climate-resilient interventions within the
programme. The Government will provide the equivalent of US$18.7 million,
representing 12.9 per cent of total programme costs, to cover all duties and taxes.
Public services at the national, regional and district levels will play a major role in
programme implementation. The beneficiary contribution is estimated at
US$12.1 million, and will be provided in labour and materials.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Training 4 142 33.4 - - 6 475 52.1 - - 1 801 14.5 12 417
Works 78 594 79.5 - - 1 000 15.0 4 452 4.5 14 831 15.0 98 876
Consultancies 3 954 47.0 1 500 17.8 1 988 23.6 - - 969 11.5 8 412
Goods, services and
inputs 9 348 50.5 - - 1 094 5.9 7 620 41.1 455 2.5 18 516
Salaries and allowances 3 572 84.1 - - 443 10.4 - - 233 5.5 4 247
Operating costs 2 390 84.6 - - - - - - 434 15.4 2 825

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The programme is expected to lead to: (i) a significant increase in farm productivity,

market output and incomes for 46,250 farm households cultivating 18,400 ha of
irrigated agriculture; (ii) higher yields in at least 60,000 ha of adjacent watersheds;
(iii) additional jobs for 15,000 young and landless people who are not members of
the households with irrigation schemes or watersheds; and (iv) improved market
access and higher yields for 10,000 farming households that received support under
PASIDP I.

28. With an economic rate of return of 28.8 per cent over 20 years and a net present
value of US$165 million per annum, the programme is an economically viable
investment. The sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to increases in



EB 2016/118/R.18

6

programme costs and reductions in output prices. The adoption rate and time lags of
benefits are the most sensitive factors.

D. Sustainability
29. The participatory process of irrigation scheme establishment creates ownership and

the necessary foundations and commitments for sustainability after programme
completion. Programme implementation will be fully embedded in the Government’s
institutional framework at all levels, which will continue after programme
implementation.

30. Mutually beneficial market linkages will ensure the sustainability of beneficiaries’
incomes. The financial analysis indicates that producers will substantially improve
their incomes with solid returns on their investments. These financial benefits from
investment in the sector will not only promote sustainability but enhance replicability
and opportunities for scaling up.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The design of PASIDP II has benefited from a risk assessment study recently

undertaken by the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management. Extreme risks with a
low or moderate frequency but high severity (such as extreme droughts or market
outbreaks) require the intervention of macro-level players.

32. The programme has been confirmed as Environmental and Social Category A since a
number of irrigation schemes may result in a loss of environmental services provided
by the natural ecosystem or have significant implications that affect a broader area
and are not easily remedied. An ESMF and a free prior and informed consent
implementation plan have been developed to guide the programme during
implementation, and environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) will be
conducted for those schemes classified as Category A, while environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for those in Category B. The
programme will endeavour to avoid schemes that may result in a high probability of
resettlement. If any scheme is selected that will trigger physical or economic
resettlement, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared and disclosed as a
precondition for financing the scheme. The RAP process should entail meaningful
consultation and negotiation with any people who will potentially be affected in
accordance with the free prior and informed consent implementation plan. In terms
of climate risk, PASIDP II is classified as "medium". The climate risks will be
mitigated by increasing the ability of affected communities to adapt to environmental
and economic variability, demographic shifts, shocks and long-term changes.

33. As a result of the uncertain implications of – and resources required for – managing
ESIAs for Category A schemes, priority will be given to schemes classified as
Category B. During early implementation, ESIAs will be prepared and IFAD will
organize an independent review to assess their implications and determine the
Borrower’s and IFAD’s capacity to manage and implement these schemes.

34. Based on Ethiopia’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 33 and public financial management assessments, the programme’s
fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D
of this report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

35. Programme design is aligned with IFAD’s Policies for Targeting; Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment; Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security; the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests; the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa; and IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The programme



EB 2016/118/R.18

7

is also aligned with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy
and Climate Change Strategy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
36. The programme is fully aligned with the investment priorities under the

Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II. Linkages between the steering
committees and technical committees, as well as between the management teams of
programmes such as the Sustainable Land Management Project and the Agricultural
Growth Programme will ensure coordination, collaboration, learning, and scaling up
of good practices. Operational linkages with the Ministry of Industry’s Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance Project and the Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
project are expected to result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The main innovations for scaling up outcomes include the: (i) mainstreaming of

participatory planning and selection of schemes; (ii) development of agribusiness
linkages and market access to mitigate marketing risk, especially for perishable
crops; (iii) integration of climate-adaptation strategies, including watershed
improvement and management, building on experiences with the Community-based
Integrated Natural Resource Management Project; (iv) promotion of improved crop
husbandry and access to improved inputs and financial services in order to achieve
the targeted yields and improve water productivity; (v) enhanced focus on women
and youth as priority target groups; (vi) mainstreaming of nutrition-sensitive
agriculture; and (vii) alignment with IFAD’s new SECAP and international
engagement with respect to climate change resilience.

Policy engagementD.
38. Productive use of water resources is a priority guiding Ethiopia’s agricultural

development agenda. Strengthening existing models for irrigation and enhanced
watershed management is a vital priority for policy engagement. The programme
presents an opportunity to: (i) test new implementation approaches, models and
technologies, identify successes and share relevant lessons; and (ii) support the
Government’s own efforts to assess the implementation and effectiveness of its
policies. The lessons learned in pursuing these approaches will be used to inform
Government-led dialogue around national policies.

39. Much of the policy engagement will take place within the framework established by
the Government for policy dialogue with its development partners and other national
stakeholders, including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector
Working Group, and its subcommittees.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A programme financing agreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of

Ethiopia and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included
in appendix I.

41. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2016/118/R.18

8

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to
seventy two million nine hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 72,950,000) (approximately US$102 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to one million and
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 1,080,000) (approximately
US$1.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to seven
million eight hundred and seventy thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 7,870,000) (approximately US$11 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the
Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$45.2 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

10.75 SDR million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.0 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund grant:

4.3 SDR million (equivalent to approximately US$6
million)

Contribution of Government: US$5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.2 million

Contribution of private sector: US$2 million

Financing gap: Approximately US$15 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the Inclusive Value Chain
Development Project, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for
the Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mauritania has about four million inhabitants, 50 per cent of whom derive their

livelihoods from crop and livestock farming and fishing (World Bank, 2013). The
annual demographic growth rate was 2.8 per cent in 2013. The country covers an
area of 1,030,700 km2, more than two thirds of which is desert.

2. During the period 2005-2010, the rural sector contributed an average of 25 per
cent of GDP, which breaks down by subsector as follows: 11 per cent plant
production, 9 per cent livestock and 5 per cent fishing (World Bank, 2016).1 During
the same period, annual average growth in GDP linked to the primary sector was
4.1 per cent, with significant discrepancies between years as a result of irregular
precipitation.

3. Mauritania is classified as a lower middle-income country.2 The human development
index (HDI) improved from 0.424 to 0.487 between 2004 and 2014 but remains
below the average for sub-Saharan Africa, which stands at 0.502. Although more
than half the population live in rural areas, the country is urbanizing very rapidly
and the population is very young: 44 per cent of Mauritanians are under 15 years of
age,3 60 per cent under 25 and just 5 per cent are over 60.

4. The incidence of rural poverty remains high, particularly in the country’s south. The
proportion of the population defined as poor fell from 51 per cent in 2000 to
47 per cent in 2004, 42 per cent in 2008 and 31 per cent in 2014.4,5 Despite the
progress made, this percentage remains high, particularly in rural areas where
74 per cent of poor people live, and in the country’s south where 44.4 per cent of
the rural population still live below the poverty line compared to 16.7 per cent in
urban areas.6

5. The food and nutritional situation of Mauritania’s population is cause for concern.
According to the last food security survey (FSMS, 2015) conducted by the Food
Security Commission with support from the World Food Programme (WFP),
23.8 per cent of Mauritania’s households are food-insecure, particularly in the
country’s southern agro-pastoral strip. Ongoing food insecurity leads to high rates
of chronic malnutrition among children under five, with national rates above
20 per cent,7 while acute malnutrition affects 14 per cent of children.8,9

6. Local value chains face competition from imports. Mauritania imports an average of
60 per cent of the staple foodstuffs consumed in the country. Only red meat and
fish are covered by domestic production, while two thirds of cereals are imported.
Imports of market garden products, mainly from Morocco and Europe, have been

1 World Development Indicators.
2 World Bank, October 2015.
3 WFP, Food Security Survey in Mauritania, July 2009.
4 These poverty rates are based on a poverty line estimated in real terms at MRO 169,445 at 2014 harmonized prices.
5 World Bank, October 2015.
6 MAED, National Poverty Profile in Mauritania. Draft version, June 2015.
7 Critical threshold according to WHO.
8 SMART national nutritional survey, Mauritania, Ministry of Health and UNICEF, June 2015.
9 IFPRI Global Nutrition Report 2015.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

2

rising since 2010. Despite substantial investments in developing rice growing areas,
the volume of rice imports remains high. Sugar and oil consumption are entirely
import-dependent. It is therefore essential to take demand into account before
undertaking any intervention in production to reduce the country’s food
dependence. This demand-driven approach is all the more important given the
experience of the Value Chains Development Programme for Poverty Reduction
(ProLPRAF), the previous project cofinanced by IFAD, which showed the local
markets can quickly become saturated.

7. Mauritania is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Based on the
environmental performance index for 2010, the country is in 161st place of
163 countries. Climate change amplifies natural risks such as periodic drought and
flooding, the resulting risks of network breakdown and human impacts. Climate
change also reduces productivity and biomass quality, which has a detrimental
impact on pastureland and non-timber forest products. High temperatures also
pose an obstacle for product conservation.

8. Mauritania’s financial sector is relatively modest in size and not well developed in
rural areas. With about 15,000 members, or 0.4 per cent of the population, and
US$1.7 million in financial savings,10 coverage by rural credit unions remains
limited. Low demographic density and low levels of capitalization among rural
people, hence their credit unions, place constraints on financial inclusion in value
chains.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

9. In a country context characterized by high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor
value chain competitiveness, heavy dependence on imports and climate phenomena
that accentuate impoverishment among the population, PRODEFI builds upon and
scales up IFAD’s experience in Mauritania and elsewhere in the subregion by
adopting a poverty reduction approach based on supporting inclusive value chains.
The PRODEFI approach is fully aligned with national policies and strategies – the
Rural Sector Development Strategy, the National Agricultural Development Plan,
the National Food Security Strategy, the National Programme of Action for
Adaptation to Climate Change – and IFAD’s country strategy note. It is also based
on the experience of technical and financial partners with a presence in Mauritania,
particularly the European Union, WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO).

10. ProLPRAF showed that market access is a determining factor in food security for
poor people. It identified pro-poor value chains with good nutritional potential in
which vulnerable people, women in particular, could position themselves through
partnerships with the private sector and benefit from the value added with project
support in production, processing, transportation and commercialization. Promoting
policy dialogue between the Government and the main value chain actors will help
install an enabling environment for promotion of local production.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. PRODEFI will be implemented in the wilayas (regions) in the country’s

south – Brakna, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech
Charghi. In these six wilayas, intervention will be localized and phased. During the
first phase, in each value chain, the project will intervene around markets where
ProLPRAF gains need to be reinforced. During the second phase, PRODEFI will
gradually expand its activities in all six wilayas.

B. Project development objective
12. The overall objective of PRODEFI is to improve the incomes and food and nutritional

10 Central Bank annual reports and interviews during formulation mission.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

3

security of poor rural people, particularly women and young people, in the project
area. The development objective is to include poor rural people, including women
and young people, in profitable and resilient value chains. PRODEFI will contribute
directly to achieving the objectives of the Rural Sector Development Strategy and
the National Agricultural Development Plan.

13. The project will target 42,600 direct beneficiaries and 243,000 indirect
beneficiaries, mainly farmers and other upstream and downstream value chain
actors. For the first phase, four value chains have been selected based on ProLPRAF
results and their poverty reduction potential: market gardening, poultry farming,
goat milk and non-timber forest products. For the second phase, plans call for
PRODEFI to operate in new value chains based on the results of the market studies
done during the first phase. A pilot operation in inland fishing will be conducted as
of project start-up around lake Foum Gleita.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will be structured around the following three components:

15. Component 1: Revitalization of value chains and development of pro-poor
public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps). The desired effect is for value
chain working groups (GTFs) and partnerships to support value chain development
and defend the interests of poor producers. To this end, the project will:
(i) reinforce and scale up GTF activities undertaken by ProLPRAF; (ii) promote a
better match between supply and demand and help set up higher performing and
more inclusive value chains by capitalizing producers, bringing actors into the
banking system, formalizing commercial transactions and facilitating partnerships
between actors, from simple contractual arrangements to 4P type partnerships; and
(iii) facilitate access to markets through structural improvements.

16. Component 2: Development and promotion of production models. The
intended effect is for the beneficiaries to adopt resilient, market-driven production
models that are sensitive to nutritional challenges. To this end, the project will
support: (i) competitive production models programmed to respond to market
demand, contracts and the 4Ps facilitated under component 1; and (ii) making
available training and advisory services associated with these production models,
i.e. nutritional education, agricultural advice, training for young people and
functional literacy.

17. Within the framework of these activities, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) financing granted will make it possible to take better account of
climate change by facilitating the use of solar energy – from production to storage
and processing – and promoting sustainable management techniques for natural
resources such as water, pastureland and plant resources, which are particularly
important in the non-timber forest products value chain.

18. Component 3: Coordination, M&E and knowledge management. Funding will
be provided for: (i) the project coordination and management unit based in
Nouakchott; (ii) the operations of two project operational management units, based
in Kaedi and Kiffa; (iii) the technical and financial assistance pool, based on cost
sharing with the Poverty Reduction Project in Aftout South and Karakoro – Phase II;
and (iv) strategic and technical steering activities as well as M&E, knowledge
management and communication.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

4

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project approach adopted by PRODEFI is to scale up the successes of ProLPRAF

while reinforcing and complementing them and integrating them with national
strategies through systematic, expanded policy dialogue. The project will adopt a
value chain approach driven by market demand. It will support actors involved the
value chains, both individually and collectively, as well as policy dialogue.Within the
framework of component 1, the actors will benefit from assistance in organization
and consultation to improve the matching of supply to demand. Project
interventions will consist of building the capacities of the actors in organization,
governance and leadership. The project will promote actor-to-actor contracting,
prioritizing producers and private promoters of innovative projects. Under
component 2, the project will, in developing market-driven production models as
defined in component 1, promote an increase in agricultural productivity and
processing by offering support to producers – underscoring financial viability,
improved nutrition and adaptation to climate change.

20. In addition, to gain efficiency, the project will adopt an outsourcing approach with
support from experienced national and international operators and consulting firms.
Operational partnerships will be promoted with other technical and financial
partners, civil society and the private sector to implement activities.

B. Organizational framework
21. Technical oversight of PRODEFI will be provided by the Policy, Planning, Statistics,

M&E and Cooperation Directorate (DPSSEC) of the Ministry of Agriculture, with
technical links to the departments in charge of the value chains targeted by the
project: livestock, fisheries and environment. The government contribution to the
project will be included in the budget of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
national steering committee will report to the Public Investment and Economic
Cooperation Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In addition, the
participation of GTF representatives will be crucial to facilitate policy dialogue
around value chain promotion. The same national steering committee could also
pilot other projects as part of IFAD’s programme in Mauritania.

22. With respect to programme coordination, a team in Nouakchott will be responsible
for operational and strategic project steering, with a mandate to, first, coordinate
and support work by branches and, second, facilitate policy dialogue on value chain
development at the national level.

23. Two operational management units, located in Kaédi and Kiffa and reporting
directly to the project coordinator, will be responsible for implementing the project.
Each unit will be administered by a branch head, based respectively within the
agriculture office in Kiffa and the livestock office in Kaédi. Both branches will be
supported by a deputy branch head and will benefit from the services of an M&E
assistant who will provide support for monitoring contracting, targeting, gender
equality, youth and nutrition, as well as a financial officer, secretariat and drivers.
Work premises will be shared with the regional offices.

24. With a view to gradually putting in place a programme approach to IFAD’s portfolio
in Mauritania, a shared pool of technical and financial assistance will provide
support to both projects in the portfolio. To this end, the PRODEFI PMU will be
housed in shared premises at the Nouakchott branch of PASK II.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
Planning

25. The PRODEFI activities will be presented each year in the form of an annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B) prepared on the basis of actors in the value chains
identified with GTF support and supported by annual action plans. Needs expressed
at the local level will be gathered on a participatory basis and consolidated by
wilayas with support from the operational management branches concerned. These



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

5

workplans will be subject to validation by technical steering committees, then
consolidated by the project coordination team in a national AWP/B and transmitted
for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture, then approved by the national steering
committee before being sent to IFAD for non objection.

M&E
26. The PRODEFI M&E system will be set up to provide information and analysis needed

to steer project implementation and plan sufficient human and financial resources
for implementation. It will measure progress in project implementation and its
effects and impact on the target groups. It will also report on a limited list of
indicators in connection with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS),
the effects of climate change (ASAP financing) and nutrition.

27. The system will be participatory, and the main M&E stakeholders will be GTFs,
implementation partners and service providers. Socio-economic baseline surveys
will be done by external service providers at project start-up and completion, and
will be strengthened with a study on the problematic issue of gender and poverty,
which will be conducted on the basis of the women’s empowerment in agriculture
index.

Learning and knowledge management
28. A knowledge management strategy will be developed under PRODEFI. The

approach will consist of creating a value chain between M&E, knowledge and
communication in order to collect, process, document, add value to and
disseminate on a large scale the data and information generated by activities in the
field, using multimedia and new technologies. The lessons learned will be
communicated via the PRODEFI website and at various national and international
workshops.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management

29. From start-up, PRODEFI will benefit from fiduciary support to encourage a forward
planning dynamic, which will be reviewed and supported during supervision
missions.

Flow of funds
30. To facilitate disbursements, the Recipient will open a designated project account

denominated in United States dollars at the Central Bank of Mauritania. The
National Pesticide Control Commission (CNCP) will open three current accounts
denominated in Mauritanian Ouguiya as the operating accounts in the two cities
where the PRODEFI branches will be located and in Nouakchott, where CNCP has its
headquarters. Start-up costs in amounts and categories to be defined during
negotiations with the Government are provided for upon the entry into
effectiveness of the PRODEFI financing agreement. Commitments and payments for
these expenses will be submitted by the Government of Mauritania to IFAD for non
objection on the basis of a detailed AWP/B.

Audit
31. The project will have an internal control function with activities based on an annual

plan drawn up by the internal controller. In addition, a full project audit conforming
to relevant international standards will be conducted each year by a firm drawn
from a shortlist with demonstrated experience in auditing the accounts of
IFAD-funded projects or programmes.

Procurement
32. Contracts for goods, works and services funded by IFAD will be awarded in

accordance with the regulations of the Recipient, provided they are compatible with
IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procedures governing contracts below the threshold
for sector commission jurisdiction will be set forth in the PRODEFI fiduciary manual.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

6

E. Supervision
33. Project supervision and administration of the financing will be done directly by

IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
34. The total cost of the project, which will be implemented over eight years, will be

US$45.2 million, of which US$4.2 million in respect of physical and financial
contingencies and US$41.0 million in base costs, which break down as follows:
US$18.3 million for component 1 (45 per cent), US$16.9 million for
component 2 (41 per cent) and US$5.8 million for component 3 (14 per cent).



7

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

4

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD

IFAD
ASAP

Other
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Value chain revitalization and 4P development
1.Professionalization of actors
and value chain steering 1.1 43.1 - - 1.1 43.1 - - - - 0.4 13.8 2.6 5.8
2.Contracting initiatives and
partnerships between value
chain actors 2.5 25.4 1.0 10.6 2.5 25.4 2.0 21.0 1.4 13.9 0.4 3.6 9.7 21.5
3.Structural improvements for
market access 3.3 41.5 - - 3.3 41.5 - - 0.4 4.6 1.0 12.5 7.9 17.5

Subtotal 6.9 34.0 1.0 5.1 6.9 34.0 2.0 10.1 1.7 8.5 1.7 8.4 20.2 44.7

B. Production models development and promotion
1.Production and processing
models 4.2 26.3 4.8 30.0 4.2 26.2 0.0 - 0.5 2.8 2.3 14.6 15.9 35.3
2.Advisory assistance and
supply of services 1.2 43.0 - - 1.2 43.0 - - - - 0.4 14.0 2.8 6.1

Subtotal 5.4 28.8 4.8 25.6 5.4 28.7 0.0 - 0.5 2.4 2.7 14.6 18.7 41.4

C. Coordination, M&E and knowledge management
1.Coordination and
management 2.3 46.2 - - 2.3 46.2 - - - - 0.4 7.6 4.9 10.8
2.M&E, knowledge
management and
communication 0.5 36.4 0.2 13.6 0.5 36.4 - - - - 0.2 13.7 1.4 3.1

Subtotal 2.8 44.0 0.2 3.0 2.8 44.0 - - - - 0.6 9.0 6.3 13.9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5.0 11.0 45.2 100.0



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

8

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

B. Project financing
35. PRODEFI, with a total cost of US$45.2 million, will be financed by: (i) IFAD, in the

amount of US$21 million (46.5 per cent of total cost), in the form of a grant for
US$15 million under the Debt Sustainability Framework for the 2016-2018 cycle of
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS), and a grant for US$6 million
under ASAP; (ii) private partners, in the amount of US$2 million (4.5 per cent);
(iii) the Government of Mauritania, in the amount of US$5 million (11 per cent);
and (iv) the beneficiaries, in the amount of US$2.2 million (4.8 per cent). The
financing deficit, in the amount of US$15 million, will be covered by other sources
of financing. Otherwise, it will be covered by a second tranche of IFAD financing
under the next PBAS cycle (2019-2021), subject to the availability of resources for
that cycle and subject to Executive Board approval.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure4

IFAD
PBAS

IFAD
ASAP

OTHER
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount    %
I. Investment expenses

A. Works 4.9 36.8 1.2 8.9 4.9 36.7 0.0 - 0.7 5.6 1.6 12 0 13 3 29.3
B. Vehicles 0.1 30.2 - - 0.1 28.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.3 0 1 40 0 0 3 0.7
C. Equipment and
supplies 0.3 19.1 0.3 21.9 0.3 18.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0 6 40 0 1 4 3.2
D. Training and
workshops 2.4 37.7 0.7 10.5 2.4 37.7 - - - - 0 9 14 0 6 4 14.1
E. Consultations 1.4 40.6 0.2 7.0 1.4 40.6 - - - - 0 4 11 9 3 5 7.7
F. Goods and services
and inputs 2.7 27.6 2.6 25.8 2.7 27.6 0.1 1.0 0.5 4.7 1 3 13 2 9 9 22.0
G. Grants and subsidies 1.5 21.4 1.0 15.0 1.5 21.4 1.9 28.3 1.0 13.9 0 0 - 6 9 15.2

Total investment
expenses 13.3 31.9 6.0 14.4 13.3 31.8 2.0 4.9 2.2 5.2 4 9 11 8 41 7 92 1

II. Operating expenses
A. Salaries and benefits 1.6 50.0 - - 1.6 50.0 - - - - - - 3 3 7.3
B. Operations 0.1 35.0 - - 0.1 35.0 - - - - 0 1 30 0 0 3 0.6

Total operating expenses 1.7 48.9 - - 1.7 48.9 - - - - 0 1 2 2 3 6 7 9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5 0 11 0 45 2 100 0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The financial analysis performed on the 4Ps and production models show that the

investments will be profitable, with internal rates of return (IRRs) higher than the
opportunity cost of capital and positive net present value (NPV). Based on the
assumptions included in the logical framework, the overall EIRR for the project is
20.5 per cent, generating NPV of US$19.6 million. The economic analysis takes into
account all of the aggregate benefits of the production models, 4Ps, environmental
co-benefits and the benefits deriving from tracks. The sensitivity analysis shows
robust results under all scenarios with different levels of risk.

D. Sustainability
37. The sustainability of PRODEFI results will be ensured by: (i) taking into account

market requirements and the profitability of investments in value chains;
(ii) strengthening and gradual participation of institutional actors such as GTFs,
government institutions and research centres, and economic actors such as
entrepreneurs and sponsoring companies, that are sustainably anchored in value
chain development; (iii) promoting a producer capitalization dynamic through
savings as a prerequisite for investments; and (iv) promoting production models
that are resilient to climate change and investments with positive environmental
externalities, as well as lower operating costs thanks to complementary ASAP
financing from IFAD.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

9

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The risk level presented by PRODEFI is considered moderate. The risks considered

most likely and most serious are systemic risks linked to the macro-economic
context, including competition from imports, as well as climate hazards, weak
domestic supply of services, and limited technical and management capacities for
implementation of the country programme. These risks will be mitigated through
greater involvement in policy dialogue to promote inclusive value chains, financing
for adaptation measures and use of outsourcing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
39. The project is in compliance with IFAD strategies, principles and tools in the areas

of rural finance and value chain financing, as well as gender equality. It is fully
consistent with IFAD's strategy on climate change (2010), particularly the objective
promoting innovative approaches to assist smallholder producers, both women and
men, to better adapt to climate change.

40. PRODEFI is classified in category B in that it is not expected to have any major
adverse environmental or social impact. Its climate vulnerability is deemed
moderate given the inclusion of adaptation considerations in all project activities.
The project also includes a set of technologies and approaches intended to prevent
greenhouse gas emissions and enable carbon storage.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the strategy on rural sector

development, which has as one of its five strategic directions the development of
value chains with growth potential, generating permanent employment and
motivating incomes, with support from structured mechanisms for consultation and
effective value chain management to the benefit of the organizations of value chain
actors. In addition, it is fully consistent with the National Agricultural Development
Plan, which calls for promoting the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. The
recent installation of the Value Chain Directorate at the new Ministry of Livestock
underscores the importance given to value chains within the Mauritanian
institutional landscape.

42. With respect to nutrition, an inter-sector action plan on nutrition has been drafted
under the initiative of the Renewed Efforts against Child Hunger and Undernutrition
(REACH) partnership with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO and WFP. A national
multi-sector strategy on nutrition (2016-2025) is also nearing completion. PRODEFI
will be part of the implementation of this strategic plan.

43. In the area of climate change, in 2015 Mauritania prepared an INDC in connection
with the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. PRODEFI will contribute to implementing national priorities
through its support for small-scale irrigation and regeneration of plant cover.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. A number of innovations and best practices introduced by ProLPRAF will be scaled

up under this project, e.g.:

(i) The market-driven value chain approach, through dialogue among the actors
within GTFs. The situational analysis done of GTFs at the time of project
design and the lessons learned from ProLPRAF allowed for a rigorous
identification of support on a larger scale for GTF governance, organization,
capacity for awareness-raising, leadership and youth representation;

(ii) The 4P initiatives undertaken during year one of ProLPRAF, which serve as a
model for developing 4P initiatives for PRODEF;

(iii) Capitalization of smallholder producers through savings, using the Centre for



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

10

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

International Studies and Cooperation (CECI) model piloted by Catholic Relief
Services in Mauritania, which showed promising results that warrant scaling
up the initiative; and

(iv) Support for community associations for joint management of natural
resources and non-timber forest products.

D. Policy engagement
45. PRODEFI will support GTF federations and inter-professions in engaging in policy

dialogue with the Government on improving the economic environment for value
chains. The exchanges will relate mainly to: (i) policies to promote inclusive value
chains; (ii) promoting local products; (iii) implementing legislation on cooperatives
and other professional organizations; and (iv) policy on trade and tariffs. This policy
dialogue process will result in concrete proposals on matters such as health and
quality standards for value chain products, improving national legislation and
enforcement, and market opportunities that could lead to improving food and
nutritional security for households. Within this framework, the project will work with
others operating in the area of institutional support and policy dialogue to ensure
good coordination among interventions.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
46. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

47. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount equivalent
to ten million seven hundred and fifty special drawing rights
(SDR 10,750,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) in an amount equivalent to four million three hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 4,300,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for
the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA)



Republic of Nicaragua

Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nicaragua

Executing agency: Ministry for Family, Community, Cooperative and
Associative Economy (MEFCCA)

Total project cost: US$48.460 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$20.504 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier: Central American Bank for Economic Integration

Amount of cofinancing: US$15 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.99 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the
Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Nicaragua covers an area of 129,494 km² and has a population of

6.17 million people. The country has experienced macroeconomic stability and
sustained economic growth over recent decades. GDP increased between 2010 and
2014 by an average of 4.7 per cent per annum, reaching US$1,904 per capita in
2014. The agricultural sector accounted for 17 per cent of national GDP in 2014,
following a gradual reduction begun in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the sector
generates 31 per cent of employment and 70 per cent of overall exports, signalling
that Nicaragua’s economy remains in transition, with a significant presence in the
productive agricultural sector.

2. The 2014 National Household Living Standards Survey (NHLSS) found 29.6 per cent
of the population to be living below the poverty line and 8.3 per cent in extreme
poverty. These figures reflect a significant improvement on those from the 2009
NHLSS (42.5 per cent and 14.6 per cent, respectively). In rural areas over the
same period, the overall poverty rate decreased from 63.3 per cent to
50.1 per cent of rural population and the number affected by extreme poverty
declined from 26.8 per cent to 16.3 per cent. Despite this significant progress in
poverty reduction, half of the rural population still lives in poverty. Nicaragua is
highly vulnerable to extreme weather events: 25 per cent of the population lives in
locations at risk of hurricanes and tropical storms while 40 per cent is affected by
recurrent drought, with Dry Corridor inhabitants and food production feeling the
greatest effects.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The proposed project is aligned with the IFAD country strategy as articulated in the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) (2013-2017).
NICAVIDA is further aligned with current policy priorities and follows the axes of the
national “Dry Corridor Strategic Framework” implemented by the Government in
response to the severe social, productive and environmental conditions affecting
the area. Under that Framework and in support of the Government’s programmatic
approach, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit will coordinate the investments
of international and development organizations, such as the World Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation,
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) and IFAD.

4. As the factors contributing to rural poverty in the Dry Corridor not only persist but
worsen, the incidence of malnutrition in rural areas must be addressed. According
to the National Demographic and Health Survey 2011-2012, 21 per cent of boys
and girls aged less than five years in rural areas exhibit overall chronic
malnutrition. The Dry Corridor has a higher overall incidence (for rural and urban



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

areas combined) of chronic malnutrition (29.5 per cent in Madriz and 27.7 per cent
in Nueva Segovia). Agricultural activities are carried out against a backdrop of
deteriorating micro/sub-basins, depleting water resources and plant cover, and soil
degradation. The situation is further exacerbated by climate change and volatility,
with production projected to decline significantly.

5. NICAVIDA will support the economic diversification and productive transformation
strategies of families in rural areas, developing articulated links between the
diversification of their sources of income, environmental protection, adaptation to
climate change and food and nutrition security. To that end, the project builds on
lessons learned from previous IFAD-financed operations, including the Programme
for the Economic Development of the Dry Region in Nicaragua (PRODESEC), the
Technical Assistance Fund, the Inclusion of Small-scale Producers in Value Chains
and Market Access Project (PROCAVAL), the Agricultural, Fishery and Forestry
Productive Systems Development Programme in RAAN and RAAS Indigenous
Territories and the Adapting to Markets and Climate Change Project (NICADAPTA).
Those operations contributed to the implementation of national public policies and
proved successful in facilitating public investment processes, increased production
and productivity, food production, climate change-adaptation investments and
income generation.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The NICAVIDA project area covers 58 municipios in the Dry Corridor. As per

agreement with the Government, initial project phases will prioritize the 37
municipios with the highest rates of poverty and at greatest risk of food and
nutrition insecurity and climate vulnerability. Natural ecosystems in the Dry
Corridor are undergoing severe degradation, with 52 per cent of soils overused and
40 per cent strongly or severely eroded. Falling production has led to food
insecurity and a decline in household incomes in rural parts of the area.

7. The target population of NICAVIDA comprises poor rural people and indigenous
peoples, with or without land, with a particular focus on women and young people.
The project will directly benefit 30,000 families, approximately 152,000 people,
characterized by the diversity of the activities in which they engage, combining
strategies for agricultural production with labour market integration. Rural
households living in the 37 priority municipios in 2015 were estimated to total
122,000, 11.2 per cent of which identified as indigenous.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall objective of NICAVIDA is to contribute to the attainment of national

targets to improve the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples in
the Dry Corridor. The development objective is to support poor rural families in the
project area, including indigenous peoples, in boosting their incomes, enhancing the
nutritional content of their diets and strengthening their capacities to adapt to
climate change. Beneficiary incomes will be increased through the productive and
economic diversification of their activities, while their resilience to climate change
will be enhanced by the sustainable management of natural resources.

C. Components/outcomes
9. NICAVADA will be organized around the following three components:

 Component 1. Capacity-building and planning. This component will put in
place the conditions to allow families and their organizations, taking into
account their resources and climatic, economic and social context, to map their
own paths towards development that will allow them to improve their incomes,
strengthen their food and nutrition security, and enhance their resilience and
capacities to adapt to climate change.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

This component will address two strategic themes: (i) the food and nutrition
security of families, ensuring access to nutritious food and an adequate diet;
and (ii) natural resource management and adaptation to climate change,
strengthening capacities to manage natural resources sustainably,
incorporating climate change-adaptation practices and adopting strategies to
reduce vulnerability to production- and climate-related risks. This component
will achieve: (i) project targeting, both geographically and towards families,
indigenous peoples and communities, prioritizing women and young people;
(ii) adaptation to the territorial, socioeconomic and environmental context of
the Dry Corridor; (iii) the provision of training to build families’ capacities to
manage economic and social strategies; and (iv) capacity-building to increase
employment, business and productive opportunities.

The implementation of this component will be based on participatory
assessments used to develop family plans and business plans to promote
productive diversification and agricultural and non-agricultural income-
generating activities. Moreover, territorial plans will be developed, based on the
demands of families, organizations and institutions, to meet needs in terms of
productive infrastructure, the stewardship and management of natural
resources, access to water, road improvement and management of
microbasins.

 Component 2. Family, territorial and business investments. This
component includes the activities and resources for the implementation of the
family, business and territorial plans. Once approved by the project
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry for Family, Community,
Cooperative and Associative Economy (MEFCCA) pursuant to the relevant
approval mechanism detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM),
these plans will be financed under this component with funds allocated under
the Project’s Family, Territorial and Business Investment Fund (FTE). The PMU
will manage the FTE directly, in accordance with the standards and procedures
defined in the PIM.

The FTE will be able to finance: (i) territorial plans targeting investments in
public goods and services that will create conditions conducive to improving the
living standards of families in rural areas and of indigenous peoples; (ii) family
plans, seeking to improve how families use and manage their resources (land,
manpower, cash), agricultural and non-agricultural activities, and food and
nutrition security, and to boost income and quality of life; (iii) business plans,
aiming to promote the link between family income strategies, environmental
protection and adaptation to climate change. Such plans may include
productive agricultural activities, value-addition, access-to-market and small
business development activities, as well as commercial, service and
microenterprise activities.

 Component 3. Project management. This component seeks to ensure
effective and efficient project implementation and to build capacity for the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities, results and impact. A
timely, efficient and effective implementation system will be established within
MEFCCA at the central and district levels, with attention to inter-institutional
coordination. With regard to planning, monitoring and evaluation (PM&E), it is
hoped that IFAD-financed MEFCCA projects will have a single M&E system. This
component includes project management and administration, which comes
under MEFCCA’s institutional responsibilities, and shall be in coordination with
other IFAD-financed projects.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

10. Project activities follow an approach that places central importance on families and
on the territory of the project area. In this context, through the family, territorial and
business plans, it is hoped that the following will be achieved: (i) at the family level,
families are able to make adequate use of their resources (land, manpower, cash)
and pursue their own development strategies, improving food and nutrition security
and building resilience to climate change; (ii) at the territorial and indigenous
community levels, investments in public goods and services create an environment
conducive to improving the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples,
including behavioural changes that enhance natural resource management, resilience
to climate change and inhabitants’ nutrition; and (iii) in the context of business plans,
families and their organizations embark on a process of rural transformation, linking
income generation and diversification with environmental protection and food and
nutrition security, and strengthening their resilience to climate change.

B. Organizational framework
11. MEFCCA will be responsible for project implementation. A PMU will be established

under the MEFCCA Project Division to coordinate and manage the project. In
coordination with IFAD operations already under way, a number of specialized units
will be set up to deal with financial management, procurement, PM&E and
knowledge management and will service all projects in IFAD’s portfolio. District-
level MEFCCA offices will play a key operational role and will be responsible for the
activities in their respective districts. The project will involve measures and
activities requiring the active participation of specialized entities – such as the
Ministry for the Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA), the Nicaraguan
Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) and the Nicaraguan Institute of
Territorial Studies (INETER), among others – with which specific agreements will be
established.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

12. NICAVIDA will implement a PM&E and knowledge management system based on
lessons learned from previous IFAD operations in the country. The project will
establish an M&E system, with short-term reporting (institutional, administrative
and first-level Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) reports), medium-
term reporting (national and sectorial statistics and second-level RIMS reports) and
long-term reporting (National Human Development Plan indicators and third-level
RIMS reports). Knowledge management will ensure the use of information and the
incorporation of lessons learned on key issues such as fiduciary aspects, business
plan implementation, climate change adaptation and food and nutrition security.
The project will complement and support the NICADAPTA efforts to establish a
MEFCCA PM&E system. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following
the adoption of the financing agreement by the IFAD Executive Board and prior to
project launch.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
13. Financial management. MEFCCA will be charged with the financial management

of all project resources, in particular flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,
accounting, financial reporting and audit. A specialized financial management unit
will be established within MEFCCA for all projects financed or cofinanced by IFAD.

14. Flow of funds. IFAD will open and deposit the loan principal in an account in
United States dollars in the name of the borrower. To receive the loan funds, the
borrower shall open and maintain in the Central Bank of Nicaragua an account
designated in United States dollars, under the control of the General Treasury of
the Republic, in which advance funds shall be deposited and from which funds will



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

be transferred to the operational account(s) of the project in MEFCCA. The latter
accounts will be opened by the borrower on terms acceptable to the Fund.

15. Retroactive financing. Expenses incurred prior to the date of entry into force of
the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a total amount of
US$250,000, in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement.

16. Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out in
accordance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the
provisions of the loan agreement. The specialized procurement unit will plan and
execute procurement processes. Any procurement required under the plans
developed by beneficiary families and organizations will be completed in compliance
with private commercial practices, in accordance with the procedures set out in the
PIM and the MEFCCA “Technical and Financial Administrative Rules”, and shall be
compatible with IFAD Guidelines. Any procurement to be carried out under the
territorial plans through agreements or contracts with public or private institutions
shall be governed by the applicable laws and must comply with IFAD guidelines.

17. Audit. The annual accounts and financial statements of the project will be
independently audited, pursuant to the terms of reference and in accordance with
International Standards on Audit and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. Within
a period not longer than three (3) months from the effective date of project launch,
MEFCCA will engage an independent, external private company acceptable to IFAD
to audit the project. The annual report shall be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of the fiscal year.

18. Governance and control. Principles of good governance, transparency and
participation will be agreed by all relevant parties, primarily MEFCCA and the
groups, organizations, communities and institutions involved in the project. These
agreements and procedures will be reflected in the PIM.

E. Supervision
19. IFAD will directly supervise the project and carry out implementation support

missions. As far as possible, such missions will be conducted in combination with
the supervision of other projects of the IFAD-financed portfolio in the country. The
first project supervision mission will take place approximately six months from the
entry into force of the project financing agreement. That mission will evaluate
progress against the timeline established in the implementation plan, and verify
progress on fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions and
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement. The second mission will take
place six months after the first.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
20. The total cost of NICAVIDA over the six-year implementation period will be

US$48.46 million, comprising US$45.54 million in baseline costs (94 per cent of the
total cost) and US$2.92 million for physical and price contingencies (6 per cent of
total cost). Components 1 and 2 account for 93 per cent of base costs of the
project, with the majority of these funds going directly to beneficiaries and their
organizations. Project management (component 3) accounts for 8 per cent of base
costs.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

amountComponents Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building
and planning 1 731 15.9 5 811 53.4 3 330 30.6 - - 10 873
2. Family, territorial
and business
investments 2 985 8.9 11 873 35.4 11 670 34.8 6 984 20.8 33 512
3. Project
management 1 258 30.9 2 819 69.1 - - - - 4 078
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463

B. Project financing
21. NICAVIDA will be financed by: (i) the Government of Nicaragua, with a contribution

of US$5.9 million; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of US$20.5 million; (iii) CABEI, with a
loan of US$15.0 million; and (iv) the project beneficiaries, with US$6.9 million.
IFAD will finance 39 per cent of the investments, with IFAD’s highest allocation by
expenditure category corresponding to FTE (US$11.35 million, equivalent to 55 per
cent of IFAD financing).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investments
A. Vehicles 70 15.0 395 85.0 - - - - 465 1.0
B. Equipment 60 15.0 342 85.0 - - - - 403 0.8
C. Training 752 15.0 2 961 59.1 1 301 25.9 - - 5 015 10.3
D. Consultations 696 15.0 1 916 41.3 2 029 43.7 - - 4 641 9.6
E. Grants (FTE) 2 811 8.6 11 351 34.6 11 670 35.6 6 984 21.3 32 816 67.7

Total investments 4 389 10.1 16 966 39.1 15 000 34.6 6 984 16.1 43 340 89.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries 1 402 35.9 2 499 64.1 - - - - 3 901 8.0
B. Operating costs 183 15.0 1 039 85.0 - - - - 1 222 2.5

Total recurrent costs 1 585 30.9 3 538 69.1 - - - - 5 123 10.6
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
22. NICAVIDA will benefit 30,000 families in rural areas (approximately 152,100

people). It is estimated that: (a) 13,450 families will receive support to improve
their nutrition and food security, acquire non-agricultural income-generating
activities and improve their working conditions; (b) 14,500 families will receive a
combination of support in the areas of food security and agricultural production and
diversification, agricultural and non-agricultural income generation, and business
plans; (c) 2,050 families will receive a combination of the support above and will
develop productive processes and agricultural diversification through business plans
incorporating technology and cash crops. The economic internal rate of return is
22.7 per cent and the net present value is US$20.8 million.

D. Sustainability
23. The sustainability of the project will be ensured by: (i) its integration with the

Government's policy for fighting rural poverty and the strengthening and expansion
of that policy, and its response to the conditions affecting the Dry Corridor; (ii) its



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

coherence and alignment with the Dry Corridor Strategic Framework; and (iii) its
approach seeking to ensure the sustainability of families in terms of food and
nutrition security, income, climate change adaptation and natural resource
management.

24. The sustainability of food security, enhanced nutrition and increased production will
be ensured by the central importance given to rural families as the focus of
NICAVIDA activities and interventions, and by the resources allocated to food
security and nutrition. At the same time, NICAVIDA also supports income-
generating activities for families through small businesses, value addition and
access to better employment opportunities through training. The project has a solid
strategic direction and dedicates resources to climate change adaptation and
climate variability-risk reduction. The integration of these measures with productive
agricultural activities will promote their sustainability.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The approach and activities proposed under NICAVIDA aim to reduce risks relating

to food security, nutrition and climate change. The territorial investments and those
in farms aim to promote the sustainable management of natural resources, in
particular soil and water. The planned productive activities take into account
limitations reflecting the availability of tested technologies and the environmental
fragility of the land, and include measures for continuous monitoring and analysis
so timely preventative measures can be taken to mitigate such risks. Interventions
to improve access to water resources for human consumption and irrigation will be
accompanied by measures to improve the replenishment and protection of water
sources and analysis to ensure that improving access to water for irrigation does
not compete with its use for human consumption. In the present context,
institutional and political risks are limited. Risks relating to the efficiency of
management and administration, institutional coordination and agreements with
specialized institutions will be minimized by the application of measures drawn from
IFAD’s long experience implementing projects with MEFCCA and the Government.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The approach, objectives and implementation modalities of NICAVIDA are
consistent with IFAD policies and strategies. The project pursues the objectives of
the COSOP 2013-2017 and is aligned with IFAD’s core policies: (i) the IFAD policy
on targeting, applying direct targeting mechanisms based on analyses of poverty,
food and nutrition insecurity and climate change risk, geographic targeting so as to
include indigenous peoples, and self-targeting within these groups and
communities; (ii) the IFAD policy on gender and youth, replicating and scaling up
lessons from previous projects applied directly to the beneficiaries;( iii) the IFAD
Policy on the Environment and Natural Resource Management, as well as the
Strategy on Climate Change, which includes the objective of maximizing the impact
of IFAD investments in rural poverty in the context of climate change and volatility;
iv) the policies on food and nutrition security, around which the project’s strategies
are built; and (v) the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, applying
the principal of free, prior and informed consent, and with local territorial and
community authorities, recognizing the distinctive cultural identities of the
populations located in the project areas. The project is also fully aligned with IFAD
strategies devoting particular attention to building social capital, guiding
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities and promoting market-
oriented small business.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The project is aligned with: the National Human Development Plan; the Dry

Corridor Strategic Framework, which is the Government's instrument for addressing
development challenges in the dry zone; and the Government’s main rural
development and poverty-reduction initiatives and policies, such as asset-transfer



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and -recovery mechanisms, systems for the provision of technical assistance and
training. Designed in close consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Public
Credit and other relevant institutions, NICAVIDA will support the process of
transforming the productive capacities of families in rural areas, thereby
contributing to the achievement of Government policy objectives promoting the
links between the diversification of agricultural and non-agricultural income,
environmental protection, family nutrition and income generation for poor rural
people looking for an opportunity to get out of poverty.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The project is in line with the joint Government-IFAD strategy aiming to establish a

rural development model that ensures food security, improves nutrition, supports
families in adapting to climate change and promotes sustainable income-generating
activities. The project contributes to the building of a robust joint approach in the
Dry Corridor, with close collaboration between the Government, MEFCCA, other
institutions — such as the MARENA, INTA and INETER — and IFAD, under the policy
guidance of the Ministries of Finance and Public Credit and of Foreign Affairs. The
model aims to build, by replicating and scaling up experience gained in previous
projects, a broad rural development framework of policies, programmes and
projects that the Government and IFAD plan to replicate and expand.

Policy engagementD.
29. NICAVIDA builds on the success of previous projects, in particular PRODESEC,

PROCAVAL and NICADAPTA, and is aligned with Government and IFAD policies. The
planned implementation methodology and instruments comply with IFAD
guidelines. The proposal is aligned with and supported by the Government in its use
of MEFCCA’s decentralization system and a system for partial asset transfers in the
form of incentives, as well as provisions for the recovery of transferred resources
and policies on the environment and climate change adaptation, inter-institutional
cooperation and improved access to the financial system for beneficiaries and their
organizations. The project is aligned with the policy, institutional and regulatory
framework and with the policies and instruments implemented by the Government
and MEFCCA.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nicaragua and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy
of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Republic of Nicaragua is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nicaragua in an amount equivalent to twenty million
five-hundred and four thousand United States dollars (US$20,504,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President's report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene
and Mantaro River Basins Project (Sustainable
Territorial Development Project)

Republic of Peru

Public Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Peru

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, through the
Agro Rural Programme

Total project cost: US$74.512 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$28.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: repayment term of 18 years, including a graceperiod of six years, with an annual interest rate
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$38.764 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.248 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River Basins Project
(Sustainable Territorial Development Project), as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public
Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Peru, with GDP per capita in 2014 of US$6,541, is currently

classified among the middle-income countries. The Peruvian economy has been one
of the best performing in Latin America, and visible progress has been made on
poverty reduction in recent years according to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, Peru faced a challenging external context in 2014, together with
problems in domestic supply and declining public subnational investment –
aggravating the external shocks and leading to a marked deceleration in growth.
Although real GDP growth declined to 2.4 per cent in 2014 compared to 5.8 per
cent the previous year, Peru still posted double the regional average of about 1.2
per cent. Estimates place real GDP growth in 2015 at 3.26 per cent.

2. Peru continued to reduce poverty and extreme poverty levels in 2014, although at
a slower pace than in previous years. According to the National Statistics and
Informatics Institute (, poverty in 2014 stood at an estimated 22.7 per cent, 1.2
percentage points lower than in 2013 – meaning that over a quarter of a million
(289,000) people exited poverty. Overall figures for 2014 show that there were
6,995,000 Peruvians living in poverty. Average monthly income per capita for the
poorest rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly as a result of cash transfers under the Juntos,
Pension 65 and Beca 18 programmes. The incidence of poverty was higher in rural
areas at 46.0 per cent, three times the urban rate. Among the major causes of
rural poverty, the fact that communities are poorly integrated with the market
economy has been identified as one of the greatest obstacles to local development,
particularly in the Sierra region, causing the population to emigrate towards urban
centres.

3. A World Bank study done in 2013 indicates that 4.3 per cent of Peru's surface area
is occupied by agricultural activities. The main crops are coffee, potato, rice,
cotton, asparagus, sugar and maize. A modern and competitive agro-export sector
along the coast coexists with more traditional or subsistence farming in the Sierra
and Selva regions. Primary agriculture accounts for 9 per cent of GDP. Over the
last 12 years, Peruvian agriculture has grown at an average rate of 4.3. An
estimated 2.35 million families – close to 10 million people – depend on
agriculture, most of them concentrated in the Sierra. Agriculture in the Sierra
poses major challenges: low yields; small and fragmented plots with high
transaction costs; fragile soil with drainage, salinity and erosion problems; limited
availability of water; a lack of connectivity and an unpredictable climate.



EB 2016/117/R.13

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The project is based on IFAD's past and current interventions in Peru, is consistent
with the strategic objectives set forth in the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) and takes into account the recommendations of the midterm
review that took place in November 2011. The project complies with both IFAD's
own requirements and those of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), and
contributes to: (i) strengthening territorial planning and citizen management
processes; (ii) promoting strategic partnerships on public-private platforms for
access to markets; (iii) promoting the organization of productive linkages between
rural small enterprises; (iv) providing greater support for financial inclusion
through savings, insurance and financial education; (v) including initiatives that
favour sustainable natural resource management, with actions to mitigate and
prevent the effects of climate change; and (vi) promoting actions to increase water
availability and equal access to water, to help prevent social conflicts within the
territory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the area of influence of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro

River Valley (VRAEM), corresponding to the periphery in contrast to the central part
or direct intervention area. Both of these areas are considered priorities by country
authorities in view of their high incidence of poverty and extreme poverty and their
exclusion from the country's development.

6. The selected area encompasses 27 municipal districts in seven provinces in the
departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Apurímac and Cusco. Included are
a highland or Sierra area at between 3,000 and 4,500 metres, a number of inter-
Andean valleys at between 1,500 and 3,000 metres, a foothills or Ceja de Selva
area at between 300 and 1,500 metres and part of the Amazon plain or Selva at
less than 300 metres.

7. Within this area, 76.5 per cent of the population is rural, using the strict definition
of a disperse rural population. That percentage rises to 87 per cent if villages with
less than 2,000 inhabitants are included. In addition, 74 per cent of the population
in the area are living below the monetary poverty line. Of these, 39 per cent are
extremely poor and 33 are poor but not extremely poor – values that place these
districts among the country's most vulnerable. Among those living in the project
area, 73 per cent are under 29 years of age and 66 per cent are indigenous.

8. The 27 districts located in the project area have a combined population of 58,681
families. Of these, the project will serve 50,936 rural families who are living in
conditions of rural poverty according to the 2014 national household survey.

9. Among the around 50,000 poor rural families making up the project's target
population, 27,000 families will benefit from the development services to be
provided under components 1 (governance and investments in territorial natural
resources) and 2 (local economic initiatives), and 23,000 poor rural families will
benefit from activities under component 3 (connectivity and territorial
infrastructure). The remaining 7,745 families (13 per cent of the population in the
intervention area), who reside in areas considered urban in Peru, will not be
included in the project's target population.

B. Development objective of the project
10. The goal of the project is to contribute to reducing poverty among rural families

through social and productive inclusion. The development objective is to increase
the human, social, natural, physical and financial assets of the project
beneficiaries.



EB 2016/117/R.13

3

C. Components/results
11. The project will be implemented over six years and will include the implementation

of three major components, in addition to project management and administration:

(a) Component 1. Governance and investments in territorial natural
resources. This component will focus on communities and families and will
build institutional capacities in the territory, including in local and provincial
governments, supporting initiatives to improve communal goods and
properties. The component activities will contribute to improving the
endowment and quality of natural resources in territories owned by the
beneficiaries and their community and indigenous associations – including
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and building capacities and
competencies for sustainable natural resource management and
development.

(b) Component 2. Local economic initiatives. The objective of this
component is to build a sustainable network of associations among potential
project beneficiaries to promote and expand opportunities for economic
development and social inclusion, providing support for economic activities by
interest groups such as farmers organizations together with financial inclusion
of families and associations. In a fragile and diverse associational context, the
component will support the creation, development and consolidation of
economic associations of beneficiaries that are oriented towards improving
their livelihood strategies and achieving greater and better participation in
markets for goods and services. To this end, the component will implement a
flexible and cumulative strategy with specific arrangements to support rural
producers organizations, based on the different types and levels of
associative development among rural people.

(c) Component 3. Connectivity and territorial infrastructure. The objective
of this component is to maintain physical conditions in the area of influence
where the project beneficiaries are located, in order to generate synergies
with interventions under the other components. In a context of relative
isolation caused by deteriorating rural roads, scarce communication services
and limited development of water and natural resources as a result of low
levels of investment in irrigation, the project will, inter alia, facilitate market
access in the intervention area for rural people, create jobs with start-ups or
contracting of communal or associational microenterprises for routine
maintenance of roads, provide for irrigation infrastructure at community
level, and promote water harvesting and collection.

(d) Component 4. Project management and administration. Under this
component, support will be provided on a cross-cutting basis to the three
preceding components to achieve the results and meet the targets set by the
project. This component includes project administration, knowledge
management and M&E.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
12. The project will employ the following five main approaches:

(a) Territorial development: This approach combines two main aspects:
(i) institutional development to promote consultations among local and
external agents and include poor people in production transformation
processes and benefits; and (ii) production transformation to link the
territory's economy with dynamic markets.

(b) Community-driven development: Implies a degree of delegation of
accountability to communities to manage their own development, including
the design and implementation of subprojects. This approach facilitates



EB 2016/117/R.13

4

access to social, human, financial and physical capital and assets by rural
poor people, by transforming development agents from top-down planners to
bottom-up providers of client-oriented services.

(c) Geographical targeting: Takes into account government priorities defining
the VRAEM area of influence as a priority area in view of the high incidence of
poverty.

(d) Scaling up: The project is consistent with the scaling up approach adopted
by IFAD, encompassing the various dimensions of scaling up: (i) fiscal and
financial; (ii) political; (iii) policy-based; (iv) organizational; (v) cultural; and
(vi) learning-based.

(e) Social inclusion as cross-cutting intervention: The project benefits rural
women, men and young people in situations of poverty and recognizes the
tangible and intangible assets of campesino and indigenous populations. This
approach promotes the empowerment of the target groups and rural
associational development.

B. Organizational framework
13. The agency responsible for the project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Irrigation, through the Agro Rural programme acting as a central executing unit
(CEU) with the legal authority to administer the project, in close coordination with
three of its branches located in the regions of Huancavelica, Ayacucho and Cusco,
and with close coordination and collaboration from municipal and provincial
administrations.

14. Project implementation will be the responsibility of a project coordination unit
(PCU) reporting to Agro Rural through its agrarian development director and in
charge of coordinating physical and financial activities and monitoring progress on
meeting the targets set. The PCU will be composed of a project coordinator and
eight specialists in the following areas: (i) M&E; (ii) financial inclusion;
(iii) entrepreneurship; (iv) infrastructure; (v) natural resource management and
climate change; (vi) social inclusion; (vii) administration; and (viii) accounting and
support staff. Each local agency will have a team made up of a coordinator, an
administrative assistant and various specialists.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
15. The project will employ a system of planning, M&E, learning and knowledge

management that is in line with national regulations and with IFAD guidelines.

16. Planning. The project will be implemented on the basis of annual operating plans
(AOP) and procurement  plans subject to IFAD no objection. Progress made on
implementing the plans will be recorded in semi-annual progress reports.

17. M&E. The responsible agency, through the PCU, will conduct the baseline study
during the first 12 months of implementation, and will set up the M&E system and
an M&E plan that will be an integral part of the AOP. The system will report on
progress made in the process of strengthening associational social capital
throughout project implementation using participatory instruments. Agro Rural will
provide information to the SNIP monitoring operating system (SOSEM), which will
allow for verification of progress made on implementing public investment projects.

18. Knowledge management and learning. The main objective of learning and
knowledge management activities will be to enhance existing knowledge assets in
the project intervention area and disseminate content in an appropriate and timely
way to inform users.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The financial management of the project will be the

responsibility of Agro Rural under the CEU procedure, as follows: (i) include project
resource requirements in its annual budget and arrange for approval by the



EB 2016/117/R.13

5

Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) implement and supervise implementation of
the project; (iii) perform financial and accounting administration and disbursement
functions; (iv) conduct tenders and contracting processes; and (v) hire external
auditors. Project accounting will comply with the provisions of the integrated
financial information system that is mandatory for all public sector entities
including budget and administrative modules.

20. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will open a sub-account in
United States dollars within the single Treasury account as a designated account to
receive IFAD loan proceeds. These funds will then be transferred to a project
operating account in local currency, to be opened at Banco de la Nación and
administered by Agro Rural. The borrower will open an account in local currency to
hold the counterpart funds. Agro Rural will transfer the project proceeds to the
CEU, which will make payments for procurement and allocate resources to fund
initiatives by the project users.

21. Procurement. The procurement of works, goods and services will take place in
accordance with IFAD guidelines on procurement of goods and services. The PCU,
together with the administrative office and procurement unit of Agro Rural, will
prepare a procurement plan as part of the AOP specifying the procurement method
and determining the goods and services required, in addition to timelines,
estimated costs, procedures and sources of financing. Procurement will be done
generally by the producers organizations benefiting from the project and hence
receiving specific technical training in areas such as procurement of minor works
and procurement of production equipment, information technology equipment and
others needed for management.

22. Audit. The audit arrangements will include internal processes and will adhere to
IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In accordance with national regulations, Agro
Rural is subject to internal audit by its internal control office, which reports to the
Office of the Comptroller General (CGR). The annual consolidated financial
statements of the project will be audited independently in accordance with terms of
reference acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with international auditing standards
and IFAD guidelines on project audits. An external auditor acceptable to both IFAD
and CGR will be employed. All project accounts will be audited, including both IFAD
financing and counterpart funds. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD within
six months after the close of each fiscal year. For audit purposes the fiscal year will
coincide with the calendar year.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with the prevailing

guidelines on direct supervision.

24. Approximately six months after the start-up workshop, IFAD will organize a first
supervision mission with the following objectives: (i) detect possible problems or
difficulties encountered in the initial implementation; (ii) review progress made
against the targets set; (iii) review the AOP being implemented and proposals for
the subsequent AOP; (iv) consult with project users on their perceptions of the
project and their participation levels; (v) review expenses incurred and
procurement carried out to date; (vi) verify compliance with the financing
agreement; (vii) prepare the project status report; and (viii) perform the financial
management evaluation. Commencing in year two of project implementation, and
in accordance with the guidelines on direct supervision, IFAD will, together with
Agro Rural, organize monitoring activities, provide support for implementation and
supervision and, in addition to meeting the objectives outlined above, analyse the
process of social mobilization and formation of groups of possible beneficiaries,
paying special attention to rural women and young people and indigenous peoples.



EB 2016/117/R.13

6

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The project will have a total cost of approximately US$74.512 million. The first

component calls for spending of US$6.046 million (equivalent to 8.1 per cent), and
the second for spending of US$51.011 million, representing 68.5 per cent of the
total. The third component will involve spending of US$8.849 million (11.9 per
cent) and the fourth component US$8.606 million (11.5 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD Beneficiaries Borrower/  counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Governance and
investments in territorial
natural resources 5 627 93.1 419 6.9 6 046 8.1
2. Local economic
initiatives 21 507 42.2 7 248 14.2 22 256 43.6 51 011 68.5
3. Connectivity and
territorial infrastructure 8 849 100 8 849 11.9
4. Project management
and administration 1 365 15.9 7 240 84.1 8 606 11.5
Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100

B. Project financing
26. Financing for the different project components includes: IFAD’s contribution, valued

at US$28.5 million, or 32.2 per cent of the total; the Government of Peru’s
contribution of ordinary resources in the amount of US$38.764 million, or 52.0 per
cent; and contributions by beneficiaries in the amount of US$7.248 million or 9.7
per cent of the total.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 568 8.8 16 242 91.2 17 810 23.9

2. Vehicles 338 100.0 419 0.5
3. Equipment and
supplies 168.5 45.3 203.5 54.7 372 0.5

4. Consultancies 2 965.5 63.5 1 707.5 36.5 4 673 6.3
5. Grants and
subsidies 21 360 51.2 7 248 17.4 13 087 31.4 41 695 56.0

6. Training 2438 72.2 937 27.8 3 375 4.5
7. Salaries and
benefits 4 699.5 100.0 4 699.5 6.3

8. Operating costs 1 549.5 100.0 1 549.5 2.1

Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100.0

C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
27. Project implementation calls for obtaining the following benefits for participating

families and communities: an increase in physical assets for communities,
improved agricultural productivity, sustainable natural resource management, and
increased social capital promoting start-up and development of economic
associations to improve their access to value chains and promote their participation
in the benefits of territorial development. Over the long term, this will result in



EB 2016/117/R.13

7

higher incomes, greater employment, higher yields and better quality agricultural
products and by-products.

28. Financial analysis shows internal rates of return (IRR) for the activities funded by
the project at above the interbank rate of 13.19 per cent, ranging between 26 per
cent and 137 per cent. Net present values (NPV) range between US$45 and
US$12,456, showing that the project is financially feasible. Both models indicate
that family labour will be freed up, so that additional off-farm income and a
reduced workload for women can be expected.

29. An economic analysis indicates that the project is economically feasible, with the
following results: (i) an economic rate of return (EIRR) of 32.5 per cent; and (ii) an
economic NPV of US$214 million at a discount rate of 9 per cent, indicating a
profitable investment.

D. Sustainability
30. The project will ensure that its interventions are sustainable by increasing and

strengthening the social fabric and generating confidence by promoting
associational development processes. At the same time, it will build confidence and
open up opportunities for the development of individuals, families and
communities. Once conditions have been created for groups of individuals or
families to associate and carry out shared activities, the sustainability of such
groups will depend upon the social cohesion established and on external factors.
Political sustainability will be ensured by commitment on the part of national
authorities to address problems in the project area, promoting solid technical and
financial linkages with sector institutions and subnational governments.

31. Social sustainability will be based on already existing community organizations,
such as the campesino and indigenous communities present in the intervention
area, which will ensure social sustainability. At the same time, the sustainability of
the interest groups associating to undertake economic initiatives will be realized by
means of ongoing support to strengthen associative principles and consolidate
them.

32. Local governments will be strengthened and trained to improve the administration
of resources and respond to the population's needs, which will contribute to
institutional sustainability. The economic and financial sustainability of the
economic initiatives undertaken by associated groups is expected to be brought
about by providing specific advisory assistance in market analysis, support from
mentoring institutions and relationships with potential clients for the products or
services cofinanced by the project.

33. Technical sustainability will be ensured by promoting local talents to operate the
initiatives identified by the project clients. Environmental sustainability will be
ensured by promoting and adopting best practices in natural resource
management.

34. Finally, the sustainability of investments in road maintenance will be the
responsibility of the municipalities under the conditional programme transfers
managed by MTC with resources provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
To ensure that the roads covered by scheduled and emergency maintenance are
included in regular maintenance plans, specific clauses will be included in the
agreements to be signed with provincial road authorities and municipalities in the
implementation area to ensure compliance with current Ministry of Economy and
Finance policy.

E. Risk determination and mitigation
35. Implementation of the project will involve moderate risks, and the measures

planned to mitigate them are outlined in table 3:



EB 2016/117/R.13

8

Table 3
Risks and mitigation measures

Risk Level Mitigation measures

Administrative and bureaucratic
constraints on implementation

Moderate Participation by all stakeholders

Limited institutional capacity at regional
and local levels

Moderate Training for provincial and local
governments

Restricted coverage by agency
responsible for implementation

Moderate Budget support

Limitations on the use of local talents
Moderate Creation of a mechanism to recognize

local talents

Limitations on process of empowerment
of communities and groups

Moderate Strengthening of community
representation and agreements with
local governments

Possibility of benefits capture Moderate Setting amounts of incentives or rewards
that do not incentivize capture and
filtration

Climate phenomena, including collapse
and landslide

Moderate Active participation in road upgrading by
community enterprises

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The proposed project is aligned with the overarching goal of the IFAD Strategic

Framework 2016-2025 and contributes to all three strategic objectives: increase
rural people’s productive capacities, increase rural people’s benefits from market
participation, and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resistance of rural people’s economic activities. Moreover, the project approach and
implementation strategies are in compliance with the policies and strategies on
targeting rural poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment,
engagement with indigenous peoples (including free, prior and informed consent),
natural resources and environmental management, climate change, social,
environmental and climate procedures (SECAP note, category B), rural finance, and
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. The project is consistent with the national policy environment promoting rural and

territorial development, decentralization and development of production. The
proposed project, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
through Agro Rural, will be consistent with the Medium-term Plan 2013-2016 and
its objective to reduce poverty and extreme poverty, improve local institutions and
management, generate competitiveness in agricultural production, and improve the
inclusion of producers by facilitating the sustainability of natural resources. The
proposed project will also be harmonized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
programme Strengthening the Competitiveness of Rural Associative Enterprises
(PROCOMPITE) and its objective to achieve sustainability in production value chains
through development, adaptation and technology transfer. In addition, the use of
technical teams of local governments will build capacity to mobilize resources from
the Rural Economic Inclusion Fund (FONIE) to rehabilitate rural roads.
Furthermore, the project is fully justified and responsive to the decision by country
authorities to address problems in the intervention area under the VRAEM
Comprehensive Territorial Plan, which pursues the overall objective of shaping an
environment of security, legality and social peace that will improve the quality of
life and social inclusion of the inhabitants by making production activities more
profitable in the area.

C. Innovation and scaling up
38. Implementing the project will involve the use of new mechanisms in addition to

those already used and proven effective in previous IFAD-funded projects in Peru –



EB 2016/117/R.13

9

such as allocating financial resources competitively and transferring them to hire
technical assistance, processing and commercialization services, following a
participatory approach to identify, formulate, implement and monitor subprojects
using local resource allocation committees, with financial inclusion and the creation
of collaboration mechanisms with local governments to invest in business
facilitation.

39. In this project, the innovations in implementation will include strong support for
local and provincial governments in defining territorial assets, and shared financing
by administrative agencies within those governments to improve planning and
implementation of territorial investment projects, including: investing in road
network maintenance to mitigate barriers of connectivity to market access; using
mobile banking as a way of facilitating financial inclusion on a massive basis; and
creating incentives for the development of new financial products and services. The
inclusion of indigenous communities will mean adopting new mechanisms for
managing natural resources and financing community initiatives, with technical and
financial assistance. A systematic strategy will also be followed to build associative
capacities among beneficiary people, supporting organizational development
processes with results-based incentives. Finally, in addition to reinforcing gender
equity, the project calls for strategies, actions and financial resources to diversify
economic opportunities, including access to employment and decent employment.

D. Policy engagement
40. The project calls for actions and resources to promote and facilitate policy dialogue

using lessons learned and recommendations arising from the project
implementation process – to remove barriers that prevent poor rural people from
sharing in the benefits of territorial development. To this end, policy dialogue will
seek to have an influence on the actors involved in decision-making processes at
the local, regional and national levels. Generally speaking, the project will seek to
build an enabling environment from a policy, institutional and regulatory point of
view to advance the interests of poor rural people. Special attention will be paid to
constructing platforms for dialogue between and by indigenous communities,
seeking to open up a space whereby they can have an influence and improve their
participation and their social and economic inclusion.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Peru and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

42. The Republic of Peru is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary conditions to the
Republic of Peru in an amount equivalent to twenty million six hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 20,650,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President













































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project

Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project


Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































































47181-002: Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project


LOAN NUMBER 3434-TAJ(SF) GRANT NUMBER 0498-TAJ(SF)

FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

between

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED hex'

TAJ 47181



FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

FINANCING AGREEMENT dated between REPUBLIC OF
TAJIKISTAN (“Beneficiary”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Beneficiary has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;

(B) the Beneficiary has also applied to the Government of Japan, through 
the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”), for a grant of three million Dollars 
($3,000,000) to assist in financing Part B of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon 
terms and conditions set forth in a grant agreement between the Beneficiary and ADB 
(“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(C) ADB has agreed to provide financing by making a loan and a grant to 
the Beneficiary from ADB’s Special Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth 
herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations and Grant Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan 
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable 
to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth 
herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Loan Agreement", wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.

(b) The term “Borrower”, wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.02. All provisions of the Special Operations Grant 
Regulations of ADB, dated 7 February 2005 (“Grant Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Grant Agreement”, wherever it appears in the Grant 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.



2

(b) The term “Recipient”, wherever it appears in the Grant Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.03. Wherever used in this Financing Agreement, the 
several terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations have the 
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise 
requires. Additional terms used in this Financing Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ALRI” means the Beneficiary’s Agency of Land Reclamation and 
Irrigation;

(b) “CIS” means the Chubek Irrigation System;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time);

(d) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Financing Agreement;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, and agreed to between the Beneficiary and ADB;

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant; and including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding 
Consulting Services;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Beneficiary and cleared by 
ADB;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time);

(k) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(I) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Beneficiary and ADB;

(m) “Part" means a part of the Project as described in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;



3

(n) “PIO” means each any of the project implementation offices referred to 
in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(o) “PMO” means the project management unit referred to in paragraph 6 
of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations, means the ALRI or any 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Beneficiary to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and 
compliance with the EMP, including any corrective and preventative actions;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Works" means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project 
related services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but 
excluding Consulting Services; and

(v) “WUA” means water users’ association.

ARTICLE II

The Loan and the Grant

Section 2.01. ADB agrees to provide to the Beneficiary from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources, on terms and conditions set forth in this Financing Agreement:

(a) a loan in various currencies equivalent to thirteen million seven 
hundred fifty-eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR13,758,000) 
(“Loan”); and

(b) a grant in the amount of five million eight hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($5,850,000) (“Grant”).

Section 2.02. (a) The Beneficiary shall pay to ADB an interest
charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time.



4

(b) The term “grace period” as used in paragraph (a) of this Section 
means the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the 
amortization schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.04. The Beneficiary shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan and the Grant

Section 3.01. The Beneficiary shall cause the proceeds of the Loan 
and the Grant to be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance 
with the provisions of this Financing Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan and the Grant shall be 
allocated and withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Financing 
Agreement, as such Schedule 3 may be amended from time to time by agreement between 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Section 3. 03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grant in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022, and the Grant Closing Date for the purposes 
of Section 8.02 of the Grant Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or, in each case, such other 
date as may from time to time be agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Beneficiary shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Financing Agreement.



5

Section 4.02. (a) The Beneficiary, through the ALRI, shall (I)
maintain separate accounts and records for the Project, including separate accounts and 
records for the Loan and the Grant; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan and the Grant 
proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of 
the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Beneficiary shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Beneficiary’s financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Beneficiary, unless the Beneficiary shall 
otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Beneficiary shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Financing Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 9.01(e) of the Grant Regulations, respectively: the JFPR Grant 
Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Beneficiary 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Financing Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.02(c) of the Grant 
Regulations, respectively, to be included in the opinion or opinions to be furnished to ADB: 
the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of 
the Beneficiary, and is legally binding on the Beneficiary in accordance with its terms.



6

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Financing 
Agreement is specified for the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement for the purposes of 
Section 9.04 of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.04 of the Grant Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Beneficiary is designated 
as representative of the Beneficiary for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 11.02 of the Grant Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations and Section 11.01 of the Grant Regulations:

For the Beneficiary

Ministry of Finance
3, Akademikov Rajabovikh Avenue
734025 Dushanbe City
Tajikistan

Facsimile Numbers:

(992)372 213-329
(992)372 216-237

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6, ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2017.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Financing Agreement to be 
signed in their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be 
delivered at the principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

By <4
ABDUSALOM K( QURBONIYON 

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

__J/j7
CH^(G CHINGYU 

Country Director 
Tajikistan Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural production in the CIS
area of the Pyanj River Basin in the territory of the Beneficiary.

2. The Project shall comprise the following parts:

Part A - Modernization and operationalization of climate-proofed CIS water 
resource management infrastructure, including:

(a) modernization and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure and its climate-proofing;

(b) construction of sediment-excluding basin;

(c) modernization and rehabilitation of at least two cascade irrigation 
pumping systems (Urtaboz and Janubi); and

(d) capacity development of the ALRI staff through provision of equipment, 
training and development of monitoring and evaluation system;

Part B - Improvement of farm management capacity and water use skills, 
including:

(a) promotion of profitable farm management and efficient water use;

(b) production of high-quality seeds; and

(c) establishment and possible reorganization of WUAs and capacity 
development of WUAs and beneficiaries.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided to support the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2021.




11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds

General

1. The tables attached to this Schedule set forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant. Table 1 sets forth 
the allocation of the Loan proceeds to each such Category. Table 2 sets out the allocation of 
the Grant proceeds to each such Category (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set 
forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category 3 of Table 1 is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of the Loan proceeds and the Grant proceeds
and the withdrawal percentages set forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively,

(a) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant allocated to any Category 
appears to be insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that 
Category, ADB may, by notice to the Beneficiary, (i) reallocate to such 
Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, 
amounts of the Loan or the Grant which have been allocated to 
another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet 
other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot fully meet the 
estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such 
Category may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have 
been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant then allocated to any Category 
appears to exceed all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, 
by notice to the Beneficiary, reallocate such excess amount to any 
other Category.

Disbursement Procedure

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Financing Agreement and except
as ADB may otherwise agree, no withdrawals shall be made from the Loan Account and the 
Grant Account until the Beneficiary has issued a resolution authorizing (a) the PMO set up 
under the Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin Project financed through 
Grant No. 0352-TAJ(EF) to serve as the PMO for this Project; and (b) enhancing the PMO 
and establishing PIOs in Hamandoni, Farkhor and Vose.



13
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE 1

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
(SDR) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan 

Account

1 Part A (Civil Works; Vehicles, 
Pumps, Motors and
Auxiliaries)**

11,802,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed*

2 Part A (Office Equipment; 
Office Accommodation; 
Supplies and Others)**

319,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed

3 Interest Charge 502,000 100% of amount due

4 Unallocated 1,135,000

Total 13,758,000

‘Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary. 
“Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



14
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

TABLE 2

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF GRANT PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Grant Account

1 Part A (Machinery; PMO and 
PIO Salaries; Consulting 
Services)**

5,079,145 100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2 Part A (Survey, Study and 
Design; Trainings and 
Workshops; Office/Vehicle 
Operation and Maintenance)**

234,360 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3 Unallocated 536,495

Total 5,850,000

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary.
**Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Financing
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

3. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

4. The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The Beneficiary may 
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of 
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Beneficiary and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Beneficiary’s national 
competitive bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any 
modifications or clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB 
shall be set out in the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed 
modifications and clarifications shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Beneficiary shall not award any Works contracts until:

(a) the Beneficiary has granted the final approval of the IEE; and

(b) the Beneficiary has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP
into the Works contract.



16
Schedule 4

Consulting Services

7. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary shall apply Quality- and
Cost-Based Selection for selecting and engaging Consulting Services.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Good, Works and Consulting Services

11. Good, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project and Operation of 
Project Facilities; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project is implemented In accordance
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Beneficiary and ADB. In the 
event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Financing Agreement, the provisions of 
this Financing Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Beneficiary shall ensure that:

(a) the implementation of the Project does not affect, or be affected by, 
any of obligations and commitments of the Beneficiary under the 
international treaties entered into with regard to the Amy Darya River 
and the Pyanj River; and

(b) contractors, suppliers, and consultants under the Project have smooth 
and timely access to necessary construction, design, study, and 
survey sites, free of charge, including timely access to up to date 
information regarding security situations and arrangements at the 
international border with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

Environment

3. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities 
comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary relating to environment, 
health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project does not have any indigenous
peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS. In the event 
that the Project does have any such impact, the Beneficiary shall take ail steps required to 
ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary 
and with the SPS.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

5. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for
Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



18
Schedule 5

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Beneficiary with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the I EE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Prohibited List of Investments

6. The Beneficiary shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan and the Grant are
used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

7. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the core labor standards and the
Beneficiary’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Beneficiary shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Beneficiary's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of 
contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding 
the Project area, particularly women.

8. The Beneficiary shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set
forth in paragraph 7 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB.



19
Schedule 5

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Beneficiary shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to 
the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the 
right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and 
implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

12. The Beneficiary shall ensure that updated information on the Project is
provided on ALRI’s website, including information on the performance of the Project, 
business opportunities, bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings and summary 
progress reports of the Project.

Operation & Maintenance

13. The Beneficiary shall ensure that after the Project completion necessary funds
are made available for full O&M of the CIS through annual budgetary allocations and 
irrigation service fees. The Beneficiary shall ensure that, (a) no later than 1 year before the 
Project completion, the ALRI develops an Asset Management and O&M Plan for the CIS, 
satisfactory to ADB, which will, among other things, set out the required increases of annual 
budget allocations and the irrigation service fees, and stipulate that the irrigation service fees 
will be used exclusively for O&M of the CIS, including expenses for the services provided by 
local district offices of the WUA Support Unit under the ALRI; and (b) by the Project 
completion, the agreed O&M Plan is approved by the government resolution.

Counterpart Support

14. The Beneficiary shall ensure that necessary funding is made available for the
period from 1 January 2019 through the Project completion to fully finance staff of the Pyanj 
River Basin Organization and its sub-office in Gorno Badakhshan Autonomous province of 
the Beneficiary.

15. In addition to the foregoing, the Beneficiary shall ensure that the ALRI has
sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting 
Services contract.

Refund

16. If ADB determines that any amount of the Loan and the Grant has been used
in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Financing Agreement, the Beneficiary 
shall, upon notice by ADB to the Beneficiary, promptly refund such amount to ADB. Except 
as ADB may otherwise determine, ADB shall cancel all amounts refunded pursuant to this 
provision.







