























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Benin Second Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF (P166115) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 8  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Jul-2018 | Report No: PIDA25112 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Benin P166115 
Benin Second Fiscal Reform 
and Growth DPF (P166115) 

P160700 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

AFRICA 30-Aug-2018 
Macroeconomics, Trade 
and Investment 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Government of Benin Ministry of Economy and Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The program development objectives of this FRG series are to: 1) strengthen fiscal management; 2) increase agricultural 
productivity and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and 3) improve equitable access to education 
and health services. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 

SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 465.00 
 

 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 195.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 

     World Bank Guarantees 180.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group Financing 450.00 

Private Capital and Commercial Financing 450.00 

of which Private Capital 450.00 
  
  
Decision 
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate 

     
 

 
This PID covers both the IDA Credit (US$ 15 million) and the PBG (US$ 180 million). 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Country Context  
Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of approximately US$830 in 
2017.  Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate of about 50 percent (US$1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 
purchasing power parity) in 2016. With an average per capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 1.4 percent 
(2007-2016) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, highlighting the need to ensure 
a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates 
are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-
headed households. However, women continue to suffer from a lack of economic opportunity and are under-
represented in politics and in other high-level decision-making positions. 
 
The macroeconomic policy framework provides an adequate basis for the proposed operation. This assessment is 
affirmed by favorable medium-term growth prospects underpinned by continued strength in agricultural production 
and sustained investments. It is further strengthened by the Government commitment to meet the 2019 West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) fiscal deficit target; and the participation to the WAEMU and the prudent 
monetary policy at the union level. The Government macroeconomic and fiscal framework is supported by an 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) External Credit Facility (ECF) supported program which aims to address Benin’s 
balance of payments needs, and alleviate the impediments to inclusive growth and poverty reduction by creating fiscal 
space for infrastructure investment and priority social spending.  While public debt has risen in recent years, the results 
of the external debt sustainability analysis (DSA) show that Benin’s debt dynamics are sustainable, facing a moderate 
risk of debt distress. 
 
The operation supports Benin’s efforts to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural productivity and 
strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and health services.  
The introduction of a Policy Based Guarantee (PBG) as a part of the second operation aims to improve debt 
management. 
 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
DPFs are a key instrument in the World Bank’s ongoing policy dialogue with the Government of Benin and its 
development partners. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-17 (Report No. 75774-BJ) noted the importance 
of relying on a combination of development policy and investment operations in order to encourage a coherent 
approach to supporting structural reforms. The new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY19-FY23 explicitly 
includes the current DPF series as a key IDA instrument for supporting Benin's structural transformation for 
competitiveness and productivity and notes that development policy operations (including the proposed operation) will 
target domestic revenue reforms designed to reduce Government reliance on revenues generated from imports 
informally re-exported to Nigeria.  Furthermore, the recently completed PLR, which extended the CPS for an additional 
year, and the forthcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2018-2023) identified the need for new investments 
and reforms in agriculture as a priority – an area supported under this series. 
 
The success of Benin to attain the WBG twin goals in the coming years is highly dependent on its capacity to promote 
private sector development, which is the most efficient channel to create jobs and to reduce poverty. Achieving this 
goal will require an increase in the productivity of the agriculture sector and also require a regular and affordable supply 
of electricity, which is frequently noted as a leading constraint to private sector growth, particularly in the light 
manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors.  The DPF series aims at supporting the Government in its efforts by 
focusing on two main objectives. The first is to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector through a series of 
measures aimed at developing high value chains and improving the quality of agricultural products. The second 
objective is to strengthen the power sector financial viability and the reliability of electricity supply, which is consistently 
viewed as one of the key constraints by firms operating in Benin. 
 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed operation supports Benin’s efforts to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural productivity 
and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and health 
services. 

 
Key Results  
 
The measures supported by this DPF series are expected to strengthen fiscal management; increase agricultural 
productivity and strengthen the financial viability of the power sector; and improve equitable access to education and 
health services. The measures supported by the first pillar are expected to strengthen fiscal management by having a 
positive impact on tax compliance and revenue mobilization and by strengthening human resource management and 
promoting more efficient wage spending. The measures supported by the second pillar will have a short-term impact on 
technology for food processing, quality of agricultural products, and their market access; and a medium-term impact on 
the productivity of the agriculture sector. In addition, they will strengthen the country’s power sector financial viability by 
increasing the energy utility revenues and reducing arrears in the sector. Finally, the measures supported by the third 
pillar will are expected to improve access to education and health services in an equitable manner through a more effective 
deployment of newly recruited education and health personnel. 
 

D. Project Description   

 
In the context of rising public debt, this series supports stronger fiscal management (Pillar 1) through measures to 
increase revenue and use public resources efficiently. In the run-up to the 2016 Presidential elections, uncontrolled 
increases in the wage bill and off-budget expenses led to significant increases in public debt (by almost 20 percent of 
GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (from 1.9 percent of GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015, including grants).  The fiscal deficit 
was reduced from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 5.9 percent in 2017 by containing public spending. The DPF series 
supports the authorities’ efforts to strengthen fiscal management by improving revenue collection and by managing 
public expenditure more efficiently, particularly wages and transfers. 
 
Increasing agricultural productivity and value addition and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability (Pillar 
2) is a Government’s priority. Addressing the challenges of the agriculture and power sectors is key to promote private 
sector development, which is the most efficient way to create jobs and to reduce poverty. Agriculture employs about 
50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector foreign exchange earner. The country has a 
large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate water resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in 
agriculture remains largely unexploited. The sector’s productivity can be improved, once deficiencies in the agriculture 
policy framework and governance structure are addressed and constraints to farming, such as limited access to input 
and output markets and food safety and quality are tackled. As for the power sector, the inconsistent supply of 
electricity is noted as a leading constraint to private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and 
agricultural processing sectors. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is essential to increase 
electricity production capacity in a fiscally sustainable manner.  
 
A new third pillar will support to the reforms necessary to improve access to education and health services. This pillar 
is consistent with the new national development strategy that emphasizes the need to strengthen the delivery of social 
services with. While access to education and health care has improved over the last decade, it varies considerably across 
income groups and locations. A key challenge is the disparity in the allocation of primary school teachers and key health 
care staff (doctors, nurses and midwives) across regions, with a relatively low number of them allocated in poor and 
marginal areas of the country.  
 
The introduction of a Policy Based Guarantee (PBG) as a part of the second operation aims to improve debt 
management. The PBG is expected to partially guarantee a Euro-denominated commercial loan extended by 
international commercial banks at more favorable terms than existing CFA-denominated short-term debt. The PBG 
would support the Government’s debt management strategy which aims at increasing the diversification of public 
borrowing and reducing refinancing risks by extending tenor. The Government has expressed its intention to use the 
proceeds of the commercial loan to prepay existing and more expensive short-term debt accumulated on the domestic 
and regional markets. This would reduce the Net Present Value of public debt and lead to reduced interest payments 
over time.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

E. Implementation  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
 


The Ministry of Economy and Finance is responsible for overall implementation of the proposed FRG series. The 
ministry’s Monitoring Unit for Economic and Financial Programs (Cellule de Suivi des Programmes Economiques et 
Financiers – CSPEF) leads the Government's technical team, with additional representatives from sector ministries 
participating as required. The Government has determined that the monitoring and evaluation of the DPF series and 
other externally financed budget-support operations will be based on performance indicators and targets set out in 
sector program budgets. Sector ministries collect data and transmit it to CSPEF, which analyses the data and produces 
periodic reports. This framework, which builds on the mechanism put in place for Benin’s PRSPs, supports the coordinated 
action and synergies between stakeholders involved in the monitoring and evaluation of the Government’s strategy and 
the provision of donor support. The donor community and the Government have agreed to an annual review process 
that includes quarterly review meetings, additional meetings on special subjects as needed, a mid-year progress review 
on the previous year’s aide memoire, individual sector reviews, a joint donor-government review mission and the 
preparation of a new aide memoire for the coming year. The World Bank is fully involved in this process, participating in 
and contributing to every element of it. 

 

F. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 

The FRG series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction through different channels. Some of the 
measures supported will have a mostly indirect through stronger fiscal managemnet, improved public spending efficiency 
and productivity gains as well as job creation in the agricultural and no-farm sectors. This impact has been strengthened 
by the inclusion of the third pillar on human capital development that could have both a direct and indirect influence on 
the level and distribution of poverty.  
 
Prior Actions 1,2 and 3 support measures to strengthen fiscal management. These measures are expected to facilitate 
the delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive to economic growth 
and private sector employment creation. Prior actions 4, 5, and 6 focus on increasing agricultural productivity and 
contribute to the Government’s poverty reduction goals. In 2015, 60 percent of the rural population lived below the 
US$1.90 per day poverty line. Limited agricultural growth (around 3.5 percent per year, which is approximately the rate 
of population growth in the country) has weakly contributed to poverty reduction. The development of value chains and 
diversifying production into more valuable crops should boost incomes of households involved in agriculture.  Prior actions 
supported in the power sector pillar (Prior actions 7 and 8) promote reliable access to electricity and a more cost-
effective electricity provision and should have a direct and positive impact on the poor. Only 29 percent of Benin’s 
households have access to electricity, and due to the significant disparities between urban and rural areas, only 6 percent 
of the rural population has access to electricity. The measures supported under this series will support the financial 
viability of the power sector. Furthermore, access to electricity liberates non-paid family time demands, particularly for 
women and girls, and further increases quality of life and opportunities for investment in human capital, including in girls 
and women. Increased and more reliable access at affordable prices should also have a significant impact on firm creation, 
firm growth and resultant employment opportunities, particularly in the higher productivity formal sector.  Prior action 9 
supports equitable access to education services and is expected to have indirect positive effects on poverty reduction. 
Schools quality play a determinant role in education outcomes. Improving school quality (through lower pupil to teacher 
ratios) is likely to improve learning outcomes and increase grade attainment. As education outcomes improve for the 
poor, they will have better job opportunities that offer higher earnings and security.  Prior action 10 supports equitable 
access to health services through the deployment of new health workers to underserved areas. Providing affordable 
health care service to the poor remains a challenge in Benin particularly in the rural areas.  Addressing health care needs 


of the poor requires a multidimensional strategy integrating availability of health services, their quality, and financial 
accessibility.  
 
Environmental Aspects 
 

The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have significant negative impacts 
on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. In addition, all the potential environmental and social 
adverse impacts associated with activities supported by the current DPF will rely on the existing National legal and 
regulatory framework and then, will be monitored and addressed through the national procedures in place in Benin.  Over 
the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming environmental sustainability in projects. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all developmental 
projects. Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to implement any development 
project. It has been set up in Law N° 98-30 relating to the environmental framework and in Decree N° 2001-235 relating 
to the environmental assessment procedures. 
 
The prior action of strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to produce climate change mitigation 
co-benefits since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is likely to promote the development of new energy 
efficient production capacities. In the agricultural sector, measures intended to diversify agriculture away from a reliance 
on cotton could have a potentially positive environmental effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and 
increasingly diversified. 
 

G. Risks and Mitigation 

 
The overall risk level associated with this operation is substantial. Substantial governance, institutional capacity, and 
macroeconomic risks could adversely impact the PDO. Despite the substantial risk rating, staff believe that the potential 
benefits of the proposed operation outweigh the risks involved and warrant IDA’s assistance in proceeding with the 
operation and in implementing the critical reforms and policy actions supported by this operation, in coordination with 
other donors, along with appropriate risk mitigation actions.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Samoa Agriculture & Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) (P165873) 

 
 

  
Feb 18, 2018 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24085 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Samoa P165873  Samoa Agriculture & 
Fisheries Productivity 
and Marketing Project 
(SAFPROM) (P165873) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Dec 10, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture & 
Fisheriers 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries. 

 
 Financing (in USD Million) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 21.00 

Total Financing 21.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 21.00 

     World Bank Lending 21.00 
   

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 



INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
A. Country Context 
The Independent State of Samoa (Samoa) is a small remote Pacific Island Country (PIC) with a population of 
approximately 197,000 people1. Samoa consists of two large islands (Upolu and Savai’i), and several smaller islands, it 
has a total land area of approximately 2,830 km2 and an exclusive economic zone of 131,000km2. Samoa is a stable 
democracy with steady growth supported by the tourism and agriculture sectors.  

 
Like many PIC’s, Samoa faces unique challenges to its economic growth, due to its small size, remoteness, high 
exposure to shocks and environmental fragility. Economic growth has picked up in recent years, and in FY2016 real GDP 
expanded by around 7 percent, much faster than originally forecast and a significant acceleration from growth of 
between 1 and 2 percent in the previous two years. Growth in FY16 was driven by tourism arrivals, lower fuel prices, 
and new fish processing facilities, as well as two major sporting events. Over the medium term, real GDP is expected to 
increase at an annual rate of around 2 percent2. However, it’s important to note that frequent natural disasters can 
distort this picture. Samoa was hit by Tropical Cyclone Evan in late 2012 and, according to the Damage and Loss 
Assessment3 caused an estimated US$210 million (30% of annual GDP) in damages and losses, including a loss of 49 
percent in crop and livestock GDP, and 5 percent in fisheries GDP. While Samoa has largely recovered from the effects 
of TC Evan, Category 5 Cyclones have been a 1 in 10-year event for Samoa.  
 
Samoa’s growth is also constrained by the high instances of obesity and noncommunicable diseases. Fifty-four percent 
of Samoa’s population is obese and 25 percent of people smoke and it is predicted that the economic burden of NCDs 
will reach as high as 8.5 percent of GDP by 20404. 
 
Samoa faces persistent challenges in securing prosperity for all and the incidence of hardship remains high. While 
extreme poverty is low, at 0.6 percent, basic needs poverty or ‘hardship’, is at 26.9 percent. Eighty-one percent of 
Samoa’s population live in rural areas and most households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity. While 
strong traditional family and community based safety nets are still effective in preventing extreme hardship, these 
traditional networks cannot manage local or country-wide shocks that affect most of their members, such as natural 
disasters. 

 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Sectoral context: In Samoa, and across the Pacific, agriculture and coastal fisheries play an important role in meeting 
subsistence needs. The most commonly produced crops are taro, banana and yam, and many households have small-
scale subsistence livestock production. In February 2017, ‘food and live animal’ imports were the top category of 
imports, accounting for 27.5 percent of total imports5, and in 2015, approximately 67 percent of all retail beef and 95 
percent of chicken meat was imported. Low cost and low quality food imports often crowd out domestic production 
and contribute (together with irrelevant food behaviors) significantly to the non-communicable disease crisis 
experienced in the region. On the other hand, fresh fish, particularly tuna, still constitutes one of the largest export 
commodities, accounting for 39 percent of exports in 20166, however in terms of contribution to GDP, fishing 
accounted for only 3.2 percent of nominal GDP in the July to September 2017 quarter. 

 
1 Samoa Bureau of Statistics.  
2 Samoa First Resilience DPO, The World Bank (2017) 
3 “Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, Cyclone Evan 2012”, Government of Samoa, March 2013.  
4 Pacific Possible, The World Bank (2017) 
5 Samoa Bureau of Statistics (http://www.sbs.gov.ws/index.php/new-document-library?view=download&fileId=1990) 
6 Central Bank of Samoa 


According to the 2015 Samoa Agriculture Survey, 97 percent of households grow some crops or raise some livestock. 
For most of these households, agriculture is a secondary activity, growing crops for subsistence purposes only. Despite 
this, agriculture in Samoa is becoming more market-oriented; between 2009 and 2015, there was a 5.2 percent 
increase in agriculture households selling ‘some produce’ and a 4.4 percent increase in major crop households 
producing mainly for sale7.  
 
Based on the same survey, 21 percent of all households are engaged in fisheries activities, with the highest rate (37 
percent) in Savaii. Home consumption is the main purpose, representing 70 percent of those households in 2015. As a 
result of destructive fishing practices, near shore fish and fishery products had a steep decline in the early 1990’s, 
however conservation and management plans were put in place and anecdotal evidence suggests the sector is 
gradually recovering.  
 
Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline fishery, particularly 
albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, recent years have 
seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 2013.  
Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 34 
such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, 
a joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
Currently only 1 percent of Samoan’s are formally employed in the agriculture and fisheries sector, one third of these 
are women8. While female labor force participation overall increased between 2011 and 2015, paid farm work for 
women is still low, at its lowest comprising only 12 percent in Savai’i9. However, in line with the rest of Samoa, women 
engaged in farm work tend to have higher levels of education than men; in 2015 the percentage of women in farm 
households with tertiary qualifications was double that of men. It is also more likely that an educated farm labor force 
will be open to modern farming techniques and tools10. 

 
Agriculture in Samoa is very vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate change is predicted to 
manifest itself in more frequent and extreme rainfall events, longer dryer spells and drought events, rising sea levels, 
extreme winds, and high air and water temperatures. According the World Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening 
Tool, this project is likely to face (i) a high level of exposure to climate and disaster hazards, (ii) high impact on physical 
infrastructure and assets as a result of those hazards and (iii) a high level of risk to the outcomes and service delivery of 
the project. More on the results of the Climate and Disaster Risk Screening tool can be found under the ‘Overall Risk’ 
section. 
 
The limited access to: (i) extension and veterinary services for farmers, (ii) markets, and (iii) financing services 
constitute the key bottlenecks to unlocking the agriculture potential in Samoa. Currently only one state Veterinarian 
services the entire country’s livestock needs and there is limited knowledge and available training for farmers wanting 
to try new or innovative practices. New regulations around food labelling and health and safety standards coming into 

 
7 A major crop household is defined as an agricultural household with more than 625 square yards of land under garden crops; or more than 20 
coconut trees; or more than 20 banana plants; or more than 20 other tree crops. 

effect will also create additional requirements for market access. However, if well accompanied, smallholders farmers 
could also benefit substantially from these. 

 
Institutional context: The Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020 provides the framework to guide 
coherent programs and actions from all key stakeholders to achieve the goal of increased food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. Under this plan, additional attention is being paid to build the institutional capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) to manage the sector-wide program. A lack of data was identified as a challenge to 
planning and monitoring in the agriculture sector, so the MAF is working closely with the Samoa Bureau of Statistics to 
strengthen data collection systems, analysis and reporting. 
 
A key outcome in the Plan is to increase the supply and consumption of competitively priced, domestically produced 
food. Fish and Taro are the top two agriculture exports (accounting for 38 and 9 percent of exports respectively in July-
September 2017 quarter). Chicken legs, followed by sugar and mutton were the biggest food imports in 2017 – poultry 
and sheep production therefore present substantial potential for import substitution. Building on the achievements of 
SACEP, the Plan looks to extend and scale up adoption of new technologies, strengthen farm business management 
skills and producer linkages to sustainable and profitable markets. Improving access to productive resources, financial 
services and business skills particularly for women is also key, noting that global experience has shown where women 
have increased access to income generating opportunities and social decision-making empowerment at community 
level, household nutrition improves. 

 
C. Relationship to CPF 
The Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for FY17 to FY21, which was approved in February 2017, covers nine small 
Pacific Island countries (PIC9), including Samoa. The RPF identifies four areas of focus: (i) fully exploiting the available 
economic opportunities; (ii) enhancing access to employment opportunities; (iii) protecting incomes and livelihoods; 
and (iv) strengthening the enablers of growth and opportunities (macro-economic management, infrastructure and 
addressing knowledge gaps). Alongside this, the Pacific Eight Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), found very 
important solution areas for Samoa include increasing incomes from agriculture and coastal fishing, preventing 
noncommunicable diseases and strengthening disaster risk preparedness.  
 
The proposed Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) generally supports both 
the RPF focus areas and the Samoa-specific solution areas in the SCD. More commercially-viable farming practices and 
better access to markets will make use of economic opportunities available to most Samoans, and increase incomes for 
those involved; providing more climate-resilient crops, education and farming infrastructure will protect incomes and 
livelihoods in the face of natural disasters and a changing climate, and; promoting locally produced food will support a 
healthy diet and less dependence on food imports.  
 
The FY2017 to FY2020 Strategy for the Development of Samoa highlights increased agricultural production as a priority 
area for Samoa, which the Samoa Agriculture and Marketing Project will also contribute to. The project is also aligned 
to the Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020, aimed at increasing the food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. 
 
The SAFPROM will also allow Samoa to join the Pacific Islands Regional Oceanoscape Program (PROP). The PROP 
Program was developed as a Series of Projects (SOP) to be implemented in three phases, each six years’ in duration. 
Phase 1 began in 2014 and is being implemented with four countries (Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of 
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu) and one regional institution, the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency 
(FFA). The Phase I country projects all share the same Regional Program PDO and Results Framework. They also reflect 

the same component design drawing on a pre-set menu of investment activities. By allowing Samoa to join the PROP, 
this project meets key criteria for utilizing the regional International Development Association (IDA) funds. The program 
(i) involves three or more countries; (ii) has benefits, economic, social and environmental, that spill over country 
boundaries (tuna / pelagic fishes’ stocks and fisheries management); (iii) requires coordination with regional bodies 
(SPC and FFA) and with other countries in the region; and (iv) provides a platform for a high level of policy 
harmonization among countries. 
 
As the PROP Program expands into Phase II with Tonga and Samoa operations, it has been decided that the regional 
project with FFA will not incorporate these new countries in Phases II and III, as it was found that the regional 
implementation approach is not the optimal model with which to secure regional support and coordination of the 
national projects.  Rather, a soft technical assistance model bilaterally to each of the four main regional fisheries 
agencies11 will be employed during Phase II of PROP to ensure that each of these agencies pro-actively engage in 
supporting the national projects to strengthen their commitment and collaboration toward shared management of 
their oceanic and coastal fisheries resources.  
 
 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries.  
 
B. Key Results 
 
Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 

(a) Increased yields in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(b) Increased value of sale in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(c) Number of fisheries management plans implemented 

(d) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
Direct beneficiaries are expected to be semi-commercial and commercial farming households and farmers, as well as 
small and medium enterprises (small agribusiness involved in collecting, processing, packaging and marketing activities, 
but also inputs suppliers). MAF will also directly benefit from capacity building activities. 
 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation.  
 

 

11 Pacific Islands Fisheries Forum Agency (FFA), Pacific Community (SPC), Parties of the Nauru Agreement Office (PNAO), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) 



PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 
The Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P115351) is currently in its last year, closing 31 
December 2018, and has achieved significant accomplishments for Samoan farmers, as well as relevant government 
departments. Based on SACEP’s successes, the government of Samoa would like to build on these achievements and 
take advantage of the opportunities presented.  
Through its objectives of increasing crops and livestock productivity and access to market increase as well as improving 
the management of targeted fisheries, this project may contribute to: (i) import substitution and increase the supply 
and consumption of domestically produced food; (ii) boost exports of some commodities, and (iii) strengthen resilience 
of farming households to climate change and climate-induced disasters (cyclones, heavy rains, prolonged dry seasons).  
 
It is proposed that SAFPROM will have four components.  
Component 1: Creating an enabling environment for increased productivity and access to markets for target farming 
and fishing households. This will include: 

a. Institutional capacity building activities in the MAF as well as current and potential cooperatives and 

associations. Activities will be based on a needs assessment and a capacity building action plan. The project 

will also support the establishment of an Agriculture Sector Coordination Division within the MAF for 

project management. This component will also help reviewing the regulatory and policy framework and 

update it if needed. A special focus will be looked at national standards that affect the capacity of Samoan 

agriculture products to reach specific high value markets. 

b. Development and improvement of infrastructure and equipment of public good nature. On the model of 

SACEP (with the Static and Mobile Slaughtering Units and the Tissue Culture Laboratory), this sub-

component will support the development of feasibility studies, work and equipment of key collective 

infrastructures that have been identified as bottlenecks for the development of the sector. For instance, in 

Savai’I island, a small veterinary laboratory and a fruits and vegetable Packhouse would help farmers to 

address their animal diseases and packaging concerns. 

 
Component 2: Support to farming and fishing households through a matching grant program (MGP). The design of 
which will be informed through a review of the MGP under SACEP. As per the GoS Concept Note, this financing 
mechanism should expand, not only to increase the number of farmers benefiting, but also to allow farmers’ groups to 
work together in post-harvest handling and agro-processing. It will help establishing alliances between the farmers, 
fishers, their groups and cooperatives and services providers or buyers. This MGP will give priority to sub-projects that 
promote innovative technologies aimed at improving productivity and quality for products for which there is a market 
demand. It will also support climate change mitigation activities through for instance intensification of livestock 
production, pasture management, improved feeding rations and practices using local products; and adaptation by 
promoting inter alia poly-tunnels to protect crops against heavy rains, water collection and small-scale irrigation to 
cope with prolonged dry seasons, etc. – therefore contributing to strengthened resilience to climate-related events. 
 
Regarding coastal fisheries, this component, through the MGP, will provide the opportunity to strengthen the 
community based fisheries management program (CBFMP) that has been implemented since 1995. This could upgrade 
the CBFMP to assess potential development support for participating communities or look at income generating 
activities for local communities. Over 100 villages have joined the program. Other coastal fisheries areas may include 

effective management regimes for the sea cucumber fishery (hatchery production, grow out and possibly processing).  
Post-harvest and value adding for low value fish are key components as community undertakings. 
 
Component 3: Aims to help GoS strengthen management of the region’s long-line tuna fisheries while identifying 
opportunities for sustainably increasing domestic revenues from this shared resource. This component will allow 
Samoa to join the PROP and is proposed to be financed through the following IDA grant resources: US$ 3 million in 
national IDA and US$ 6 million in regional IDA. 
  
Towards this objective, the component will support GoS’ regional and national activities to:  

a. Strengthen its capacity to engage effectively in the Tokelau Arrangement, the Western and Central Pacific 

Fisheries Management Commission (WCPFC) and other regional forums;  

b. Strengthen capacity and establishment of a national observer program 

c. Invest in and implement robust Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS), stock monitoring and fisheries 

management mechanisms and schemes. This includes upgrading Samoa’s Fisheries Information 

Management Systems and skills on MCS, carrying out joint regional patrol operations, boarding inspections, 

data collection, analysis and application; and combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing 

d. Develop and implement strategies to enhance the competitiveness of the domestic longline fleet and the 

oversight and value of oceanic fishing activities within their EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 

related services.     

 
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0): Following an eligible crisis or 
emergency, the government of Samoa may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency 
response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources under the project 
from other project components to cover emergency response. These activities would be carried out, as needed to 
ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be used in the event that 
an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project would be implemented over a period of five years on Upolu and Savaii islands. Samoa is made up of nine 

islands with four main inhabited islands (Upolu,Savaii, Manono and Apolima) and has a total land area is 2,830 km2. The 
islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. The area is generally mountainous. 
  
Samoa has a population of approximately 197,000 people, of which 97% are Polynesian. The majority of people live on 

Upolu and Savaii. Settlements and agricultural activity on these islands are concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling 
slopes. 
 
Approximately 60,000 ha or 21% of the total land area is under crops or grazing regimes. Forest cover is approximately 

60%. Samoa’s 12 terrestrial national parks, reserves and community conservation areas are located on Upolu and Savaii. 


The country’s reef area is approximately 10,000 km2 and its exclusive economic zone is approximately 131000 km2. The 
main fishery landing sites in Samoa include Apia (Upolu), Salelologa (Savaii) and Apolima-uta (Upolu) with local 
subsistence landings scattered in coastal villages around inhabited islands . Samoa has three (3) protected marine areas 
(inshore). 
 
As for offshore fishery, Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline 

fishery, particularly albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, 
recent years have seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 
2013.  Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 
34 such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, a 
joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The current World Bank financed Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP) has addressed 

safeguards' capacity constraints within MAF through a Coordination group (PCG) which includes an environmental and 
social (E&S) officer. For SAFPROM, E&S capacity within MAF is expected to be further strengthened with the 
establishment of a dedicated Agriculture Sector Coordination Division (ASCD) including a senior E&S specialist, to 
effectively coordinate and management agriculture sector activities, including environmental and social safeguards. This 
unit will be supported by a Centralized Technical Services and Support Unit (CTSSU) within the MOF which will also 
include an E&S Advisor. Her/his role will be to build capacity of E&S specialists within the line ministries, including the 
ASCD, and advise these teams on complex issues on an ad hoc basis. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project would finance a number of small-scale, 
household-based farming (i.e. livestock development 
and crop development) and community fisheries 
production/marketing subprojects through a small 
grants scheme. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project would support the development and 
improvement of collective infrastructure and/or 
equipment (i.e. small veterinary laboratory, 
renovation of a local fish market or a fruits and 
vegetable pack-house). These small to medium-scale 
investments have the potential to cause some minor 
adverse environmental and social impacts however 
these are readily managed through standard 
mitigation measures. 
 
The project would finance the development and 
implementation of strategies to enhance the 
competitiveness of the domestic longline tuna fleet 
and the value of oceanic fishing activities within the 
Samoa’s EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 
related services.  
  
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the grant 
process. The ESMF will incorporate the requirements 
of the World Group’s Environmental, Health and 
Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) and industry specific 
guidelines for agribusiness, food production and 
pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emerency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including ascreening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

For agriculture and livestock, the project will not 
finance any activities that significantly convert or 
degrade any protected areas or natural habitats as the 
screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude all 
subprojects with these impacts. 
The project will support enhanced management of 
coastal and ocean fisheries/ecosystems. While 
proposed activities are expected to enhance positive 
and sustainable returns to these important habitats, 
the ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impact on natural habitats, including critical natural 
habitats, as well as measures to enhance positive 
environmental impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

For agriculture (crops and livestock), the policy will not 
finance activities that impact on the health and quality 
of forests. 
For fisheries, the project may support marine 
ecosystem conservation activities (i.e. mangroves 
conservation). 
The ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impacts of these activities, as well as measures to 
enhance positive environmental impacts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The client will review and update the current SACEP 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) following the 
standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09 and 
the World Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness and food 
production. The project will include measures to 
strengthen the institutional capacity for implementing 
IPM in project areas. This will include a stronger focus 
on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources; screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The ethnic structure in Samoa is predominantly ethnic 
Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and 
biracial European/Polynesian. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
In fishery, certain activities may involve the restriction 
of access to natural resources and/or marine 
protected areas which local people may depend upon 
for their livelihood. A Process Framework will be 
developed in compliance with OP4.12 requirements to 
address these potential issues.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
As soon as the GoS will access the Project preparation Facility, the recruitment of an E&S specialist and a consultant to 

develop both the ESMF and the PMP. It is therefore expected that the safeguards documents will be ready by mid-August 
to inform the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Women's Economic Empowerment Rural Development Project (P164443) 

 
 

  
Aug 29, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P164443 Women's Economic 
Empowerment Rural 
Development Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 31-Aug-2018 28-Sep-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 
Components 

Community Mobilization and Institution Development 
Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions 
Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 25.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 25.00 


          IDA Grant 25.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 75.00 

          Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 75.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Despite notable progress in rebuilding the economy, strengthening institutions, and restoring 
infrastructure and basic services, Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges today. Afghanistan has relatively 
successfully managed the immediate challenges resulting from the political transition post-election of 2014.  The 
country has maintained macroeconomic stability and established the conditions for a slow recovery of the 
economy. Risks to the economy remain significant, however, and withdrawal of international security forces 
starting 2011, coupled with political uncertainties and declining aid, have resulted in deceleration of economic 
growth, while fiscal pressures increase as security threats mount. The latest numbers from the Afghanistan Living 
Conditions Survey (ALCS)1 released by the Central Statistics Organization (CSO) show that poverty in Afghanistan 
has increased from 38.3 percent in 2012-13 to 54.5 percent in 2016-17.2 With the population continuing to grow 
more than 3 percent a year, per capita GDP fell during the same period from US$ 669 to US$ 551, making it one 
of the poorest countries in the world. At the same time, private sector growth has fallen 9.4 percent in the period 
2003-2012 to only 2.1 percent between 2013 and 2016. Private sector development and diversification is 
constrained by political instability, weak institutions, inadequate infrastructure, widespread corruption, and a 
difficult business environment (Afghanistan was ranked 183rd of 190 countries in the 2017 Doing Business Survey 
and 177 out of 180 in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index)3. With a fresh election cycle 
approaching in 2018-19, it is vital that the Government focuses on private sector led growth and revitalization of 
the economy to fill up the void emerging from the declining donor inflows over the longer-term.  
 

2. A particularly concerning challenge is the low level of economic empowerment of Afghan women. The 
current level of women’s formal economic contribution to Afghan development is low. While women constitute 
47 percent of the estimated 34.65 million population of Afghanistan in 20164 the female labour force 
participation rate stands at only 26.8 percent (down from 29 percent in 2013-14). Among the working age 

                                                           
1 Source: ALCS 2016-17; available at https://cso-of-afghanistan.shinyapps.io/ALCS_Dashboard  
2 This is measured against a national poverty line of 2,064 AFN per person per month – approx. $1 a day in current exchange 
rate terms. 
3 Sources: www.doingbusiness.org/data and www.transparency.org/cpi  
4 Statistics in this section are taken from the ALCS 2013-2014, ALCS 2016-17, the World Bank development database; and the 
WEE-NPP Strategy paper, December 2016. 

women, only 29 percent are economically active and most are employed in the agricultural sector (70 percent) 
while 24 percent are in manufacturing. The share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector is 
only 10 percent. Only 19.9 percent of the female population is literate (versus 49.4 percent for men), although 
this figure nearly doubles to 38.7 percent if only the female population under 25 is counted, a significant 
testimony to the advances that have been obtained over the past decade. Women earn significantly less than 
men. For the same type of job, women earn 30 percent less than men on average. 

 

3. Women in Afghanistan face significant legal, regulatory and cultural challenges that hinder their ability 
to run businesses and access markets5.  While the Afghan Constitution clearly states that “the citizens of 
Afghanistan – whether man or woman – have equal rights and duties before the law”6 and while most commercial 
laws have no explicit gender-legal differentiations, there are implicit cultural barriers and lack of legal incentive 
mechanisms that reduce the ability of women to participate in the economy successfully. Likewise, there are 
numerous actual gender-legal differences when it comes to non-commercial laws (like the Marriage Law, Civil 
Code, Labor Law, etc.). These include differences in the legal age of marriage, mobility of women, ownership of 
property, and duration and types of work that women can undertake7. This lack of legal incentives for women to 
participate in formal business activities, has translated into very low levels of female entrepreneurship and 
women-owned businesses, although this number has increased steadily thanks to donor and Government efforts. 

 

4. Access to finance, particularly for rural women, is especially constrained. Financial inclusion is a core 
development challenge in Afghanistan – with only 10 percent of the population (and 3.8 percent of women) 
having accounts in formal financial institutions8. Microfinance has been a widely-used strategy in Afghanistan to 
address barriers to financial inclusion, with the Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA) 
serving as an apex institution channeling funding and technical assistance to the whole sector. While the sector 
has grown and consolidated over the last decade, the total number of clients of micro-finance institutions (MFIs) 
only stands at 0.22 million, of which only 0.13 million are active borrowers. The outreach of MFIs is limited to 80 
districts of 14 provinces, and only 12 percent of their active clients are from rural areas. Naturally, therefore, 
demand for microfinance services continues to far outstrips supply, especially in rural areas where financial 
markets have limited presence. The outreach of the banking industry is equally limited in rural areas. Currently, 
there are 15 licensed banks in Afghanistan including three state owned banks, nine private sector banks, and 
three foreign banks. The Banking sector has gradually been offering range of financial products and services but 
their services are mostly limited to urban areas. Most commercial banks have no branches outside Kabul yet, and 
a few are providing loans to local businesses, much less small rural businesses. 
 

5. There is hence tremendous potential to increase women’s participation in national development. 
Global evidence increasingly showcases that greater gender equality can enhance productivity, improve 
development outcomes for the next generation, and make institutions more representative.9 Actions to expand 
women’s economic activity in Afghanistan are constrained by a variety of cultural, institutional, and economic 
factors. Afghan women suffer discrimination that is multi-faceted, inter-related and self-reinforcing. But the 
current international perception that Afghan women are blocked from the economy is an unhelpful over-
generalization given the variation in cultural practices across the country. Furthermore, as in other parts of the 

world, cultural practices are more dynamic than often realized. As an economy grows and more opportunities 
arise, cultural beliefs about women’s ability to contribute to household income and their participation in 
economic activities will change. Moreover, addressing gender disparities and empowering women is essential 
for consolidating peace and security in fragile and conflict-affected societies. The imperative for investing in 
women’s economic empowerment (WEE) in Afghanistan can thus not be over-emphasized. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Recognizing this imperative, the Government of Afghanistan (GoIRA) launched the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment National Priority Program (WEE-NPP) on March 8th, 2017. The WEE-NPP forms the third pillar of 
the GoIRA’s Gender Strategy which is encompassed in the broader Afghanistan National Peace and Development 
Framework (ANPDF) – the country’s five-year development plan. The WEE-NPP aims to build poor women’s 
capacity to strengthen the economy of their households, communities, and the entire nation. It is structured as 
an umbrella program (rather than a stand-alone project/operation) that would operate through over a dozen 
line ministries (through ongoing or pipeline projects) and coordinated through a Program Coordination Office 
(PCO) in the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled (MOLSAMD). The latter would in turn provide 
start-up technical and financial resources to support women-owned businesses, and development of job skills, 
and financial literacy. The program would further help create an enabling environment for WEE through policy 
and planning reforms that will remove legal barriers to women’s economic participation; streamline and reduce 
regulatory barriers to women’s involvement in marketing; and improve the quality and use of gender statistics 
for planning and monitoring women's economic progress.   

 

7. The WEE-NPP builds upon and complements other initiatives of the GoIRA. The WEE-NPP builds on 
previous government-led initiatives to expand women's economic empowerment, including the gender elements 
of the Afghanistan Compact, the 2008-18 National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA), and the 
2008 Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS). The GoIRA has also fully committed to gender equality 
and has backed this commitment with credible reforms to increasing the role of women in government, providing 
access to property, and implementing UN Resolution 1325. The WEE-NPP compliments these efforts and links 
closely to other NPPs – notably the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP), the Agriculture NPP and 
the Human Development NPP. 
 

8. The WEE-NPP is comprised of six pillars. The WEE-NPP encompasses two domains of action. Facilitating 
activities (the first two pillars) include reforms that improve the regulatory and normative environment for 
women’s economic development, and investment activities (the last four pillars) include projects and programs 
that provide resources directly to women. In this way, the six WEE-NPP pillars focus on: (i) increasing the 
availability and analysis of gender statistics; (ii) removing legal and regulatory barriers to participation; (iii) 
training in literacy, business management, and labor skills; (iv) ensuring inclusive access to finance; (v) improving 
access to agricultural inputs, extension services, and markets; and, (vi) promoting access to creative economy 
markets. The activities under each of these pillars will be implemented by different ongoing and pipeline projects 
under various line ministries. 

 
9. The proposed women’s economic empowerment rural development project (WEE-RDP) will directly 
implement the last four pillars of WEE-NPP, while contributing to the others. It offers a national framework for 
women’s economic empowerment starting at the community level and with an explicit targeting of poor rural 
women. As acknowledged in the WEE-NPP document, past efforts at women’s economic empowerment have 
often focused on better-off, urban women. WEE-RDP reverses this approach. 

10. The project builds off the lessons from the ongoing Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Program 
(AREDP). The AREDP was approved by the ARTF Management Committee on April 11, 2010 with the objective of 
improving employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of targeted local 
enterprises. The project was successful in integrating the poorest segments of the population and empowering 
women who were the main direct beneficiary groups of all Project activities. AREDP’s operational activities have 
resulted in the strengthening of about 64,328 community members (56 percent women) including marginalized 
groups, IDPs and Returnees through a community-driven savings and enterprise model for income and 
employment generation. More than 5,193 SGs (54 percent women), 1,336 EGs (841 EGs managed by women) 
and 505 VSLAs were established and supported. Community Saving Groups have saved US$4.2 million (US$2.2 
million by women), where US$4 million of loanable savings are in circulation at any given time. Additionally, the 
program supported 657 SMEs to strengthen backward/forward linkages with the rural economy and utilized 
them as business service providers for the newly established community enterprises. A recent Bank funded 
analytical study ‘Jobs from Agriculture and Rural Development Operations in Afghanistan’ found that the 
employment effects of AREDP on female beneficiaries were significant. Participation of women in program 
activities has emerged as one of key strengths of AREDP as over 60% program beneficiaries are women. The 
impact of the project on the local economy and its catalytic effect on social inclusion facilitate its transition into 
a programmatic and women-oriented operation under the WEE-NPP.  
 

11. The project will leverage the social mobilization and outreach of the Citizens’ Charter program. Most 
successful women’s empowerment programs are built on a community platform which also provides access to 
basic services and enables trust. This is why the WEE-NPP conceived the WEE-RDP to leverage the institutional 
structure of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP). The CCNPP emerged from the foundation 
of the highly successful National Solidarity Program (NSP), which introduced a community-driven development 
(CDD) approach towards rural infrastructure and service delivery and reached approximately 35,000 
communities over the past 14 years. The Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) which implements the first 
phase of the CCNPP aims to deliver core infrastructure, emergency support, and social services to participating 
communities through strengthened Community Development Councils (CDCs). By helping to improve services, 
especially for the poor and most vulnerable through the CDCs, it also ensures social inclusion. The CCAP was 
planned to be a major contributor to building strong and accountable institutions especially by strengthening the 
capacity of CDCs to plan and monitor local service delivery and hold government and service providers 
accountable. The CCAP can thus provide an umbrella body for women’s groups and help women access critical 
social infrastructure. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

12. To increase social  and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 

13. The project defines “social empowerment” as participation in community level women’s institutions, with 
an implicit theory of change that such participation leads to social empowerment. These institutions will be 
provided seed capital, technical assistance, and in turn be linked to formal financial institutions and markets so 
as to enable economic empowerment. “Economic empowerment” is defined in this project as having both the 
resources to advance economically and the power to make and act on economic decisions. Economic 
empowerment starts with fair and equal access to markets and institutions, but women also need agency and 
control over resources to ensure they benefit from economic activities. Economic empowerment also 


encompasses financial inclusion, which increases women’s access to products and services to exercise control 
over money.  

 
PDO Level Indicators 

14. Following the focus of the project on social, financial, and economic inclusion and empowerment, the 
proposed PDO level indicators are as follows: 

(a) Number of direct beneficiaries (of which female)  
(b) % of women self-help group (SHG) members from poor or vulnerable households  
(c) Number of beneficiaries reached with financial services (Corporate Results Indicator) 
(d) % of women EGs/PAs showing increase in volume of sales 

 
D. Project Description  

15. Based on the rural goals outlined in the WEE-NPP, the WEE-RDP has three core intervention tracks – one 
around social mobilization to develop community institutions and federating them to higher levels; the second 
dedicated to providing inclusive access to finance, and the third focusing more on enterprise development and 
value chain/market linkages. These would be supplemented with program support that would also link back to 
both the WEE-NPP and the CCNPP. This ‘institutional approach’ to empowerment of women has proven very 
successful in rural livelihoods projects in other South Asian countries, notably in India, since it harnesses the social 
capital of poor women and uses this to develop both financial and economic capital. The overall approach and 
functions are similar to what existed under the AREDP, but the fundamental shifts would be (i) specific design 
features to promote participation of poor women; (ii)a more prominent role of social mobilization (with a goal of 
‘saturating’ as many women into savings/self-help groups as possible, of which a subset would receive enterprise 
support); and (iii) a much stronger focus on building sustainable community institutions for women’s agency and 
empowerment. Keeping this core design model in mind, each of the project components is described below.  
 

COMPONENT-1: Community Mobilization and Institution Development (est. US$ 30 million) 

16. Overall focus: The first component of the WEE-RDP aims to build sustainable community institutions 
through social and economic mobilization of rural women. This is perhaps the most critical component of the 
project, since it lays the institutional foundation on top of which the rest of the activities will depend. The 
formation of sustainable institutions would build the social capital of women in the rural areas and serve as the 
first stage of their economic empowerment. The core community institutional framework envisaged under the 
project are women’s savings groups (WSG or simply SGs) which would be federated into VLSAs. From these would 
emerge community level enterprise groups (EG) which in turn would be aggregated to producer associations (PAs). 
The project will heavily draw on the mobilization efforts undertaken by CCAP and leverage the network of CCAP 
facilitating partners (FPs) working with the program.  
 

Component 2: Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions (est. US$ 38 million): 

17. Overall approach: The second component will facilitate empowering of both community institutions i.e. 
SGs/VSLAs and its members to develop as sustainable financial institutions at the community level and eventually 
establish direct linkages with financial service providers including MFIs and commercial banks. Evidence from past 
experiences in Afghanistan as well as other countries demonstrates that this is a long-term process that has to be 
approached in phases. The key focus of WEE-RDP would be to strengthen the ‘demand side’ by creating an 
ecosystem of women savings groups that are built on mutual trust and respect to support their livelihoods and 


federate to VSLAs for sustainability. This would prepare the women groups to link with MFIs and make them 
bankable. In this way, there would be three stages in the access to finance:  

(a) the first stage is to develop an own savings culture through SHGs and federate them into VLSAs.  
(b) In the second stage, the project will inject seed capital, which will support transforming VSLAs to 

the next level in terms of scale as well as operational and financial sustainability.  
(c) Finally, the third stage would be to link the VSLAs to MFIs and Banks. 

 

18. The component will have a strong focus on ensuring the financial and operational sustainability of VSLAs 
and will work with MFIs and commercial banks to create an enabling environment for investment in the 
livelihoods of rural women by increasing their access to sustainable financial services. 
 
19. Financial Intermediation. Given the above, the project complies in general terms with OP 10.00 para 15 
on financial intermediation. However, there is a significant reason for concern about how loan contracts can be 
enforced, and how VSLAs will be sustainable when relying on ad hoc profit sharing arrangements (under Islamic 
finance) instead of predictable interest rates. There are also major security concerns in rural areas that could 
make the financial intermediation activities difficult to implement on the ground. An additional concern is how 
risks will be covered, including force majeure risk and credit risk (on loans to SHGs by VSLAs, and on loans from 
microfinance institutions and commercial banks to VSLAs in the future).  Given that VSLAs are supervised by the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, a new arrangement for supervision will be necessary as they 
take on a financial intermediation role. Mature VSLAs managing grants and a growing loan portfolio may be 
supervised by the Central Bank, while others will require technical assistance and supervision from another 
agency.   It would also be critical to have a certification process to insure basic practices and systems are in place 
before seed capital is provided. For VSLAs that initially meet requirements and later do not, there needs to be a 
decertification or strengthening process in place – and this would have ripple effects for groups who have 
provided their savings. As for the eventual participation of MFIs, there is no law in place yet, which might limit 
their role. However, efforts are underway to pass a law to provide clear legal status and supervision 
arrangements. 
 
20. Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets (est. US$ 18 million):  
This component aims to finance common assets of public goods nature based on business needs and assessment 
of market failures using the ‘maximizing finance for development’ (MFD) cascade principle (see figure 6 below) 
in order to provide catalytic support for the growth of viable economic activities and leveraging more private 
sector investments. These investments are expected to be catalytic, helping individual level investments reach 
economies of scale through increased coordination. This will be supplemented with technical assistance, business 
development support, as well as market exposure and linkages.  

 

21. Approach: Groups of women with homogeneous economic activities under the project will be enabled 
and incentivized to come up with business ideas that will provide the rationale for partnership and formation of 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producers Associations (PAs). 10 Any support under this component will be against 

                                                           
10 Enterprise/Producers Groups (EGs or PGs) are primary economic interest groups consisting of members from same village 
working on common enterprise/production systems. This could be in the areas of farm; non-farm or off farm activities. Members 

of an EG normally ranges from 8-20 depending upon nature of economic activities. Producer’s Association (PAs) would be a higher 

order, secondary organization i.e. Federations of EGs/PAs. EGs/PGs from multiple villages engaged in common economic or 

income generating activities could be federated at a cluster level i.e. 10 to 20 villages. While, EG and PG would be an informal 

 
robust Business Plan with a ceiling of $ 2000 per EG, which may also be aggregated for the larger assets 
/infrastructure at the PA level depending upon specific business case and project requirements. The committee 
reviewing the business plan would have members of commercial banks/MFIs and representatives from industries 
and private sector, who could also choose to co-finance the proposal. The project is also considering contracting 
an independent third party to verify and validate the Business plan in terms of feasibility, fiduciary process and 
inclusion. It is expected that this build-up process will help women to increase their productivity, 
competitiveness, which would in turn improve the job opportunities for women and contribute to their economic 
empowerment. The component builds on the existing successful framework of AREDP on enterprise 
development which has proven effective in developing women enterprises and supporting them on capacity 
building, business skills and linkage to markets. EGs will be encouraged among all SHG members engaged in 
common economic activities. Thus, the component would help both individual and collective women enterprises 
to participate in organized and competitive supply chains, which would be identified through provincial 
situational analysis and other related studies. The focus will be on pro-poor, high value commodities such as 
vegetables, horticulture, milk, poultry, ship; fish; goat; carpet; honey, handicrafts etc. where women participation 
tend to be higher. Overall, only a sub-set of total households and geography having growth potential and are 
part of either economic clusters or value chains would be specifically supported under this component. This 
component will also facilitate EGs access to credit from VSLAs to support building of a healthy portfolio for the 
VSLAs and hence contributing to their sustainability. This component will also seek to draw partnerships and 
synergy with other ARTF, bilateral donor funded, and NGO run programs and projects that work on similar 
themes11. Investments made under this component would be largely/mostly of public in nature. 
 
22. COMPONENT 4: Project Management and Knowledge Management (est. US$14 million): Under this 
Component, the project will finance salaries of project staff, consultancies, training programs, office equipment, 
and incremental operational costs of set up under MRRD and provincial units. The component will also support 
project coordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at the national and provincial levels, 
Management Information System (MIS), financial management (FM), procurement, human resource 
management, knowledge management and communication systems as well as environmental and social 
safeguards management, and running of the grievance redress mechanism. The project will leverage the existing 
institutional infrastructure available in the CCAP program at the MRRD level for various project management 
activities including procurement, FM and communications. A detailed M&E plan will be prepared to align project 
activities and tasks with the key results and the related PDO level results indicators and the intermediate level 
indicators at the component level. There will be systematic internal monitoring of activities and results that will 
be fed into the preparation of Implementation Status report and Annual Progress reports. An M&E/ MIS system 
will be established to collect and process appropriate information that will enable determination of the progress 
towards the achievement of the project development objective, tracking of progress at each phase of the results 
chain, and if required, adjustments will continuously be made and at Mid-Term. Baseline information will also be 
collected as part of the project preparation activities. 
 

23. Other areas of support under the component include the following: 
(a) Technical assistance to inform implementation and policy development, and capacity building of 

some of the MRRD directorate/cell/units to mainstream and ensure long term adequate staffing 

                                                           
organization, efforts would be made to convert PAs as formal community based organization registered as co-operatives or 

companies. Membership of PAs could range from 50 to 500 depending on the value chain.  

11 In this respect, the project is exploring a formal partnership with the “Women in Economy” program run by USAID. 

as part of exit strategy; 
(b) Partnership arrangements with some of the projects in India/Pakistan e.g. JEEViKA, Bihar in India 

or PPAF, Pakistan for overall technical assistance and implementation guidance; 
(c) Overall training and capacity building of staff/community professionals; identification, 

development and deployment of CRPs; organizing study tours and field learning trips; exchange 
of knowledge etc. could be also supported as part of this component. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

24. The WEE-RDP will be implemented by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
under the overall framework of WEE-NPP. Although, MRRD is going through an structural changes, which will 
evolve during the course of 2019, as per the latest thinking, it is proposed to restructure the Ministry into three 
operational general directorates, each covering the main functional pillars of MRRD’s operations. These are – (a) 
Community Development (covering the Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) as well as supporting public 
goods/infrastructure projects such as the Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP)); (b) Sustainable Economic 
Growth (covering the livelihoods/private goods related operations such as AREDP); and (c) Balanced Growth and 
Border Areas (covering specialized cross-border programs targeting these geographies as well as specific 
populations). Common functions (such as HR, procurement, finance, etc.) would be centralized at the Ministry 
level. The WEE-RDP, given its livelihoods and private sector goods focus, would be situated under the second 
pillar (Sustainable Economic Growth). However, WEE-RDP would work closely with CC General Directorate as 
well as balanced growth pillars at both the national and sub-national levels and would leverage existing 
implementation architecture set up under different programs, particularly CCAP.  
 

25. The existing WEE-NPP Steering Committee will provide overall strategic guidance and oversight. The 
High-Level Steering Committee established under the WEE-NPP will be used for the overall co-ordination, 
guidance, setting up direction for program implementation and to enable leveraging of resources and drive 
synergies among various related programs of these Ministries for the overall socio-economic empowerment of 
women in Afghanistan. The steering committee will also be an avenue to move forward with any policy reforms 
and legal provisions that may be needed to facilitate the program (e.g. registration of VSLAs, or easing the process 
of issuing national IDs to women, etc.). The WEE-RDP directorate at the national level will coordinate its activities 
with the other programs being implemented under the aegis of the WEE-NPP through other related Ministries, 
such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL); Ministry of Commerce and Industries (MoCI); 
MoLSAMD; and Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) so as to ensure synergy and coordination.  
 

26. At the national level, the existing AREDP PIU, will be re-modelled for WEE-RDP and positioned within 
the new Sustainable Economic Growth Directorate. The Directorate/PIU will be fully staffed with technically 
competent multi-disciplinary team of senior professionals, consultants and sector specialists to implement & 
manage the enterprise development, access to finance, access to market and economic empowerment elements 
of the program. WEE-RDP will utilize MRRDs common resources/systems for program support services related 
to HR; Finance Management, Procurement, and other technical units like communication; gender; Grievance 
redressal; Governance and Accountability etc. as part of the proposed Ministry restructuring. Only a lean team 
of complementary skills set with WEE-RDP will be maintained at the WEE-RDP directorate level for overall co-
ordination; policy/guidelines formulation; and for building partnerships with various public & private 
development organizations/institutions. 


27. At the sub-national level, the WEE-RDP structure will be merged with the existing institutional 
arrangements for the CCAP to avoid duplication. The WEE-RDP would therefore piggy back on the provincial 
management units (PMUs) and District Offices that have been set up under CCAP. The latter would be 
supplemented with one District Coordinator (DC) for each of the 76 districts under WEE-RDP coverage and the 
program would also establish seven regional offices for coordination across the provinces under them. 
Additionally, a team of 3 SOs (two female and one male) would be hired for every 30 CDCs covered for the first 
two years, which would then be reduced to 3 SOs per district in the remaining three years of implementation 
once the speed and scale of the program had increased sufficiently and most of the VSLAs were formed. Likewise, 
a team of 3 VFs (again two female and one male) would be deployed for every 10 CDCs for 2 years and 
subsequently for every 20 CDCs in Years 3-5. This same implementation model would be proposed for the FPs 
(who would be asked to on board VFs as well) so that at exit there is a common implementation architecture for 
the program. Selection of the sub-national positions will be done through a competitive process managed by 
MRRD at the provincial level. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Based on the AREDP experiences and lessons learnt, the proposed project, WEE-RDP is designed to be a 
more women centric program that is in better alignment with the WEE-NPP objectives. It will cover a total 
of 76 districts across all 34 provinces in the country with an average of 2 districts covered per province. 
More than two thirds of these districts overlap with the ongoing CCAP and therefore the WEE-RDP will 
benefit from the community mobilization and capacity building (including a range of participatory analysis 
and tools) that have been done as part of the former. At this stage it is envisaged that, the environmental 
and social adverse impacts will be insignificant, minor and reversible in nature. The environmental impacts 
may include issues with health, safety and labor hygiene as well as concerns on handling and disposal of 
agro-based wastes. However, given the scope and scale of planned businesses, the impact are minor and 
easily manageable. The environmental and social safeguards issues will be managed through a framework 
approach, and if required the framework will include necessary provisions to spell out with additional 
safeguards tools and plans which will be used throughout the project life.  


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. 
The access to finance under compoent-2 and the 
provision of seed capital (revolving fund) for VSLAs 
under subcomponent 3 and  may cause some 
adverse environmental and social impacts including 
occupational health and safety issues. The 
environmental and health and safety concerns may 
arise from different enterprises including agro-
businesses, food processing machinery, chicken 
farms, carpets weaving and other handcraft 
industries etc.  
Similarly, the project has also triggered Pest 
Management OP/BP 4.09 to ensure address safe 
utilization of pesticide and other associated risks 
related to agri-business. A ToR for Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) has been prepared by the client . The 
project has adopted a framework approach, as the 
specific locations and details of activities will only be 
determined by the borrower during project 
implementation.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) prescribes 
directions and procedures that would avoid, 
mitigate, or minimize adverse environmental and 
social impacts and it will also spell out the policies, 
guidelines and procedures including mitigation plans 
to minimize and mitigate the likelihood of envisaged 
negative impacts. The ToR for preparation of the 
PMP is annexed in the project ESMF.   
The ESMF was prepared, consulted, cleared and 
disclosed before project appraisal and the required 
mitigation plans for sub-project and businesses 
activities under WEERDP will be identified during 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The project is owned, designed and will be 
implemented and supervised by the MRRD, which is 
a Government Agency and therefore the OP/BP 4.03 
is not triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk to the natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk on Forest. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 (Pest Management) is triggered, since under 
component-3 the project operations will lead the 
EGs (Enterprise Groups) to use pesticides for 
Agricultural related works and agri-business related 
activities.  
 
The Client will prepare an Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) during project implementation stage. The 
PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted 
and disclosed. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there are no 
activities that will impact the quality of physical 
cultural resources as defined under the policy. 
However, the ESMF will also comprise guidelines for 
Chance Find Procedures according to national laws. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 
4.10 in the country that could potentially benefit or 
be adversely affected by the Project’s activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The World Bank’s operational policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered, since the 
project will not have land acquisition and 
resettlement, in case of land requirement, the ESMF 
will provide guidelines and provisions on land 
acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 
approach, or the Government provides government 
land to the community for sub-project 
implementation, requiring no resettlement and/or 
compensation for losses, and the land should be free 
of squatters and any dispute.  
The RSA concurs on the proposal not to trigger OP 
4.12 given that there is no physical footprint; land 
acquisition or subsequent impacts of physical or 
economic resettlement or loss of access to resources 
are not anticipated. The ESMF includes a section on 
land acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 

=
method, if that should occur during project 
implementation. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not have any activity involving 
dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project does not involve any activity that will 
affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project does not involve any activity in any know 
disputed area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered for the project hence the project is an Environmental Safeguards Category-B. The project 
under component 2 and 3 is intended to develop WSGs/VSLAs/EGs and PAs who would be provided with access to 
funds by multiple agencies. The funding would lead to village/community level businesses in various selected 
provinces. Although, the scope and nature of these businesses are not known at appraisal stage, however it is 
predicted that such businesses may have minor health and safety issues. The environmental and social safeguards risk 
rating for WEE-RDP is thus Moderate: due to insignificant negative impact on health, safety and environmental aspect 
from the project related operations.  
 
OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management is also triggered as agricultural activities supported under Component 3 could lead 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producer Associations (PAs) to use pesticides for agriculture related works and 
agribusiness related activities. The client will prepare an Pest Management Plan (PMP) during implementation to 
mitigate the risks from this. The PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted, and disclosed during 
implementation. 
 
Likewise, activities under the project are not expected to have major adverse social impacts.  Systematic involvement 
of the local community throughout the planning and implementation of sub-projects will underpin the identification of 
potential negative social impacts and corresponding mitigation measures to be included in the ESMPs. Given the 
economic activities under the EGs and PAs, there is a potential risk of child labor. The project will therefore update 
and refine the ‘child labor’ strategy that had been used under AREDP. Training on labor safety will also be part of the 
training modules for EGs/PAs. Similarly, as global evidence shows, there can potentially be an enhanced risk of gender 
based violence (GBV) when working on women's economic empowerment. Although, there hasn’t been any evidence 
of increased GBV under AREDP as a result of engaging male community members, especially village elders and 
Mullah’s, this could be a potential risk to beneficiaries given that the focus now is only on women. To mitigate this 
risk, the project as part of its mobilization activities will discuss the importance women economic empowerment from 
Islamic point of view (the fact that women are given Mahr is to ensure their access to finance and making them 
empower financially) as well as highlight the good practices in Islam (wife of prophet being a merchant). Furthermore 
as part of capacity building and training activities under each component, the project will train women on soft skills 
including their wellbeing and how to manage/resolve conflict within family and community. The VSLA and SHGs will 


also serve as a safe-space to discuss/tackle potential GBV issues. 
 
As the project is owned, designed, implemented, and supervised by the MRRD (a Government Ministry), the OP/BP 
4.03 on Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities does not apply. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any harmful indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable. 
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To manage the environmental and socials safeguards (ESS) issues during the project implementation stage, the client 
has adopted a framework approach and prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF), 
which is consulted with stakeholders. Clearance has been obtained from the WB and disclosed officially. The ESMF has 
necessary provisions to prepare required safeguards mitigation measures including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and checklist to affectively address risk related issues during project implementation. Based 
on the experience of similar projects, notably AREDP that was managed by the same Ministry and team, most of the 
communities in the selected villages have no capacity/awareness to tackle risks associated with the day to day 
businesses under planned SGs/VSLAs. However, MRRD as an implementing agency has years of experience with 
similar projects and is therefore expected to provide the required technical assistance and capacity building to ensure 
that the provisions in EMSF are implemented. The project will hire an ESS focal officer at HQ level, as well as appoint 
safeguards focal points at each provincial level, the terms of references (TOR) for whom will need to be approved by 
the Bank before recruitment. The ESMF will guide the preparation of any Social Impact Assessments (SIA) and ESMPs, 
if required. The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s 
external website on August 25, 2018. The ESMF contains the terms of reference for the proposed pest management 
plan. The PMP will be prepared and disclosed during project implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities and rural women who will be the beneficiaries of the project. The project 
will undertake a range of training and capacity building efforts with the target groups under each of the Components 
of the project. This will include awareness raising with regards to the ESS provisions in the ESMF. The project will also 
leverage similar efforts and capacity building done for CDCs through the Citizens Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP). 
The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s external website 
on August 25, 2018. 
 
 



 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Guinea Integrated Agricultural Development Project (GIADP) (P164326) 

 
 

  
Jul 23, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC22885 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Guinea P164326  Guinea Integrated 
Agricultural 
Development Project 
(GIADP/PDAIG) 
(P164326) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Apr 02, 2018 May 08, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Guinea West Africa Agricultural 
Productivity Program 
(WAAPP) Project 
coordination unit 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project development objective is to increase productivity, processing and market transactions between producers 
and other actors participating in targeted agricultural values chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)   40.00  

Total Project Cost   40.00  

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 



B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Guinea is fortunate to possess considerable agricultural and mining resources. It possesses the world’s richest 

deposits of bauxite and iron as well as abundant agricultural land and water resources (“water tower” of West Africa). 
However, Guinea has yet to take advantage of this endowment to achieve sustainable economic growth and poverty 
reduction. Guinea remains one of Africa’s poorest countries and is classified among the Low Income and Food Deficit 
Countries by the World Bank. Per-capita income was approximately US$490 in 2016, less than one third of the regional 
average (US$1,505), and the majority of the population continues to live in extreme poverty. According to UNDP’s 
2015 Human Development Report1, Guinea ranks 182th out of 188 countries in terms of the Human Development 
Index (HDI). Guinea’s HDI of 0.411 is below the average for countries in the low human development group (0.505) 
and also for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (0.518).  

 
2. Guinea past economic growth has been too slow and too inconsistent to reduce poverty. Since the mid-80s, 

economic growth increased due in part to the implementation of the Programme de Redressement Economique et 
Financier (Financial and Economic Redressing Program - PREF)2. Annual economic growth averaged 4.5 percent during 
the 1990-97 period, outpacing population growth (3.1 percent). Poverty declined and most social indicators 
improved3. However, these gains were short-lived. After 2000, the country experienced a series of internal political 
crises, and was negatively impacted by conflicts in neighboring countries (Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote d’Ivoire)4. 
Economic growth slowed and poverty increased from 49 percent in 2002 to 53 percent in 2007 and more than 55 
percent in 2012. As is typical for many Sub-Saharan African countries, most of the poor are living in rural areas with a 
poverty rate of 65 percent against 32 percent in urban area (2012). Per recent detailed surveys of food security in 
Guinea5, close to a third of the country’s households (30.5 percent) are food insecure. 

 
3. Economic growth resumed after 2010 following the presidential elections that resulted in a return to constitutional 

order. Macroeconomic policies improved, structural reforms were carried out in key sectors and the country’s 
cooperation with external partners improved. Guinea reached the Highly-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Completion 
Point in 2012 with the cancellation of two-thirds of its external debt. However, growth again faltered in 2013-2015 
with the Ebola outbreak which had a devastating impact on economic activity6. Economic growth dropped drastically 
to 2.4 percent in 2013, then 1.1 percent and 0.1 percent respectively in 2014 and 2015. GDP per capita declined 
accordingly to -0.9 percent, -2.1 and -2.2 over those years. The Ebola crisis took a heavy toll on the agriculture and the 
food sectors. Guinea like other African countries is highly vulnerable to internal and external shocks that can wipe out 
hard-earned development gains, and worsen already entrenched poverty. However, in 2016 strong growth was 
recorded (6.7 percent) driven by a strong harvest and the mining sector. 

 
4. Mining and agriculture are the dominant sectors in the country. The agriculture sector represents 20 percent of GDP. 

The mining sector currently consists of industrial-scale mining of bauxite, alumina and gold, and accounts for about 

 
1 2015 Human Development Report (HDR) Work for Human Development; UNDP 2015. 
2 Supported by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, focusing on macro-economic stabilization and the liberalization 

of the economy. 
3 Between 1985 and 1997, primary school enrolment increased from 29% to 51%; access to primary health care from 10% to 40%; 

access to drinkable water from 28% to 55%. 
4 Guinea recorded more than half-a million refugee.  
5 “Evaluation de la sécurité alimentaire en situation d’urgence », PAM, July 2015; and « Guinea, Nutritional Assessment », Feed the 
Future, USAID, 24 November 2015. 
6 The World Bank estimates Ebola economic impact to 0.7 -2.3 % of GDP during 2014-2015. 


20 percent of GDP, 80 percent of foreign currency earnings and 20 to 25 percent of government revenue. However, 
the extractive industries do not create enough direct jobs opportunities. Secondly, strong investment and policies 
from the Government are a condition to diversify the economy. Thirdly, the sector increases governance risks and the 
potential for corruption. There is a strong risk that Guinea’s economy could become subject to the “resource curse” 
resulting from an overreliance on extractive industries. Such undesirable developments can be avoided by increasing 
investment in agricultural values chains to increase productivity and competitiveness, as well as investing in transport 
and marketing infrastructure and energy to facilitate economic diversification, inclusive private sector development 
and job creation. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. The economy of Guinea is not sufficiently diversified, and structural transformation is incomplete. The agricultural 

sector is, along with the mining sector, the main engine of the economy7. Contrary to mining, which provides most of 

the country’s export revenues but creates little employment, agriculture still occupies approximately 80 percent of 

the active population. As a result, sustainable agricultural development is central to Guinea’s economic and social 

development agenda.  

6. Guinea is richly endowed with natural resources: 6.2 million ha of cultivable land, abundant rainfall and varied agro-

climatic conditions favorable to the production of a wide variety of cash and food crops. This considerable potential 

is largely underutilized. Only 25 percent of cultivable land is cultivated (including fallow land, with less than 10 percent 

cropped every year). Only 32,000 ha have been developed for irrigation out of a potential of 360,000 ha (less than 10 

percent).8 Agricultural productivity is very low, using extensive, rainfed agricultural and livestock farming systems. 

Farms are small and produce primarily for household consumption, with very little marketed surplus. The main food 

crops are cereals (rice, maize and fonio), root crops (cassava, yam, sweet potato and potato) and groundnut. Rice is 

by far the main crop representing more than two thirds of all cultivated land, and produced by 80 percent of 

agricultural households. It is also the main food import of the country. Women play particularly a key role in rice 

production, processing and marketing. The main cash crops are coffee, cotton, cashew, oil palm and rubber. Their 

importance in Agricultural GDP is negligible and exports are low despite the potential and market opportunity.  

7. Guinea's agriculture is key for poverty reduction, job creation and food security. The country has not been able to 

build on its natural advantages and on the traditional expertise of its farmers. Agriculture in Guinea is entangled in a 

vicious circle starting from lack of investment, and distorted incentives and interference in markets, leading to low 

productivity and competitiveness. Producers face high costs of factors and inputs, as well as high costs of 

transformation and commercialization. Unable to invest in quality, their products are sold at low prices, and face 

significant challenges reaching domestic and export markets.  

8. As a result, Guinean agriculture is missing the positive outcomes that would have been generated from oversea 

trade and market-oriented agribusiness, while other countries in the region have become world exporters of cash 

crops. Agriculture in Guinea represents 11% of exports and 17% of imports (PNIASA 2012). Agricultural exports are 

declining. In 2013, only five agricultural products were exported overseas: coffee, cocoa, rubber, cashew and mango. 

Cotton and banana, once Guinean major exports, have disappeared from overseas market. Guinean fruits and 

vegetables, as well as palm oil and rice are sold in neighboring countries, that are less demanding in terms of quality. 

 
7 20% for agriculture, 41% for the industrial sector (of which 15%for the mining sector) and 34%for the service sector. 
8 Of which 9 000 ha of bottom land (20% of potential), 15 000 ha of mangrove (13%), 8 000 ha of flood plains (6%). 

To break the spell, a holistic approach to agriculture is needed, focused on markets, and enhancing upstream and 

downstream linkages. 

9. Agricultural growth has been driven by the increase in cultivated land estimated at 3% per year, consistent with the 

increase in rural population. Agriculture suffers from very low productivity constrained by a combination of limited 

use of improved technologies, failures in input, output and financial markets, and land tenure issues. Subsistence 

farmers, who account for 95 percent of the cultivated area, use very few agriculture inputs (e.g. improved seeds, 

fertilizer, pesticides, irrigation, and mechanization). Improved seeds are used on less than 8 percent of cultivated land 

with only 7 kg of fertilizer used per hectare, per year (among the lowest use in Africa). Yields are very low and have 

been stagnant for many years at less than 1t/ha for rainfed rice and 5 tons/ha for cassava. Many production areas are 

cut off from markets for part or most of the year, access to financial institutions is nearly non-existent and post-harvest 

losses are high (rice: 10 percent, maize: 15-20 percent, roots and tuber: 20-45 percent, fruits and vegetables: 30-60 

percent) due to poor cultural practices and post-harvest handling, the lack of storage and deficient transport services.  

Processing is negligible and mostly small-scale. The project would be instrumental in addressing these challenges.  

10. Animal husbandry is an important activity for the rural population. Guinea has a large herd of mostly local breeds, 

hardy and trypanotolerant9. Animal husbandry accounts for approximately 20 percent of Agricultural GDP and 4 

percent of total GDP. It provides revenues to approximately 30 percent of agricultural households. It also provides 

much needed animal protein to the population, and thus contributes to food security and nutritional status. Livestock 

systems are mostly traditional, extensive and with low productivity. The country has significant advantages for 

livestock production possessing large tracts of natural pasture land, water resources and ample availability of 

agricultural sub-products. Thus, despite very low public investment (less than 5 percent of public investment is in the 

agricultural sector), Guinea has registered reasonable long-term growth (3.8 percent per year). However, competition 

for land with agriculture is increasingly causing conflict, and constraining prevailing extensive, transhumant cattle 

raising systems. National production cannot keep up with demand, and the country has experienced a significant 

increase in livestock imports, mostly poultry and milk.  

11. Over the last few decades, increasing population pressures have been responsible for an accelerating degradation 

of the natural resource base, most visible in mangrove areas along the coast and in Guinée Forestière. These anthropic 

factors have been amplified by climate change. Data since 1960 show a continuous increase in temperature and 

decline in rainfall, together with an increased variability in the start of the agricultural season and more frequent dry 

spells and floods. Although difficult to predict with any precision, it is anticipated that these trends will continue in 

the future, with important negative impacts on ecosystems and agricultural production with a decrease in crop yields 

estimated at 10 to 25 percent by 205010. To mitigate these adverse developments, Guinea has prepared its Programme 

d’Action National pour l’Adaptation aux Changements Climatiques (National Action Program for Climate Change 

Adaptation - PANA, 2007) which identifies preventive and adaptation measures such as development of irrigation, 

development and dissemination of drought-resistant varieties, protection of forests and watersheds, improved soil 

and water conservation practices, environmental education, etc.  

12. Regarding institutional context, the Government of Guinea has long recognized the critical role of agriculture for 

economic growth and poverty reduction. It has prepared and implemented a series of strategies and plans. The most 

recent are: (i) the Plan National d’Investissement Agricole et de Sécurité Alimentaire (National Agricultural and Food 

 
9 Estimated in 2012 at 5.5 million cattle, 4.0 million small ruminants, 105.000 pigs and 24 million poultry. 
10 Various models forecast a decline in rainfall of 100-to-400 mm and an increase in temperature of 1.5 to 3.0 degrees by 2050.  



Security Investment Plan - PNIASA, 2013-2017), (ii) the Programme Accéléré de Sécurité Alimentaire et Nutritionnelle 

et de Développement Agricole Durable (Accelerated Program of Food and Nutritional Security, and Sustainable 

Agricultural Development - PASANDAD, 2016-2020), and (iii) the Plan National de Développment Economique et Social 

(National Economic and Social Development Plan – PNDES, 2016-2020). PASANDAD is a strategy, an orientation 

framework and a program fully integrated in the PNDES and aiming at improving food and nutrition security, 

accelerating agricultural production (crop, animal, fish and forestry), improving commercialization, storage and 

processing, and reducing foods imports. PNDES is targeting a primary sector growth rate of 8.1 percent by 2020 

horizon by setting up agro-poles across the districts focusing on the development of values chains with high value-

added, a core component of PASANDAD. Also, PASANDAD is seeking to spur implementation of PNIASA which will be 

completed on December 31, 2017.  

13. A detailed analysis of PNIASA achievements has been initiated in the context of preparation of the successor 

program (PNIASA 2) for the 2018-22 period. This assessment is on-going and preliminary results from 2015 showed 

clearly that, although some positive results were achieved, most of PNIASA’s strategic objectives will not be met: 

▪ Actual growth in the sector has been lower than the PNIASA annual 6 percent growth target with 5.1 percent in 

2013, 2.7 in 2014 and 4.1 in 2015. Like most of Sub-Saharan African countries, Guinea did not meet the ECOWAS 

and CAADP 6 percent agricultural growth goal;  

▪ About rice production, the objectives - a 300 percent increase in production through increased use of irrigation, 

a doubling of yields (from 1.2 to 2.45 t/ha) and the elimination of rice imports - will not be achieved. Rice 

production continued to increase at about 3% per year, largely through the expansion of cultivated areas, and rice 

imports have increased;  

▪ Regarding food crop diversification, while satisfactory results have been achieved with maize and fonio 

production which has exceeded PNIASA’s objectives, the production of cassava has not; 

▪ With respect to cash crop production and exports, there has been no significant increase, as the current business 

environment related to access to markets, inputs and services is still not conducive to large private investments 

in agricultural sector;    

▪ Concerning livestock production, despite very little public support with less than 2 percent of the agricultural 

budget, the sector continued to show reasonable annual growth of about 4 percent on the strength of its 

traditional extensive systems and also of the development of peri-urban poultry production;  

▪ Regarding development of infrastructure, only 1,400 km of rural roads have been rehabilitated through 2015, 

against an objective of 3,000 km (47 percent), and only 10,000 ha brought under irrigation to date against the end 

of the Plan target of 110,000 ha. 

 

14. The disappointing results registered so far are due in part to the impact of the Ebola epidemic, as well as a large 

shortfall in the PNIASA financing plan. The financing plan suffered from two clear weaknesses: (i) an extreme 

dependency on external sources (approximately 90 percent of financing); and (ii) the low level of financial resources 

mobilized at the start (less than 25 percent). In fact, annual budget allocations for the sector averaged 5 percent, much 

lower than anticipated by PNIASA’s financing plan and the Maputo objective of 10% public spending on agriculture. 

As lessons learnt from PNIASA underperformance, it is worthy to have ambitious development objective, but 

mobilization of required resources and its efficient distribution and use across the activities driving growth are critical 

to meet it. Also, whatever the agricultural potential and opportunities offered by the country, private sector could be 

attracted if and only the business environment is favorable. 

15. Like the new PNDES approved in June 2017 by the Parliament, PNIASA 2 will be consistent with the African Union’s 

Agenda 2063 for the structural transformation of Africa, the Paris Agreement (COP 21) on climate change and the 

UN’s Universal Program for Sustainable Development.  PNIASA 2 will also be based on the main principles of the 

Malabo Declaration (2014) which reaffirms that agriculture is at the heart of Africa’s economic and social development 

while enlarging governments’ commitments to areas, such as rural infrastructure, natural resource management and 

nutrition which, are critical for agricultural growth and poverty reduction.  

16. Realigning its interventions to the PASANDAD, World bank will support the development of value chains and the 

emergence of commercial agriculture, complementing ongoing operations with (i) the proposed IDA operation 

focusing on selected staple crops for domestic and regional market, (ii) an IBRD-enclave operation focusing on 

potentially exportable crops for international market, (iii) another IDA operation on rural mobility and connectivity, 

and (iv) a Development Policy Operation (DPO) supporting structural reform in the governance of the sector and 

particularly the agricultural subsidy program for more targeting, transparency and efficiency. In addition, a review of 

the agricultural sector and the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) are being completed. The proposed project will 

draw heavily on findings from these analytical works.  

17. Progress is being made by the Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-G) on strengthening institutional capacity 

and by the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) on reinforcing research, regional transfer of 

innovations and improved technologies to farmers, and rebuilding seeds production systems. Building on these 

achievements, to pave way for structural agricultural transformation for inclusive economic growth and poverty 

reduction, Guinea needs to: (i) increase agricultural productivity through a climate-smart intensification and 

sustainable mechanization of the production systems to create jobs, leveraging on WAAPP; (ii) develop and integrate 

agricultural values chains and food systems to increase value addition; (iii) improve competitiveness and develop 

agricultural markets seizing upon growing domestic, regional and international food demand; (iv) reinforce basic 

production infrastructure and logistics to enable irrigation, connection, connectivity or mobility, storage and agro-

processing for a better agri-business environment more attractive to the private sector. Also, a special attention 

should be paid to finding ways to attract youth to modern agribusiness including access to water and land-efficient 

technologies, modern labor-saving irrigation and agro-processing technologies, and advisory and financial services. 

The project will be instrumental in contributing to this development agenda. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The last closing Guinea Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2014-2017) focused on: (i) improving governance and 

service delivery, (ii) stimulating growth and economic diversification, and (iii) strengthening human capital. A 

Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is being completed. The SCD identified two hypotheses and the five most critical 

binding constraints and opportunities facing Guinea in achieving the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme 

poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The first hypothesis arguing that poor political and economic governance is 

at the center of Guinea’s development difficulties, leading to natural resources mismanagement, institutional 

fragmentation, and ineffective public investment. The second hypothesis is that low levels of structural transformation 

are affected by unproductive agriculture and poorly planned urbanization. Guinea’s position regarding agriculture is 

interesting since Guinea is performing significantly below its potential despite abundant rainfall and agricultural land. 

For a variety of historical reasons, agriculture was not given prominence in Guinea, and the potential for agricultural 

development remains largely underexploited. The three critical binding constraints related to agriculture are the 

following. First, although resilient, Guinea’s agriculture is underperforming, partly due to farmers’ limited access to 

quality inputs (fertilizer, seeds, and equipment). Second, Guinea’s poor infrastructure (road, ports and logistics 

services, power and telecommunications) is a major obstacle to private sector development. Finally, access to finance 

is difficult for smallholders and entrepreneurs and low levels of private investment and undercapitalization are 

manifest. Taken together, the improvement in these constraints will be able to help Guinea move forward. The project 

will be instrumental in addressing most of these constraints in the agricultural sector by improving productivity, value 

chain diversification and integration, market development and competitiveness, infrastructures and logistics to enable 

agribusiness development and create job. A multisector approach will be used bringing Agriculture, Trade and 

Competitiveness, and Transport Global Practices to team up. The project will support anticipatively the 

implementation of the upcoming CPS which will be guided by findings from the SCD. The project is also consistent 

with the Africa Regional Strategy. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
19. The Project development objective is to increase productivity, processing and market transactions between producers 

and other actors participating in targeted agricultural values chains in the project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
20. The proposed PDO level performance indicators are: i) Number of Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services 

of which female (at least 40%) and youth (at least 10%); ii) Increase in productivity (ton/ha) of targeted agricultural 

commodities by direct beneficiaries; (iii) Volume of targeted agricultural commodities processed with the new 

facilities (t); and (iv) Increase in volume of market sales of targeted agricultural commodities by Project-supported 

beneficiaries (%). A detailed result monitoring framework and indicators would be developed during project 

preparation.  

21. It is expected that the project would result in increased productivity and production coupled with reduced post-

harvest losses, more integrated agricultural systems, improved product range and quality, more efficient processing 

with a better access to facilities, and improved marketing and mobility, thereby generating additional incomes for 

producers and other operators in the targeted value chains. The preliminary selected value chains are rice, maize, 

horticulture (vegetables and fruits), livestock (poultry in particular) and aquaculture (fresh, dry and smoked fish) for 

which market opportunities exist and productivity gains are achievable through better water control and adoption of 

proven technologies leveraging on WAAPP. These commodities present potentially profitable business opportunities 

that can attract youth and the private sector and contribute directly to rural poverty reduction as production is 

dominated by poor smallholders. The project will be gender-sensitive targeting both men and women as key players 

of the value chains. It is expected also that the project would develop an innovative business model for youth insertion 

in agribusiness replicable throughout the region. 

22. The project would contribute to integrated agricultural development to improve food security, income and youth 

employment. This would be achieved by improving productive infrastructure, integrating values chains, and 

developing agribusinesses and markets. An integrated approach would be used vertically along the targeted values 

chains and horizontally across the selected agricultural subsectors including crops, livestock and aquaculture.  

 

D. Concept Description 


23. The design of the proposed project would build upon the achievements and lessons learned from the 

implementation of on-going or closed projects and programs in Guinea and elsewhere in the region. Close 

coordination and synergy would be sought with ongoing or upcoming projects and programs, and approaches would 

be harmonized to leverage support in critical areas, optimize development outcomes and avoid duplication. In 

particular, partnerships would be sought with (i) the project financed by Agence Française de Développement (French 

Development Agency - AFD) and the European Union (EU) for developing rice-cum-fish production; (ii) the forthcoming 

AFD-financed rural road project; (iii) the Third Village Community Project (PACV) financed by IDA and AFD; (iv) the 

West African Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) financed by IDA; (v) the Agriculture Sector Support Project 

(PASA-G); (vi) the Agricultural Services Support Project financed by USAID under its « Feed the Future » Program; (vii) 

the Growth Pole Project under preparation for funding by the Abu Dhabi Development Fund; (viii) the upcoming rural 

mobility and connectivity project financed by IDA; and (ix) the future IBRD-enclave project.  

24. The design of the project considers the growing need for Guinea to transformits agriculture sector by increasing 

substantially productivity and resilience against climate change, integrating values chains, developing markets, 

improving competitiveness, and reinforcing infrastructure to foster economic growth, improve food security and 

nutrition, and contribute to end extreme poverty. With the increasing concern for youth employment, it is more than 

ever critical to enable agriculture to offer attractive business opportunities for youth. The project will focus support 

on (i) a selected number of value chains that are both important in terms of food and nutrition security, and have 

significant development potential to respond to market opportunities; (ii) a selected geographical area to resolve the 

binding constraints on productivity, quality, value-addition and market linkages. 

25. The proposed project would consist of four interconnected components structured as follows: 

Component 1:  Supporting productive infrastructure and logistics systems 
 

26.  This component would support critical public and private infrastructure and logistics systems required to better 
valorize land and water resources to improve productivity and competitiveness of agricultural value chains. It would 
consist of three sub-components: 
 

27. Subcomponent 1.1: Water control and management. This subcomponent would consist of improving water 

management and small scale irrigation systems within existing irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated or developed. 

Land planning and water management are critical in strengthening resilience and increasing productivity and 

competitiveness. This would enable the expansion of cropped areas, the mechanization of production systems and 

production two to three times a year and consequently, yield increases. Increasing the cropping intensity is yet an 

opportunity to be exploited for Guinea agricultural development. Less than 10% of the irrigable land estimated at 

360,000 ha is developed. Also, the project would contribute to restore and develop under-used low-land (9,000 ha 

out of a potential of 180,000 ha) and flood plains (8,000 ha out of a potential of 200,000 ha). A master planning study 

on irrigation is underway and will inform the interventions areas and perimeters to be targeted. By targeting some 

works with no or limited environmental impact such as catchment weirs and drainage networks, supporting small-

scale irrigation systems and promoting the adoption of efficient water and land management technologies, the project 

would contribute significantly to developing irrigated agriculture in line with PANSANDAD priorities. It would support 

the use of improved labor-saving irrigation systems to modernize horticultural production, alleviate women’s 

irrigation burden and attract youth to this business. It would finance water user associations and develop management 

procedures and guidelines to ensure the sustainability of irrigation infrastructures. The project would aim at a 

substantial increase in yield in the irrigated perimeters, leveraging on WAAPP for producer access to improved 

certified seeds and technologies.  

28. Subcomponent 1.2: Storage, conditioning and logistics systems. This subcomponent would address the lack of 

agricultural machinery, storage, conditioning and logistics assets that prevent value chain development. It would seek 

to improve postharvest management facilities to improve quality, lower costs and enhance competitiveness, 

particularly for domestically produced rice and horticultural crops. In particular, the project would finance: (i) storage 

facilities for adequate conservation of the harvest; (ii) agro-processing equipment to reduce post-harvest losses and 

allow processing and packaging of agricultural produces for value addition; (iii) production and processing facilities for 

livestock (poultry and milk) and fish produces (smoked and dry); (iv) agricultural market infrastructure; and (v) 

processing platforms in targeted large production zones and in partnership with the upcoming IBRD-Enclave 

operation. Investment selection would be based on selection criteria including economic analyses. Investments would 

require a business plan, a mechanism for sustainable operation, and be tied to market demand.  Private sector 

involvement in those investments could be structured either through direct investment, joint ventures or PPP projects.  

29. Finally, the project would work closely with the Rural Mobility and Connectivity project under preparation to unlock 

production areas, connect farmers to markets, and attract private sector investment in agricultural values chains.  The 

required roads to be built in the targeted areas would be jointly identified. 

Component 2: Increasing agricultural productivity 
 

30. Subcomponent 2.1: Access to quality inputs and machinery. The project would leverage on WAAPP to enable the 

wide diffusion of improved technologies including certified seeds of improved varieties, fertilizers, best and 

environmentally-friendly practices for the intensification of production systems. The project’s emphasis would be on 

supporting appropriate and sustainable agricultural mechanization through the transfer of improved motorized 

machinery developed throughout the region leveraging on WAAPP, the development of machinery services and 

leasing systems. The project would provide financial and technical assistance for entrepreneurs developing 

agricultural machinery and using appropriate technology to develop prototypes and systems.  It would engage these 

entrepreneurs via business plan competitions and matchmaking with regional and international incubators for 

innovation and appropriate technology.  

31. Subcomponent 2.2: Institutional strengthening. Leveraging on WAAPP, the project would provide support to the 

national extension service, the Agence National de la Promotion Rurale et du Conseil Agricole (National Agency for 

Rural Promotion and Agricultural Council - ANPROCA), strengthening its institutional capacity through financial and 

logistic support, and capacity building. Efforts would be put on connecting and articulating agricultural extension 

services to research to enable dissemination of improved technologies and agricultural advisory services. 

Component 3: Developing and integrating agricultural values chains  
 

32. Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity building and value chain coordination. Under this sub-component, the project would 

strengthen the technical and management skills of producers’ groups including youth and women’s groups, 

cooperatives, professional associations and other stakeholders benefiting from the project. With support from agro-

processing research institutes, more sophisticated agribusiness firms, NGOs and entrepreneurship incubators, training 

would focus on improving and upgrading agro-processing technologies. Training may concern packaging and 

compliance with food safety standards for quality assurance while promoting artisanal agro-processing. Training in 


accounting, operations, using technology for business, financial management and marketing may be provided. The 

project would develop, adapt and/or deliver training on a range of business and technical subjects. Innovative personal 

initiative training that encourages entrepreneurial thinking and problem solving may also be delivered. Building on 

WAAPP experiences, innovation platforms may be created or reinforced for some value chains to develop partnerships 

among stakeholders. These efforts would build on, and may form partnerships with past and present training and 

capacity building efforts of World Bank Group partners, and other donors and organizations. IFC’s Agribusiness team 

may help replicate its Agribusiness Leadership Program which aims to professionalize producers/cooperatives by 

improving their technical and managerial capacity, and supporting them to access finance. The project may collaborate 

with IFAD’s program (Plan National d’Appui aux Acteurs des Filières Agricoles) whose objective is also to provide 

capacity building to farmer’s organization in the same value chains targeted by this project. FAO and AFD have similar 

programs in different value chains. Finally, for coordination of all initiatives on farmer’s professionalization, the project 

may work within the local Market Ecosystem Alliance (AMEA) platform, under creation by the IFC’s Agribusiness 

advisory team, which aims to standardize tools and mechanisms for farmers’ professionalization. For SMEs, more 

involved at the middle of value-chains (processing, packaging, storage, transportation), the recently-created SME 

Business center under Guinea MSME Project has the potential to become a robust platform to provide technical and 

management capacity to SME. The project would take stock of the SME Business Center’s development with an aim 

to partnering with it to deliver technical assistance and services.  

33.  Subcomponent 3.2: Access to finance for agribusiness development. This subcomponent would promote youth 

entrepreneurship and private sector investment in agribusiness through a matching grant mechanism to be defined 

in consultation with stakeholders. The project would support development of Micro, Small and Medium Agribusiness 

Enterprises (MSMAEs) to increase domestic production and processing of high-quality rice, horticultural produces 

(mango, pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), and livestock, particularly for poultry and dairy products, and fish 

(aquaculture, dry and smoked fish etc.). The percentage of cost sharing required by beneficiaries would be determined 

during the project design phase. The matching grants may be disbursed through one or more windows each targeting 

specific types of beneficiaries, kinds of financial support or objectives. Training and capacity building activities would 

be made available to complement financing. The project would develop relationships with financial institutions to 

encourage co-financing of beneficiaries’ activities. Under this subcomponent, support would be given to the creation 

of integrated aquaculture-poultry-rice firms leveraging experience developed in Nigeria under the West and Central 

Africa Council for Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF/WECARD) Multi-Donor Trust Fund.  In addition, this 

subcomponent would support the development of agricultural machinery services led by youth groups or producers’ 

organizations.   

34. Subcomponent 3.3: Formation of productive alliances for cash crops. The productive alliance is an economic 

agreement between a group of organized producers and a buyer (intermediary, wholesaler, agro-processor or 

processor, international mining company) in which all parties assume risks, provide resources, and share the benefits, 

such that the agreement can continue over the medium and long term. The subcomponent’s main output would be 

the implementation of subprojects with clearly defined and sustainable goals, and cost sharing accompanied by 

technical assistance and business development services. It would help build productive alliances between rural 

producers and their buyers (intermediaries, wholesalers, processors or exporters) for cash crops value chains, and 

finance part of joint business plans. By formalizing relationships among value chain actors, the project would facilitate 

access to finance and expand opportunities for investment in cash crop value chains ultimately increasing the revenues 

of producers and industrial firms, improving the quality of Guinean products, and increasing exports and value added.  



35. This subcomponent would leverage past and ongoing efforts in Guinea to study and develop productive alliances. The 

World Bank and the IFC have undertaken studies to identify potential sectors and potential value chain participants 

for productive alliances. This effort would be linked to IFC’s network of more sophisticated agribusinesses that may 

be interested in buying from producers’ associations associated with the project. This subcomponent would link with 

IFC and World Bank work with financial institutions to de-risk, identify opportunities and increasingly lending to 

agribusinesses. Furthermore, the project would leverage ongoing IFC initiatives supporting the development of the 

local content in the mining sector specifically to overcome obstacles to selling food to the mines.  

36. Subcomponent 3.4: Provision of the market information system: This subcomponent would finance collaboration 

with producers’ and marketing associations to provide agribusinesses with the information they need to plan their 

operations and transact with their customers. The project would build upon pre-existing IT solutions in place where 

possible, or create new systems that are responsive to the needs of agribusinesses, their suppliers and their 

customers, and managed by market-oriented organizations. The goal would be to link producers to customers in 

markets in urban areas in Guinea and in neighboring countries, build business relationships between buyers and 

sellers, and facilitate transactions. A survey of market information systems initiatives and use, and an action plan 

would be prepared during project preparation.  

37. Subcomponent 3.5: Support to investment promotion in agricultural value chains. Through a results-based 

Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Investment Promotion Agency (APIP), this subcomponent would 

finance experts, targeted Technical Assistance (TA), consulting services, trainings, and IT development and equipment 

to facilitate private investments in agribusiness and cash crop value chains. Support for APIP under the Guinea MSME 

Development Project has increased the Agency’s capabilities, but agribusiness investing is and requires special 

attention. The new project would continue to support APIP so that it can attract and retain agribusiness investors, 

both foreign and domestic. This subcomponent would also fund efforts to improve public-private dialogue to inform 

policy decisions that take stock of the needs of agribusiness investors. The project would use the World Bank-

developed framework, “Enabling the Business of Agriculture,” to identify business environment constraints to 

investment support activities to overcome them.  

 

Component 4: Project implementation and coordination 
 

38. This component aims to ensure that the project is efficiently managed, monitored, and that performance and impacts 

are carefully tracked. It would: (i) finance the incremental expenses incurred in implementing the project through the 

project implementation unit (PIU) and the participating field implementing agencies and various service providers; (ii) 

provide technical assistance through consultancies, audits, and training to enhance implementation capacity of the 

PIU; (iii) finance communication and outreach activities; (iv) finance monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes 

and impacts; (v) support institutional strengthening to ensure sustainability of the project; and (vi) provision funds to 

address emergency demands arising from natural disasters or other shocks.  

39. Finally, the project may finance the agricultural census in partnership with others donors.  
 

  

  SAFEGUARDS 

 

A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
Activities with a physical footprint includes water control and management, building or rehabilitating storage facilities 

and establishment or development of Micro, Small and Medium Agribusiness Enterprises (MSMAEs) to increase domestic 
production and processing capacities for staple crops including high-quality rice, horticultural produces (mango, 
pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), livestock and particularly poultry and dairy produces, and fish produces (aquaculture, 
dry and smoked fish etc.). The physical locations and specific details of the proposed project interventions are not as yet 
known. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
This preliminary Borrower’s institutional Capacity for Safeguard policies will be completed during the project preparation 

to complete the information that are not yet available. The preliminary assessment considers:  
(i)-Policy framework:  
Article 19 (3) of the constitution states that: "the People has the right to the preservation of his heritage, culture and of 

its environment ".  Therefore, the environmental policy framework is rooted in the provisions of the Constitution. The 
Environment code was published on May 28, 1987. In November 8, 1989 the government published a Decree Regulating 
Impact Studies. 
(ii)-Operationalization of policy framework:  
The national Environmental and Social Assessment and ESIA review process is under the responsibility of the Ministry of 

the Environment through the Guinean Bureau of Studies and Environmental Assessment (BGEEE). It is part of its functions 
to monitoring and preserving the quality of the environment and advising the Government on the environmental issues. 
Since March 2013, the Government adopted a General Environmental Assessment Guide that provides project 

developers with technical support to carry out environmental and social impact studies necessary for a better analysis of 
their projects.  
(iii)-Resourcing 
In general, the ministry of environment and other state institutions in charge to handle environmental and social issues 

including BGEEE are poorly staffed.  
At the institutional level, environmental and social units are set up in the main sectors (agriculture, livestock and 

fisheries). At the decentralized level, the environmental monitoring committees (CPSE) exist.  
At the concept stage of the project, the structure that will host the PIU is not yet found.  Once defined, an in-depth 

assessment will be conducted and an action plan defined. The Unit will hire full time Environmental and Social 
Development Specialists during project preparation and implementation period.  
(iv)-Practice/outcomes/track record 
BGEEE statistics are not published yet annually  confirming that a robust archiving system will be necessary.  Despite the 

past experience with the WB safeguards policies implementation (WAAPP, PASAG, PRAO…) the borrower capacity to 
ensure the safeguards implementation in the in the satisfactory manner remains low and more capacity building will be 
needed including the logistic support to BGEEE. 
 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as B under this OP 
because its potential social and environmental risks 
are expected to moderate and mostly site specific, 
with no significant or long-term negative impacts. The 
potential environmental impacts are related to 
components 1, 2 and 3 activities ( Water control and 
management, building or rehabilitating storage 
facilities and establishment or development of Micro, 
Small and Medium Agribusiness Enterprises (MSMAEs) 
to increase domestic production and processing 
capacities for high-quality rice, horticultural produces 
(mango, pineapple, banana, potatoes etc.), livestock 
and particularly poultry and dairy produces, and fish 
produces (aquaculture, dry fish etc.).   An ESMF will be 
prepared and disclosed prior appraisal to guide the 
way that potential negative environmental and social 
impacts of future sub-projects (following the positive 
list) will be identified and mitigated during the project 
implementation. In the meantime, specific sites will be 
identified during the project preparation and 
ESIAs/EMPs prepared for the first year of the project 
implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD 

The decision to trigger or not this policy will be taken 
prior appraisal. Nevertheless, the project activities will 
avoid any negative impacts on the health and quality 
of forests. The project will avoid financing any activity 
that should have any negative impact in the natural 
forests. The ESMF will include sections relevant on 
how. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project activities will likely increase the use of 
chemical pesticides which could have negative 
environmental and health impacts. A pest 
management plan will be prepared to mitigate this 
risk. Moreover, the Project will support the diffusion 
of best agricultural practices environmentally-friendly 
including  integrated pest management practices 
combining chemical and biological control of pest and 
disease to support sustainable agriculture. 



Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The proposed operation will involve excavations and 
movement of earth for the building facilities. During 
the development of the ESMF physical cultural 
resources will be taken into consideration and 
baselines defined.  The ESMF will include clear 
procedures that will be required for identification, 
protection of cultural property from theft, and 
treatment of discovered artifacts, and will be included 
in standard bidding documents. The ESMF will also 
provide procedures for handling with “chance finds” 
during implementation project activities. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the vent that 
sub-projects should involve involuntary resettlement 
as the Project will finance construction/rehabilitation 
of processing facilities; and infrastructures that may 
imply land acquisition in the covered areas. A RPF will 
be prepared that will guide the management of such 
situations should they arise during project 
implementation. RAPs will be prepared as and when 
necessary. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project is not anticipating financing any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not anticipate any wide activity that 
could impact international waterways. only small 
irrigation scheme will be rehabilitated or developed. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not anticipate any disputes in the 
targeted area. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Terms of reference for consultants in charge of safeguard-related studies will be completed in October 30, 2017 and 

consultants will be hired by November 30, 2017. 
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP), and Resettlement Policy 

Framework (RPF),) will be delivered by January 30, 2018. 
 
 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24937 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Papua New Guinea P166222  PNG Agriculture 
Commercialization and 
Diversification Project 
(P166222) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Jan 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of National 
Planning and 
Monitoring,Independant 
State of Papua New Guinea 

Department of Agriculture 
and Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 40.00 

Total Financing 40.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 

          IDA Credit 40.00 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
 
 
A. Country Context 
 

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea (PNG) is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world with over 
800 languages and 1,000 ethnic groups1. It has a total land area of approximately 460,000km2 comprised of 600 islands 
of various sizes, and hosts a remarkably varied number of species and ecosystems. The country is separated into four 
regions – Highlands, Islands, Momase and Southern – and 21 provinces. In 2017, its population was estimated at close to 
8 million2. Of this, over 80 percent live in rural areas and the rest in small urban centers with populations of under 
30,000.    
 
PNG is a relatively stable democracy and had an average GDP growth of 6.85 percent between 2005 and 2010, however 
like other resource-dependent countries, it is feeling the impacts of the fall in global commodity prices, with GDP growth 
estimated at 2.4 percent in 2016 and projected for 2.1 percent in 20173 and real GDP per capita growth in 2016 was 0.3 
percent, down from 10.1 percent in 2014. The country is dominated by two main sectors: the formal, capital-intensive 
mining and energy sector which relies heavily on the country’s rich natural resources and accounts for most of the 
export earnings, and the agriculture sector which, while largely informal, employs an estimated 80 percent of the 
population and accounts for approximately 27 percent of GDP3.  
 
Despite considerable natural wealth and reasonable economic performance over the past decade, PNG’s rural 
population continues to face significant challenges. The disparity between rural and urban living conditions is 
exacerbated by the country’s difficult terrain which increases hardship, poverty, and isolation in rural areas, and limits 
access to basic services, infrastructure and economic markets. Less than 20 percent of rural households have access to 
electricity, 60 percent lack access to safe drinking water, and an estimated 80 percent lack access to improved 
sanitation2.    
 
The 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) noted that in 2009, approximately 38 percent of the 
population lived below the extreme poverty line of US $1.90 per day, about the same proportion as in 1996.  PNG’s 
Human Development Index (HDI) ranking was 155 in 2010 and improved by one place to 154 in 2015, the second lowest 
in the Pacific2. It has the fourth highest child stunting rate in the world. An estimated 28 percent of children are 
underweight and 5-15 percent are wasted. The highlands region has the highest rates of stunting at 61.5 percent, and 

the island region has the highest wasting and underweight rates at 19 percent and 29.2 percent respectively. The 
economic cost of undernutrition is high, in 2015-2016, it was estimated to have cost the economy 2.81 percent of 
annual GDP (equivalent to US$ 508 million)4.   
 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in PNG, and the country ranks 158 out of 188 countries in the 2014 Gender 
Inequality Index3. GBV severely affects women’s ability to contribute to the economy, participate in business activities, 
and support family livelihoods. Violence and crime are high along the country’s transport corridors where much of the 
rural population are engaged in agriculture, trade, and the transportation of goods. 
 
PNG’s road network is highly fragmented and poorly maintained with only about 35 percent of national roads sealed2 
and no roads connecting most provinces and ports. PNG’s vulnerability to climate risks and hazards due to climate 
variability and complex geography further exacerbate problems with the transport network resulting in an estimated 75 
percent or more of the road network – national, provincial and district – becoming impassable at some point during the 
year2. The country is subject to both El Niño and La Niña events and both can have significant impacts such as severe 
droughts, landslides and flooding from increased rainfall5. The World Risk Report 2016 ranks PNG 10th, with a risk index 
of 16.43%, due to the country’s high exposure to natural disasters and its high social and economic vulnerability to these 
events6. The February 2018 magnitude 7.5 earthquake and aftershocks affected 544,368 people across five provinces of 
Hela, Southern, Enga, Western and Gulf provinces. In the Southern Highlands and Hela provinces alone, it is estimated to 
have killed over 100 people, displaced 18,200 and left 270,442 people in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. It 
has also left 32% of health facilities closed and, of those that are open, only a third are undamaged7. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Sectoral context:  
PNG is characterized by its diverse agro-ecological environments (highlands, lowlands, islands), favorable climate and 
fertile soils allowing the farming of many different agricultural products, including both cultivation of cash and staple 
crops, as well as livestock production. While PNG’s export economy is presently dominated by minerals (gold and 
copper) and oil, the contribution of agricultural exports in the renewable resources sector is significant, at around 
23.1%. The main agricultural exports of the country include cocoa, coffee, copra, palm oil, rubber, and tea. The 
predominant mode of farming is in smallholder farms of less than 5 ha. Village agriculture, which supports over 80 
percent of the population, remains dominated by subsistence food production. It generates little cash income and is 
characterized by low productivity. Despite good intentions, governments, commodity boards and agencies have 
provided village farmers with little help to raise their productivity in order to improve food and nutrition security, and to 
enable them to participate more effectively in commercial activities. Translation of new knowledge to business and 
commercial opportunities has been lacking for many years. Major crops, except palm oil, have historically been 
marketed by statutory marketing boards. These arrangements as well as measures in the past such as stabilization funds 
for selected commodities (coffee, cocoa, and coconuts) have not been efficient, with over regulation of major 
commodities perhaps impeding agricultural development. In the past, labor-intensive plantation estates of some 50-150 
hectares have grown tree products for export, especially palm oil, coffee, cocoa, coconut, tea, and rubber, but except 
for palm oil, their production share is decreasing to the benefit of smallholder farmers. 
 
Coffee and cocoa are key cash crops. Papua New Guinea is considered a small coffee producer in the international 
market, but the high quality of its coffee and cocoa is recognized and sought after. Nearly 30 and 20 percent of the total 

       
     

labor force in the country is engaged in the production of coffee and cocoa, respectively. The majority of coffee is under 
the production of smallholder farmers with low productivity, and diseconomies of scale, and the main constraint is the 
limited capacity of the country to reliably meet market demand in quantity and quality. The development of coffee and 
cocoa production as an agribusiness for smallholder farmers is limited due to several constraints. These include: high 
transaction costs due to diseconomies of scale, limited market access, lack of access to information and technologies 
due to poor extensions services, poor rural infrastructure, and lack of access to rural finance. 
 
A robust internal fresh food and livestock products market exists. However, value chains are not well developed. 
Livestock production, except for pigs and poultry, remains static or on the decline since the 1970s. Meat consumption in 
PNG on the other hand, has increased steadily over the last two decades, and is predicted to increase at a conservative 
rate of 5% per annum. Increased demand for meat is met by meat imports, and is influenced by population growth rate, 
urbanization, changes in disposable income of citizens, and changes in people’s eating habits. 
 
Agriculture has under-performed. This is due primarily to low productivity, largely reflecting inadequate research and 
development, poor application of technological improvements and lack of scale economies inherent in smallholder 
farming. Other major constraints include inadequate transport and marketing infrastructure facilities, unreliable and 
expensive utilities, poor extension and veterinary services, prevalent crime and lawlessness, and insecurity of land 
ownership and tenure. However, some reasons for hope exist. For instance, the World Bank funded Productive 
Partnerships in Agriculture project (PPAP – P110959) is demonstrating in the coffee and cocoa sectors that the 
productive partnership model can help overcome some of the bottlenecks and facilitate the integration of smallholder 
farmers into effective supply/value-chains and link them to markets, which remains a priority for the Government of 
PNG (GoPNG). In the PPAP model, farmers join a partnership coordinated by a “Lead Partner (LP)” (the private sector in 
70 percent of cases, although sometimes an NGO or academic institution) through paying a small fee (contribution to 
the planned activities). The LP access a grant from the project to purchase tools and seedlings (including innovative 
cocoa clones) to be distributed to farmers, renovate processing facilities or organize training on a broad range of topics; 
technical (coffee or cocoa on-farm good practice), gender, HIV-AIDS, nutrition, etc. This increased proximity between LPs 
and the smallholder farmers has greatly contributed to: (i) increasing their on-farm productivity (over two-fold as of the 
time of writing), and (ii) link them to a potential buyer and therefore the markets.  
 
In December 2014, the World Bank completed a piece of analytical work studying the role of women in the agriculture 
sector in PNG8, notably related to coffee, cocoa and fresh produce. The main finding was that women provide 
substantial labor in both coffee and cocoa cultivation, and they dominate in the fresh produce sectors. More important 
than the amount of labor women provide, analysis of these supply chains indicated that the specific tasks women 
undertake have a direct bearing on the quality of the final product. However, different labor dynamics, gender-specific 
barriers to access key services (extension and financial) and insecurity (violence limiting women’s ability to serve in the 
field as researchers and extension agents) affect this potential outcome. In early 2018, a more specific gender time-use 
study among PPAP farmers9 highlighted that there is an imbalance between men and women’s time-use with possible 
discrimination against women which negatively impacts crop productivity and household welfare. Beside household 
awareness-raising and training on gender dynamics, reducing the domestic work burden for women before they can 
engage in more value-added agricultural activities should be a priority. 
 
Institutional context:  


The GoPNG’s Vision 2050 details the long-term development strategy for PNG.  Launched in 2009, the document sets 
out a vision for transforming the country by 2050 towards a top 50 ranking in the HDI10. It leverages seven strategic 
pillars – human development, wealth creation, environment and climate change, planning, systems and institutions, 
security and international relations, and partnerships with churches – to build this vision and realign the country’s 
economic focus away from the mining and energy sectors which currently dominate development, to new growth 
bases in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, manufacturing and eco-tourism.   
 
Vision 2050 acknowledges both the importance of subsistence agriculture to the rural economy and the cultural lives of 
many, as well as the significant challenges faced by the sector including limited markets, poor infrastructure, ineffective 
extension services, and security and safety concerns.  
 
The previous GoPNG’s National Agriculture Development Plan (NADP) 2007-2016 (currently being updated) recognized 

the importance of the agricultural sector in developing the economic potential of the country, sustaining the basic 

livelihoods of its population, increasing social wellbeing, and providing food security for all. However, its 

implementation has faced several challenges relating to the limited capacity of the Department of Agriculture and 

Livestock (DAL) to enhance implementation performance and monitor progress of outcomes in the sector. 

 
The GoPNG’s Alotau Accord II operationalizes the National Strategy for Responsible and Sustainable Development 
through the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) III reflecting the principles of the PNG Vision 2050 and the PNG 
Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030. High on the list of priorities is the adoption of a national population policy 
aimed at accelerating economic growth by using economic stimulus packages in the non-minerals sector (agriculture, 
tourism, fisheries and forestry) to keep pace with a population currently increasing at a growth rate of about 3 percent 
annually.  
 
The government has placed greater emphasis on growing the agriculture sector by giving it greater prominence in its 
2018 budget allocation. To emphasize this commitment, the government held the first ever National Agriculture 
Summit in November 2017 to exchange experiences on successful models. The key priorities from the summit are to: (i) 
grow the economy; (ii) promote import substitution; (iii) promote more accessible and affordable credit; and (iv) place 
greater focus on institutional strengthening. 
 
C. Relationship to CPF 
 

The 2017 PNG Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is under preparation and is scheduled for Board approval in early 
May 2018. The SCD recognizes the World Bank Group’s long-standing history of support to the agriculture sector in PNG, 
currently led by the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP). Since 2011, the PPAP has been providing 
support to smallholder coffee and cocoa farmers with the aim of improving their livelihoods. Important lessons have 
emerged from the implementation of the PPAP which could assist the SCD to identify opportunities for inclusive growth 
in the agriculture sector in PNG, and support the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. The third Pillar of the draft SCD (Enabling private sector development for inclusive job creation and 
growth) recognizes the central role played by agriculture in providing opportunities for inclusive growth and bolstering 
food security. The SCD recommends an “extension of PPAP-type programs to more districts and regions and more crop-
types” – which is exactly what the PACD intends to do. 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

    

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors.  

 
B. Key Results 
 

Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 
 

(a) Increased farm yields of crops and livestock in target value-chains 

(b) Increased volume of sale of selected value-chains at both farm gate and processing SMEs levels 

(c) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation. Specific gender and citizen engagement indicators 
will be added in this results framework.  
 

PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 

 
The Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP P110959 + PPAP AF P146003) is scheduled to close on June 30, 
2019 and has delivered significant benefits to PNG’s cocoa and coffee sector farmers. In order to build on and 
consolidate PPAP’s achievements, the PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) would 
continue to support the cocoa and coffee sectors, and may also add the following commodities: small livestock, spices, 
rubber and coconuts. The additional commodities to be supported under the new project will be narrowed down to 2 
or 3 commodities based on criteria, including level of preparedness of the value-chain and possible return on 
investments11. Further stock-taking will be required during the project preparation, including, if the need is identified, 
specific value-chain analysis to help the decision-making process. DAL has already started this work which should be 
completed prior to pre-Appraisal. The FAO Investment Center will support the DAL and the WB Task Team in this stock-
taking exercise and commodity final selection. 
 
Beneficiaries: GoPNG’s emphasis is on agriculture to accelerate economic growth and generate revenues, this may 
require a targeted approach towards farmers willing to move from subsistence to semi-commercial or commercial 
farming (therefore being less inclusive than in the case of PPAP). However, the smallholder farmers remain the primary 
direct beneficiaries of the new project, together with the groups and cooperatives formed by those better-off and 
willing to address common issues collectively. While building on PPAP, considerations around the possibility of looking 
at a complementary window targeting more progressive farmers and those who are ready to take risks and form more 

                                            
11 Agreed criteria comprise: (i) competitiveness and existence of a market justifying good return on investments, (ii) availability of technical advisory and 
extension services for these specific commodities, whether of public or private origin, (iii) tradition of integrating the selected commodities in cocoa and 
coffee farming system, as a diversification strategy, (iv) importance of women participation in the specific commodities, (v) share of the value-chains’ 
income remaining with the smallholder producers, (vi) size of the population involved or benefiting from the selected commodities, and (vii) commitment 
of different level of Government (including Provincial and District) to it. 

commercial alliances under a common set of constraints and opportunities will be explored. Additional direct 
beneficiaries will be SMEs (mainly micro- and small private enterprises) involved in agri-business activities (storage, 
processing, marketing, inputs supply). DAL and Commodities Board staff will also benefit from capacity building 
interventions. 
  
Regarding the geographical scope, the MTDP identifies ten “Economic Corridors” for priority services delivery, defining 
zones for development of public transport and utilities network, social services and integration of economic plans 
including agriculture. The PACD will align its geographical scope to this GoPNG strategy and support some of these 
economic corridors, based on transparent selection criteria to be defined during preparation. 
 
The PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) -  interventions will be delivered through five 
components:  

 
Component 1: Institutional capacity building 
The project will address institutional capacity gaps at (i) the central level - DAL, statutory bodies in charge of 
commodities targeted under the project (Cocoa Board, Coffee Industry Corporation, Spices Industry Board, the 
Livestock Development Corporation (LDC) and the Rubber Board – list to be confirmed as per commodities selected 
under the project) and links with the private sector – and, (ii) the decentralized level – provincial and district capacity to 
deliver services: extension, advisory and veterinary services, access to inputs. Research needs may also be included and 
will depend on further discussion during preparation.  
  
This first component will also support the GoPNG in reviewing and, if required, reforming their policy and regulatory 
framework, notably on climate-smart agriculture, extension and veterinary services, quality standards and food safety. 
 
Component 2: Infrastructure networks and logistics 
The infrastructure network, including roads and storage/processing facilities, remains a major bottleneck to farmers’ 
capacity to access markets. This project should contribute to its improvement, with a focus on infrastructure that has a 
public good nature and is essential to the selected value chains. Examples of such infrastructure include feeder roads, 
municipality-managed small-scale slaughterhouses (ensuring better food safety and waste management / pollution 
reduction) or laboratories (for safety and quality tests). As per the PPAP model, feeder roads will be designed and 
constructed to be resistant to heavy rains occurring during the rainy season: they will be slightly curved, include large 
concrete gutters on the side and small log-bridges on water stream sites – therefore adapted to heavy rains which are 
increasing and longer-lasting due to climate change. 
 
Component 3: Productive Partnership-like interventions 
Integrating smallholder farmers into effective supply/value-chains and linking them to markets remains a priority for 
the GoPNG. For this, the Productive Partnerships’ model implemented under the PPAP has been successful and should 
be a strong building block to scale-up. However, additional focus should be put on approaches that promote the 
establishment and capacity building of farmers’ cooperatives that will strengthen the sustainability of the model, 
among other lessons learned.  
 
This component will promote access to services and markets by facilitating the establishment of Productive 
Partnerships, and their access to finance (Matching Grants; involvement of financial institutions) that could finance 
small collective infrastructure (e.g. small storage and processing facilities like community-managed cocoa 
fermenteries), and the introduction of innovative technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture (agro-forestry, 

water collection and micro-irrigation, drought resistance varieties, intensification of small livestock production such as 
poultry and pigs, and bio-digesters). This will be done through establishing two windows for financing:  

(i) one focusing on on-farm productivity (garden regeneration, innovative technologies, etc.) and more inclusive 

regarding smallholder farmers willing/unwilling to join partnerships – this window will expand on the PPAP 

model where a Lead Partner (often from the private sector) can aggregate smallholder farmers and channel 

support to them (advisory services, training, inputs); and  

(ii) one focusing on value-addition and marketing of products, and targeting better-off farmers willing to address a 

common issue (storage, agro-processing, marketing, access to inputs, etc.) collectively through groups and 

cooperatives who become the recipient of the funds. 

 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:  
This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, 
conduct project M&E including Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),12 and comply with safeguard mitigation 
measures.  It would provide training and equipment to modernize DAL operations (computer hardware and software, 
office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed for project activities. It would also 
support the development and implementation of a communications strategy, as well as general awareness and 
sensitization campaigns about project activities. 
 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0):  

Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the government of PNG may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to 
support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources 
under the project from other project components to cover an emergency response. These activities would be carried 
out, as needed, to ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be 
used in the event that an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Target provinces and districts are yet to be confirmed. The project is likely to support core coca production areas in the 

province of East New Britain, the autonomous Region of Bougainville (tropical island regions) and East Sepik (Momase 
Region), and coffee production areas in the provinces of Eastern Highlands, Western Highlands and Simbu (highlands 
regions). The project may expand its geographical coverage with potential support in the livestock, spices, rubber and 
coconut sectors in the same areas.  
PNG is characterized by diverse agricultural and ecological environments, tropical climate and fertile soils. Physical 

characteristics vary considerably between regions and will be described once project location and sectors are confirmed. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Livestock (DAL - lead agency) through a Project 

                                            
12 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the objective to improve project 
efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects information on project implementation, even in insecure 
settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project 
teams through different iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from beneficiaries 
but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 



Coordination Unit (PCU), with specific Project Management Units (PMUs) established for each selected commodity. The 
Department of Works (DOW) will be designated responsibility for infrastructure networks and logistics activities related 
to rural feeder (not paved) roads. 
 
Capacity for implementing safeguard policies is currently weak in each of these agencies. The DAL lacks specific 

safeguard resources. The current World Bank financed PPAP has addressed safeguard capacity constraints within the 
cocoa and coffee PMUs however capacity remains limited and confined to these sub-sectors. DOW has an Environmental 
Management Unit (EMU) however this unit is under-resourced and relatively inexperienced. To address these constraints, 
the PACD will establish a core safeguards team consisting of senior environmental and social specialists within the PCU to 
ensure the effective implementation of safeguard policies across all project activities. The PACD will also finance 
additional environmental and social specialists within DOW to oversee safeguard requirements for project infrastructure 
network and logistic activities related to rural roads. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as Category B. The proposed 
investments are small-scale and potential adverse 
impacts can be managed. There are no potential large-
scale, significant or irreversible impacts associated 
with the project. 
 
The project will finance small collective infrastructure 
for partnerships (Component 3) including innovative 
technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture 
(agro-forestry, water collection and micro-irrigation, 
drought resistance varieties, intensification of small 
livestock production (poultry, pigs) and bio-digesters) 
that have the potential for positive impacts on the 
environment. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project will invest in infrastructure networks to 
improve access to market (Component 2). This will 
involve the rehabilitation of feeder roads and the 
development of small-scale community infrastructure 



 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 11 of 14  

     

(e.g. small-scale slaughter house and laboratories). 
These small-scale investments have the potential to 
cause some minor adverse environmental and social 
impacts however these are readily managed through 
standard mitigation measures. 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the 
partnership/grant process. The ESMF will incorporate 
the requirements of the World Group’s 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) 
and industry specific guidelines for agribusiness, food 
production and pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emergency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including a screening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project will not finance any activities that 
significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or 
natural habitats as the screening procedures in the 
ESMF will exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Potential project target sectors including cocoa, spices 
and rubber are frequently associated with agro-
forestry in PNG, often in a positive way. No adverse 
impacts on forests are anticipated. The ESMF will 
contain measures to properly manage the risk of any 
unforeseen adverse environmental impacts of these 
activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support the sustainable use of 
chemical fertilizers and pesticides within an holistic 
farm management model and integrated pest 
management approach. The client will review and 
update the current PPAP Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) following the standards and requirements set 
forth in OP4.09 and the World Group’s Environmental, 
Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness 


and food production. The project will include 
measures to strengthen the institutional capacity for 
implementing IPM in project areas. This will include a 
stronger focus on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources. Screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project is likely to be located in areas where 
Indigenous Peoples are the sole or the overwhelming 
majority of direct project beneficiaries. Accordingly, a 
separate Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) is not proposed. Rather, in accordance with the 
provisions of OP 4.10, the elements of an IPPF is 
included in the overall project design.  
 
The ESMF will outline steps for ensuring free and prior 
informed consultation are undertaken and broad 
community support is achieved for each Partnership 
and Infrastructure activity under Components 2 and 3 
respectively. This will include a Beneficiaries 
Partnership Framework and Consultation Guidelines. 
 
A Social Assessment will be conducted across target 
sectors/provinces during project preparation to inform 
project design and will include consultations with 
farming communities, local level government 
representatives, grower associations and 
cooperatives, youth and women’s groups, extension 
workers, the private sector, and other relevant 
stakeholders. 
. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
The RFP will include a voluntary land donation 
protocol to ensure that this approach is properly used, 
verified and documented. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The PPAP PCU is in charge of coordinating the preparation of the proposed PACD. Safeguards specialists working for the 

PPAP, together with the support of external safeguards consultants, will conduct the social assessment and consultations 
across target sectors/provinces to inform project design and the preparation of ESMF and RFP. 
 
A Project preparation Advance (PPA) will be processed once the Concept Note is approved and the procurement process 

for these consultants will start after. Therefore, first drafts of these studies are not expected before end of August 2018. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 
 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Jamaica P166279 Jamaica Rural Economic 
Development Initiative-
Second Phase 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 12-Nov-2018 26-Feb-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Jamaica Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF), Ministry of 
Finance and Public Sector 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Community Tourism Investment Subprojects for Rural Enterprises 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Public Sector Entities 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 42.00 

Total Financing 42.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 40.00 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 3 of 16  

 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Jamaican economy has historically been characterized by low growth and high public debt, but 
fiscal and structural reforms launched in 2013 are helping to reverse the trend. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) per capita grew by only 0.5 percent on average per year between 1990 and 2016. Fiscal restraints, higher 
tax revenue, and well-timed liability management operations have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 25 
percentage points. GDP growth has seen a modest acceleration since the start of reforms, rising to 1.4 percent 
in 2016. The informal sector continues to be large in relative terms, accounting for 43% of official GDP according 
to an ILO 2014 study. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks.  

2. Rural poverty has remained consistently higher than urban poverty, with an increasing urban-rural gap. 
The national incidence of poverty for 2015 was 21.2 percent, with an urban-rural gap of 14 percentage points 
(28.5 percent in rural areas1 compared to 14.3 percent in the Kingston Metropolitan Area). Socio-economic 
disparities for women and youth continue to contribute to the higher level of rural poverty. If Jamaica is to 
achieve “Developed World” status, as is the goal of the GOJ’s Vision 2030 plan, development of rural areas needs 
to keep pace with development in urban areas. The tourism and food/agriculture sectors hold significant 
potential for rural growth and development because of their importance to the economy overall as well as their 
potential reach into rural areas. 

3. Jamaica is highly vulnerable to climate change and faces significant environmental threats due to its 
geographical location. Between 2004 and 2008, five major storm events caused damages and losses estimated 
at US$1.2 billion. Evidence suggests that Jamaica will likely see increases in severe weather events, such as 
droughts, extreme precipitation, flooding, and increases in the intensity and frequency of hurricanes2. 
Additionally, Jamaica’s vulnerability to sea level rise is more pronounced than in other regions due to the 
potential impact of storm surges from tropical storms and hurricanes on the coast. 

            
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

Agricultural Sector 

4. The agricultural sector is an important contributor to the country’s economic development and is 
recognized as a priority in the GOJ’s mid-term plans. The agricultural sector accounts for 8.0 percent of Jamaica’s 
GDP, and employs 18.7 percent of the active population (of which 44.7 lives in rural areas). Agriculture and agro-
processing in Jamaica are characterized by a few sub-sectors with relatively tight value chains and high-quality 
standards serving export markets and the tourism industry, along with domestic production sub-sectors serving 
local parish markets and supermarkets. Traditional export crops (sugar, bananas, coffee, and citrus) are in 
decline. The “non-traditional” export sector showing strong growth and market potential includes agricultural 
products such as preserved fruits (e.g. ackee) and sauces, condiments, and mixed seasonings (e.g. jerk sauces). 
Jamaica is a net importer of livestock commodities (dairy and meat products). 

5. The small-scale agricultural and food products sector exhibits significant potential for growth, but 
significant challenges remain to be addressed.  Small-scale agriculture has ample potential for serving domestic 
markets but needs to become more competitive with respect to imports by increasing land and labor 
productivity, the quality and reliability of distribution, and climate resiliency.  Small-farmers and micro and small-
sized agri-businesses enterprises tend to be at a comparative disadvantage in accessing higher value markets due 
to lack of market information, inefficient production practice, outdated technologies, lack of value addition, 
diseconomies of scale, and high logistics costs. Limited access to financing is among the key challenges to 
agriculture competitiveness and related MSMEs. Weaknesses in the connectivity of rural areas is also limiting 
marketing opportunities and access to potentially attractive inland tourism sites.   

6. The natural environment exposes the agriculture and food sector to frequent weather shocks and high 
levels of climatic variability – further exacerbated by climate change.  Climate change has caused a trend of 
rising temperatures, worsening rainfall variability, and droughts, and here the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events is likely to rise in the future.  This will make soil and crop management more difficult, especially in coastal 
areas, which are threatened by a decline in fertility or being washed away. Crops need to be able to withstand a 
more extreme and diverse set of environmental challenges, including worsening of pests and disease occurrence. 
In the livestock sub-sector, these weather trends may put additional strains on cattle, adding to the vulnerability 
of livestock facilities.    

Tourism Sector 

7. Tourism is also a critical driver of the Jamaican economy.  The tourism sector accounted for 9.3 percent 
of the national GDP in 20163.  This sector is considered mature, with international arrivals still growing more 
rapidly than elsewhere in the region. Jamaica’s tourism strategy4 sets a target of 5 percent annual growth for the 
sector for the years 2017 to 2022, as well as 5 million visitors with US$3.5 billion in total earnings annually from 
visitor spending. The goal is also to reduce significantly the amount of leakage that results from the large amount 
of imports used in the sector. Jamaica retains about 30 percent of every dollar spent by tourists, while the target 
set by The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is 50 percent. As such, Tourism has the potential to be strongly linked to 
agriculture and small-scale production: Sandals Resorts in Jamaica reports that 90 percent of produce purchased 
in Jamaica annually are locally produced by a network of around 180 farmers5.   

        

8. Jamaica’s tourism market has traditionally focused on the “sun, sea and sand” concept model but more 
diversification is being pursued. Attempts are being made by the GOJ and the private sector to provide a more 
diversified visitor experience through new product offerings targeted to wider groups of visitors.  The MOT 
intends to move towards a more inclusive tourism model to spread the benefits of tourism, provide more 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and deepen economic linkages in rural areas. This policy is laid out in the 
National Community Tourism Policy and Strategy, which was funded under the previous REDI project. Many 
challenges to the further development of community tourism in rural areas remains They include: (a) excessive 
licensing and standards that are too complex for small NGOs and Community Tourism Enterprises (CTEs) to 
manage; (b) low levels of available capacity and resources for expanding community tourism operations; and 
(c) poor marketing support and inadequate connections to the tourism supply chain, operators, and hotels.  

9. Climate resilience is also important for the tourism sector. More severe storms and hurricanes, rising sea 
levels, droughts, and heatwaves can degrade tourism assets such as coral reefs, shorelines, freshwater supply, 
and ecosystems, and can damage tourism infrastructure and destination communities with potentially 
significant losses to GDP and employment.  Changing weather conditions and milder winters in various parts of 
the world may also affect tourist demand, underscoring the need for sun, sea, and sand destinations to diversify 
their offerings.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 
 

Key Results 
10. The results of the proposed Project will be measured through the following set of outcome indicators: 

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises that have accessed new markets;  

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises operating on or above the projections (gross sales value) 
of their corresponding business plan; and 

• Number of targeted beneficiaries reached with climate resilient approaches supported by the project 
(of which number of rural enterprises and public institutions). 

 
D. Project Description  

 
11. Enhancement to the REDI I approaches. Building on the experience and results of REDI, the new Project 
will focus on strengthening value chains6  and tourism clusters development, placing emphasis on the linkages 
between producers/service providers and buyers, to improve economies of scale for small agricultural and 
tourism enterprises and to mainstream climate resilience.  

A. Project Components 

12. Component 1. Climate Resilient Agricultural and Community Tourism Investments Subprojects for Rural 
Enterprises (Total US$ 28.0 million, IBRD US$26.0 million).  The objective of this component is to promote the 
development of agricultural/community tourism enterprises that are better integrated in productive 

         
 liances" and operate more competitively in selected value chains, with more reliable linkages 
with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks.  

13. This component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, good, works and operating costs 
(through matching grants) for demand-driven and competitively selected agriculture/fisheries or community 
tourism subprojects presented and implemented by participating rural enterprises to increase their production 
and to capture and/or increase their market share and level of profits.  Financed activities will support the 
promotion, identification, design, feasibility, and implementation of competitive and climate resilient 
investment subprojects for business ventures established by beneficiary enterprises (small farmer/fisher 
associations – cooperatives, friendly or benevolent societies, or any formal form of legally established 
associations – as well as, agribusinesses, community tourism operators, and related entrepreneurs such as craft 
makers).  

14. Investments proposals will be prepared in response to calls for proposal and submitted by the beneficiary 
rural enterprises. They will be appraised and competitively selected for project support and funding considering 
pre-established criteria assessing, inter-alia: market demand, product quality, technical and financial feasibility, 
environmental and social sustainability; approaches to enhance climate resiliency and the potential for local 
impact; and the level of participation by women and youth.  It is estimated that a total of 90 investment 
subprojects will be supported through this component, benefitting directly around 200 rural enterprises. As 
such, around 20,000 individual members of these rural enterprises will benefit directly from these investments 
(of which 40 percent will be females and 30 percent youth).  

15. Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Relevant Public Entities (IBRD 
US$8.0 million).  This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant public-sector institutions (MICAF, 
MOT, and JSIF) and associated entities (RADA, TPDCo, and others) to provide public infrastructure and quality 
services needed to promote inclusive rural development (based on the agriculture and tourism nexus) and to 
ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises and productive partnerships supported by the project. It is 
organized in the following two subcomponents: (i) 2.1 –Public Infrastructure Investments (IBRD US$ 6,0 million) 
will finance civil works, goods, and consulting services for priority public infrastructure investments (new or 
rehabilitated) that are needed for improving the efficiency and climate resilience of targeted agri-food and 
tourism value chains; and (ii) 2.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IBRD US$2.0 million. will finance 
technical assistance (consultant and non-consultant services, goods, training, workshops, and study tours) to 
strengthen the capacity of relevant national organizations and other relevant partner entities responsible for 
assisting the agricultural and community tourism enterprises.  

16. Component 3. Project Management (IBRD US$6.0 million).  This component will finance incremental 
costs associated with the management, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
by JSIF and its technical Project Management Team (PMT) for REDI II. Cost to be financed include technical 
expertise (agriculture, tourism, business development, monitoring and evaluation, etc.), staff training, annual 
audits, vehicles, office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective 
safeguards, fiduciary, and M&E arrangements are in place during implementation.   

17. Component 4.  Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0).  This component will allow for a reallocation of 
loan proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an 
eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. Considering the Project design, the CERC is 
expected to be operationalized through a reallocation from component 1 to provide emergency recovery and 
reconstruction support.  To ensure that there is capacity, the Project Operations Manual includes a CERC annex 
applicable to eligible disasters, detailing fiduciary, safeguards, monitoring and reporting, and any other 

necessary implementation arrangements. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

18. Implementing Agency for REDI II.  Building on the REDI I experience, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund 
(JSIF) will be the lead implementing agency for REDI II and will work in close coordination and under the technical 
leadership of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF), ,the Ministry of Tourism 
(MOT), and their respective operational agencies RADA and TPDCo. JSIF will have overall responsibility for the 
coordination and management of project implementation. JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) 
that will be responsible for overall technical implementation and will coordinate with all relevant national 
institutions on component implementation. The implementation period is expected to be six years. 

19. Project Oversight: Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee. This committee will be responsible for 
ensuring that the Project is in line with national development priorities.  The Committee will be chaired by the 
Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) with membership to include representatives from MICAF and MOT and other 
relevant agencies i.e. Office of the Prime Minister, Rural Agricultural Development Authority (RADA), Tourism 
Product Development Company (TPDCo), JSIF, and Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOF&PS). 

20. Beneficiary Rural Enterprises in the agriculture and community tourism sectors will be eligible for 
subproject financing and responsible for the operating, maintenance, and sustainability of the corresponding 
investments. 

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will take place nationally in Jamaica and specifically in rural agricultural and tourism landscapes. 
Specific location details are unknown at this time because the sub-projects will be demand driven. 

 
 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 
The project is rated as a Category B in terms of its 
risk profile.  
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 8 of 16  

 

Component 1 will finance rural agricultural and 
tourism subprojects that support revenue 
generating activities including support to rural 
producers (inputs, equipment, seeds, water access, 
drip irrigation, greenhouses etc.) as well as support 
to tourism operators and enterprises (marketing, 
small renovations such as painting and refurbishing 
guest housing, equipment for craft making, etc.). 
Component 2 finances small scale public 
investments aimed at improving the efficiency of 
priority value chains for selected products (e.g., 
storage facilities, cold chain supply infrastructure 
equipment at the regional level as well as at 
airports/ports, fresh products grading, clearing hubs, 
agricultural research and development, 
seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities}.    Most of the impacts related to the 
implementation of Component 1 and 2 are minor, 
short-term and highly localized and thus easily 
mitigated. No cumulative impacts are expected. Any 
impacts are therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures. .    
 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building will finance TA and capacity 
building for key organizations and agencies that 
deliver support services in agriculture and rural 
tourism at the local level. While the TA activities 
themselves do not have direct adverse 
environmental or social impacts, the Bank team will 
integrate environmental and social principles and 
objectives as an integral part of the terms of 
reference and supervision of the TA.   
 
JSIF has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines 
potential risks and guidelines to mitigate potential 
impacts, outlines roles and responsibilities of key 
actors, provides budget and costs for mitigation and 
training (where needed) and gives guidance to 
contractors and PIU environmental specialists in 
terms of managing contracts with firms.  The ESMF 
also serves as the guiding document for any site-
specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMPs).  This document has been reviewed 
and cleared by the bank and was recently disclosed 



to stakeholders in Jamaica and on the Bank's 
website. A separate integrated pest management 
plan was prepared and also disclosed similarly under 
the project. Institutional arrangements outlined 
within the document will guide the use of pesticides 
according to OP 4:09.  During implementation, each 
subproject will be screened to determine its risk 
profile and, accordingly, it will be determined 
whether further documents (ESMPs) will need to be 
developed to manage these risks.  Any activity that is 
rated Category A will be screened out.  
The ESMF points to additional guidance, as 
applicable, in the General EHS Guidelines and the 
Industry Sector Guidelines specifically guidelines for 
AGRIBUSINESS/FOOD PRODUCTION and FORESTRY 
http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This is not a private sector activity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Given the scale of the activities, it is unlikely that 
natural habitats will be impacted.  However, the 
locations are unknown and are in the rural areas of 
Jamaica, which has significant natural resources. For 
this reason, the OP is triggered as a precaution.  
However, every effort will be made to avoid working 
in or impacting critical natural habitats. The ESMF  
includes measures to avoid/mitigate the alteration 
of critical or sensitive areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project activities are highly localized and are 
unlikely to impact forests but the project will 
operate in a rural landscape and therefore it is 
possible that some activities may impact tree 
clusters. For this reason, OP 4.36 is triggered as a 
precaution.  All subprojects will  be screened and 
any impacts on forests, or tree clusters, quantified.  
Alternatives will be considered as a means to avoid 
negative impacts on any forests or significant tree 
clusters. The ESMF includes specific screening tools 
to identify any potential negative impacts on forests 
or tree clusters. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that support is provided to producer 
organizers, pesticides may be supported.  However, 
World Bank guidance regarding the use of pesticides 
and  IPM will be observed, and a pesticide 
management plan has been prepared. 



 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

This OP is not triggered because the project will not 
operate in culturally sensitive areas.  However, 
during implementation, small rehabilitation works 
and minor mitigation works may result in the chance 
find of culturally significant objects. The ESMF 
includes procedures to address chance findings of 
archeological and cultural resources during 
construction works. 
  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
groups in Jamaica who meet the definition of IPs 
under OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy will be triggered for activities under 
Component 2. The activities under Component 1 are 
small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to 
have long-term or cumulative impacts. The JSIF 
evaluation found no sub-project activity financed 
under the REDI I that required physical involuntary 
resettlement. The CDD-type of activities/sub-
projects proposed under Component 1 will exclude 
Involuntary Resettlement as a result of land take 
and/or the physical relocation of households as the 
costs and complexity could easily outweigh the 
benefits and costs of the sub-projects project.  
Under Component 1 a negative list will be developed 
in the ESMF including clear criteria for excluding 
Category A high-risk activities. 
 
While OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was not 
triggered for REDI I there may be investments under 
REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public 
Infrastructure that could result in involuntary 
resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 
finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for 
selected products. There is scope within the project 
to also finance other public investments that are 
outside the scope of agriculture or tourism yet are 
needed to improve competitiveness and enhance 
access to markets in the two sectors.  Specific 
location details are unknown at this time and sub-
projects will be demand driven. As a result, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared to guide the selection and compensation 
aspects under Component 2 which will be disclosed 




prior to appraisal. The project has also prepared 
guidelines for Voluntary Land Donation.  Upon 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, 
consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the 
policy. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not support the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams nor will it support other investments which 
rely on the services of existing dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not affect international waterways as defined 
under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy will not be triggered because the 
proposed project will not intervene in disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The possible activities to be financed are small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to have long-term or 
cumulative impacts. Any impacts would be short-term, highly localized, and therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures.  The ESMF prepared by the Government has been reviewed by the Bank and has been 
found satisfactory.  That document outlines the procedure for minimizing risks within the project.  For Component 1 
which has many subprojects (e.g. greenhouses, water harvesting, expansion of efficient irrigation methods, integrated 
pest management, introduction of new crop varieties, development of integrated landscape models, improvement in 
stock breeding, and small group marketing infrastructure) the ESMF outlines a screening mechanism to categorize 
each subproject according to its risk profile.  ESMPs will also be developed for certain higher risk subprojects (cleared 
by the Bank and disclosed publicly) prior to implementation of the subcomponent.  For Component 2 which supports 
critical public infrastructure negative impacts will include construction related impacts such as   noise, occupational 
health and safety risks, waste management issues and so on.  In terms of safeguard however, these impacts are all 
small scale and reversible.  None of the project's activities in Component 1 are likely to result in large scale, significant 
or irreversible  impacts. 
 
There may be investments under REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public Infrastructure that could result in 
involuntary resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for selected products. These could include building storage facilities, 
processing areas, cold chain supply infrastructure equipment at the regional level as well as at airports/ports, fresh 
products grading, clearing hubs, agricultural research and development, seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities. There is scope within the project to also finance other public investments that are outside the scope of 
agriculture or tourism yet are needed to improve competitiveness and enhance access to markets in the two sectors.  


Specific location details are unknown at this time and sub-projects will be demand driven. As a result, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the selection and compensation aspects under Component 2 and 
has been consulted upon and disclosed. Upon identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the policy. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Most of the impacts related to the implementation of the project are anticipated to be minor, short-term and highly 
localized and thus easily mitigated through standard mitigation measures.    
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project has already been able to examine alternatives through lessons learnt from REDI which was the previous 
project that supported similar activities.  The successful aspects of the first project have become a core aspect of the 
current project. Safeguard implementation under the first project was deemed very successful due, in part, to a 
trained PIU- the same PIU that will manage this current project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity is relatively high.  The JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) that will be responsible 
for overall implementation and will coordinate all the actors involved in the Project’s execution. The JSIF will be 
responsible for financial management, procurement and compliance with safeguards. The JSIF managed the recently 
closed project (Jamaica REDI (P10522)) and the ICR noted that its management of safeguards was highly satisfactory.  
In terms of social implementation, some activities may be undertaken on land that has been donated voluntarily from 
the state (through a lease and nominal peppercorn rent) or though private individual (s). Voluntary Land Donation 
(VLD) will be applied according to good global practice and in line with the World  Bank guidelines on VLD including 
that VLD applies directly to project beneficiaries and that impacts are minor.  The protocols and guidelines to be 
applied to the Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) are included in the RPF. The project has also prepared a Worker's Code 
of Conduct for all workers and contractors working on the project and a Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF has been completed, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in Jamaica (November 12th, 2018) and on the 
Bank's website (November 15th, 2018).  Consultations were held with the relevant Government officials and Ministries 
and a with a subset of the project's estimated 50,000 beneficiaries.  Disclosures in Jamaica have occurred on relevant 
websites including JSIFs and further disclosures will occur through discussions during the launch meetings and follow 
up meetings with project beneficiaries. The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) and TPDCo will be a lead partner with JSIF.  
The RPF has been completed, consulted upon and disclosed in country on November 12, 2018 and on the Bank's 
website on November 20, 2018. 
 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 
 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Chad P162956 Chad – Climate Resilient 
Agriculture and 
Productivity Enhancement 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 26-Feb-2018 26-Apr-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Chad Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrgation and Equipment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “promote the adoption of improved technologies leading to 
increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by 
the Project”. 
 

 
Components 

Institutional support for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience 
Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies and climate-smart agriculture 
Contingency Emergency Response 
Coordination. Knowledge management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   41.00  

Total Project Cost   41.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 

Country Context 

1. Chad is a vast and landlocked country in Central Africa characterized by land degradation and 
erratic climatic conditions. It has a total land area of 1,284,000 km2 that encompasses three agro-
ecological zones: Saharan, Sahelian, and Sudanian. Out of a total population of over 14 million people, 47 
percent live below the poverty line. Chad ranked 186 out of 188 on the 2016 Human Development Index 
(HDI, 2016), making it one of the poorest and most deprived countries in the world. Chad remains largely 
rural, with over three-quarters of its population living in rural areas where they depend on subsistence 
farming for both household food and income security. The country is also beset with high unemployment, 
particularly among the youth. 

2. The economy continues to underperform, due to impacts from two main exogenous shocks: 
low oil prices and elevated regional insecurity. The oil and agricultural sectors were Chad's main growth 
drivers until the fall of the world oil price in 2014. Since then, Chad has experienced a sharp economic 
slow-down, with a fall in government revenue, resulting in a significant reduction in public expenses 
negatively impacting GDP growth (from 6.3% in 2014 to 0.2% in 2017)1,  leading the economy into deeper 
recession.  This difficult economic situation has been exacerbated by the prevailing serious threat to 
security in the region (including civil conflict and low-level insurgencies in the neighboring countries of 
Sudan, Nigeria, CAR and Libya), which has caused economic disruption in Chad and forced the Government 
to reprioritize its spending to defense, hosting of refugees and internally displaced persons. It also had an 
impact on cross-border trade, leading to the collapse of internal and external trade, especially for 
livestock, and a major disruption of the trade routes of imported products, especially in the Sahel.  

3. The short and medium-term outlooks remain challenging, with projected GDP growth for 2019 
of 3.15 percent. The situation has led the Government of Chad to prioritize diversification of the economy, 
focusing more on the non-oil sectors. The most important of these is the agricultural sector, which 
employs 80% of the Chadian workforce and accounts for 52% of GDP. It is also the second largest source 
of export income, after oil. In its 2016 – 2020 national development plan, the Government has, among 
other actions, prioritized the industrialization of agriculture, with the aim of boosting exports in order to 
diversify the economy to reduce its dependence on oil exports and increase tax revenue. 

4. The country is also experiencing rapid population growth (6.3% annually from 2010 to 20152), 
with a large youth cohort – more than 65% of the population is under the age of 25. The majority of the 
population remains rural, deriving their incomes from subsistence farming and herding activities, relying 
on traditional extensive production techniques, with limited access to markets and services (Systematic 
Country Diagnosis - SCD, 2015). Women engaged in agriculture and/or living in rural areas face 
considerable barriers: Chad ranks 140 out of 144 on the Global Gender Gap Index. Adult female literacy 
rate is 13.9% per UNESCO, about half that of men, and women are often confined to producing 

       

subsistence crops and traditional farming, with little access to advisory services and inputs (mainly 
captured by men). As a result, they are financially more vulnerable.  

5. Food insecurity is a big concern that is likely to be exacerbated by climate change. It is estimated 
that one out of 10 Chadians, or 1.4 million people, are chronically food-insecure, meaning they are unable 
to meet their basic food requirements even during “good” years of crop harvest. The situation worsens 
during “bad” years – characterized by limited availability of and constrained access to food – where 
millions more can easily and quickly fall into transitory food insecurity. Difficulties in access to food are 
partly attributed to the poor performance of the important crops and livestock sub-sectors, which are 
characterized by sluggish productivity growth due to multiple factors. Such factors include lack of and 
limited access to promising technologies, underinvestment in new technologies, as well as climate-related 
constraints. Crop and livestock production are highly dependent on rainfall, making these sub-sectors 
extremely vulnerable to climate shocks (in particular the scarcity and poor distribution of rainfall over 
time and space). This situation is aggravated by the country’s vulnerability to climatic risks, both short-
term risks associated with its inherent climatic variability and long-terms risks associated with climate 
change. The National Action Program of Adaptation (NAPA, 2010) reported that the main short-term 
climate risks are associated with droughts, floods, poor spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall, 
extreme heat, and strong winds. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Chad has enormous unrealized agricultural potential. The country has a total agricultural area of 
more than 49 million hectares, of which only 6 percent is currently cultivated. Similarly, the available 
water resources remain largely untapped, with only 9 percent of this potential being used. Less than 1 
percent of the agricultural land is under irrigation in Chad. The main Agro-Ecological Zones (AEZ) in Chad, 
from North to South, are the Saharian (up to 200 mm average annual rainfall), the Sahelian (200-700 mm) 
and the Sudanian (over 750 mm) AEZ. These distinct AEZs provide a unique opportunity to diversify 
agricultural production and to develop dynamic and complementary crop and livestock value chains. 
While other projects are already targeting livestock systems in the Sahelian AEZ, the proposed project will 
focus on the higher potential Sudanian AEZ where smallholder farmers are engaged mainly in traditional 
rainfed cereal-based (sorghum, millet and berbéré and associated pulses) farming systems, but including 
also some small livestock production. This zone is also a transit zone for livestock herds as they move 
southwards from the Sahelian AEZ during the dry season, causing some farmer-livestock herder conflicts. 

7. Despite its vast potential, the agriculture sector continues to underperform. Yields of key cereals 
are far below the averages for sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and yield gains have not kept pace with the yield 
gains achieved in other countries. For example, sorghum yields average stand between 720 and 785 
kg/ha3 respectively for Sahelian and Sudanian zones of Chad, against an average of 980 kg/ha in the 
ECOWAS4 region.  

8. Average rainfall ranges between 800 to 1250 mm in the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone (AEZ), but 
the distribution increases in variability, in both inter-annual quantities and geographic distribution, when 
moving from the south towards the north. The main crops are cereals (sorghum, berbéré, maize and rice), 

mostly intercropped with legumes, and roots and tubers, mainly grown for household consumption. 
Farmers also cultivate cotton for cash. Unfortunately, production of cotton is in sharp decline due to weak 
value chain organization. The Sudanian AEZ area is also classified as a cattle husbandry (and 
transhumance) area. Finally, collection of wild fruits and plants remains common, especially collection of 
shea nuts. 

9. The 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) described how Chadian agriculture is going 
through a deep crisis. The sector is struggling to modernize and remains largely dependent on weather 
conditions. However, the report emphasized the potential for development of family farming in terms of 
productivity, profitability and resilience to shocks and its potential to meet the national and external food 
demand and improve the welfare of the rural populations.  

10. Several related factors explain the low productivity of Chadian agriculture: 

▪ Weak research and extension services as well as low overall institutional capacity constrain 
innovation and slow the rate of technical change. The agriculture research and development 
(AR&D) system is weak, with limited human and infrastructure resources and lack of continued 
programmatic support. In addition, the limited reach of public and private agricultural extension 
and advisory services significantly affects the dissemination and adoption of promising 
technologies.  

▪ The use of low yielding agricultural technologies and poor and unsustainable traditional 
agricultural practices are the main characteristics of Chadian subsistence farming. Farmers lack 
access to improved agricultural technologies, as well as to the know-how needed to improve 
productivity. For example, less than 5% of farmers are currently using improved seeds (Agriculture 
Sector Review, May 2017).  

▪ The growing population is increasing pressure on existing fertile production resources and hence 
rendering the practice of extensive subsistence agriculture and traditional livestock management 
systems more challenging over time. Increased competition for the shrinking natural capital often 
results in tensions between diverse user communities with at times conflicting interests. As a 
result, the increasing pressure on natural resources, particularly in marginal areas and their fragile 
eco-systems, are leading to lower soil fertility levels, soil erosion and degradation. 

▪ Climate shocks are exacting an increasing toll on Chadian agriculture. The Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) categorizes Chad as one of the countries highly vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Vulnerability in Chad is characterized by increasing scarcity of available 
natural resources, fragile and substantially degraded soils, high level of food security and poverty, 
and lack of infrastructure, which hinder the capacity of local population to adapt to severe 
weather conditions. Indeed, the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of the 
Republic of Chad (September 2015) indicates that over the past decades, the Saharan and 
Sahelian climatic zones of Chad have progressed southwards by 150 km.  

▪ Weak or lack of policies also lead to cumbersome administrative and organizational procedures in 
Chad. The Agriculture Sector Review Report (ASRR) highlighted the persistent lack of concrete 
measures to address effectively the major factors that impact food and nutritional security. In 
practice, efforts to address those factors are very limited, and often questioned. As an illustration, 
the ASRR proposed a process for  setting up a pastoral code, which has not moved forward even 
though there has been a resurgence of conflicts related to the access and control of natural 


resources by different users. This situation of land insecurity is still limiting private investment 
and the sector’s performance. 

11. To address these constraints, the 2017 Agriculture Sector Review Report has identified improving 
productivity and strengthening resilience of family farming as effective and appropriate means of reducing 
poverty in rural areas. 

12. The Project will coordinate closely with other IDA-financed projects and projects being 
implemented by other partners to ensure effective synergies on the ground. For example, the Project will 
rely on the Chad Hydrological and Meteorological Services Modernization Project (P164256) to strengthen 
the capacity of the National Meteorology Agency (ANAM) to provide effective agro-meteorological 
services in support of the Project’s activities, including training and acquisition of digital solutions for data 
collection and analysis and weather forecasting (e.g. remote sensing application and GIS products). The 
Project will also complement interventions in pastoralism management being supported under the 
Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS – P147674). The Project will support mixed crops and 
livestock systems in agro-pastoral zones, while PRAPS will target purely pastoral zones. The Project will 
establish strategical and operational linkages with the Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P164747) 
which will be implemented in two out of the three targeted regions. This Project will to improve road 
access to selected agricultural production basin and markets in the Project area. Technologies to be 
introduced by the Project would also be used in the irrigation schemes developed by the Chad’s 
Component of the Sahel Irrigation Initiative Project (P154482). The is aligned with the Sahel Alliance 
Initiative which objective is to improve the support and coordination of development partners in the 
region to contribute effectively and more broadly to the stabilization and eradication of poverty, by 
developing rural areas, creating employment for youth, improving energy infrastructure and 
strengthening governance.  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

13. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to promote the adoption of improved 
technologies leading to increase productivity and enhance the climate resilience of agricultural 
production systems in the areas targeted by the Project.”  

 
Key Results 

 

14. The PDO-Level Results Indicators are:  

i. Number of direct Project beneficiaries – or farmers/producers/processors reached with 
agricultural assets or services (of which 40% female and 50% youth); 

ii. Total land area under improved technologies (in hectares) disseminated by the Project 
(including % in CSA technology - proxy for climate resilience technologies/practices); 

iii. Increase in average yields of the direct beneficiaries compared to average yields in the 
Project area (% of baselines for targeted crops in the project area); and 

iv. Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on Project interventions 

 

D. Project Description  
 
The total project amount is the equivalent of USD 44.6 million (IDA grant of USD 41 million and beneficiaries contribution 
of USD 3.6 million) over a period of 5 years. The project consists of four components, namely: (A) Institutional support 
for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience; (B) Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies 
and climate-smart agriculture; (C) Contingency emergency response; and (D) Coordination, knowledge management and 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL). 
 
COMPONENT A: INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE: 
This component is designed to strengthen institutional capacities for Agricultural Research & Development (AR&D) and 
climate change adaptation at national level. It includes the following sub-components : (A1) Strengthening the agricultural 
research and development (AR&D) system;  (A2) Strengthening of national support services for sustainable agricultural 
development and climate resilience and  (A.3) : Strengthening the framework for sectoral strategies and reforms 
preparation and monitoring    
 
COMPONENT B: SUPPORTING ADOPTION OF DEMAND DRIVEN TECHNOLOGIES AND CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE: 
This component will support the adoption of high productivity potential and climate resilient technologies /practices. It 
is sub-divided into three sub-components: (B.1) Improving the effectiveness of agricultural support services in the 
targeted areas; (B.2) Accelerating adoption of improved technologies and innovations; and (B.3) Implementing climate-
smart agriculture plans.  
 
COMPONENT C: CONTINGENCY EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
This component will create a mechanism for financing emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a 
“zero-dollar” Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). Should this component be activated, it will allow 
rapid disbursement of funds to help reduce damage to infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early 
rehabilitation. Following an adverse event that causes a major disaster, the GoC will be able to request that the Bank to 
channel resources from other components into an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). The IRM will enable the use 
of a portion of uncommitted funds from the overall IDA portfolio to respond to emergencies. To mobilize resources from 
the component, it will use the “Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual.”  

 

COMPONENT D: COORDINATION, M&E AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
This component is to support the Project on: (i) coordination and management, including human resources, financial 
management and procurement; (ii) M&E, gender impact evaluation and technical studies, (iii) knowledge management 
and communication; and (iv) safeguards and citizen engagement. The project will pilot the “Iterative Beneficiary 
monitoring” (IBM) System which is a simple low cost, high frequency feedback mechanism elaborated to inform regularly 
on what is not working during the project implementation and help to improve project results gradually and quickly 
without need of lengthy and expensive evaluations. 
 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

15. The project will be implemented under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation 
and Agricultural Equipment (MAIEA).  It will be supported by a National Steering Committee for all 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956)  

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 8 of 18  

 

projects/programmes in the Agricultural sector, chaired by the Ministry’s General Secretary, whose 
composition and mandate will be specified in a MAIEA decree5. 

16. By Ministerial Decree, dated 05 October 2017, all new projects/programmes under the MoA are 
under a unique Project Coordination Department (CCP). The CCP mandate are to ensure: (i) the alignment 
of agricultural projects/programs with national and regional policies and strategies; (ii) the development 
of synergies and collaborative frameworks between agricultural projects/programs funded  by different 
donors; (iv) monitoring the progress of projects / programs by updating the MoA’s indicators dashboard; 
(vi) knowledge management and communication on the projects and programs achievements ; (viii) the 
organization of capacity building activities and exchange between the different projects/programs; (xi) 
the recruitment of the (external) financial auditor in accordance with the provisions of the Financing 
Agreement and monitoring of the implementation of the recommendations; and (x) support for the 
release of counterpart funds for sector projects/programs.  

17. The day to day project management and coordination will be under the responsibility of a 
Technical and Fiduciary Coordination Unit (UCTF).  As agreed with MAIEA, the UCTF will be the 
implementation unit for all new World Bank funded operations in the agriculture sector. Reporting to the 
CCP, the UTCF main functions of this unit are to: (i) coordinate all projects of the agricultural portfolio of 
the Bank and their relations with the technical departments of the Ministry; (ii) the preparation and 
signing of the various memoranda of understanding, agreements and contracts linking the project (s) to 
the various partners and service providers; (iii) Financial Management (FM) and procurement activities in 
accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement between IDA and the Government and the 
procurement and FM guidelines;  (v) Terms of reference preparation, recruitment and management of 
support staff and technical units of Bank / IDA (UTPs) agricultural projects; (vi) preparation of annual work 
plans , budgets and progress reports and presentation of these documents to the PSC in relation with the 
CCP; (vii) daily liaison with all national partners, including communication on agricultural projects / 
programs funded by the World Bank; and (viii) the organization of supervision missions, mid-term and 
final evaluations of WB agricultural program projects. 

18. The UCTF will be headed by a National Programme Coordinator. It will include the following staff: 
an Internal Auditor, an Administrative and Financial Officer, an Accountant, one Procurement Officer, an 
Environmental Specialist, Gender and Social Development Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation and 
knowledge management Officer, and support staff. 

19. At field level, a Regional Technical Support Unit (RTSU) will be set up in Sarh for the field activities 
coordination and follow up. The TSU will be reporting to the UTCF.  The TSU will be a light structure that 
will work closely with the regional rural development delegations. The TSU mandates are to: (i) ensure 
and support the project activities implementation within its coverage area; (ii) providing technical and 
management support to project beneficiaries; and (iii) ensuring the compliance of the various subprojects 
to the operational rules and procedures. 

 
 .    
 

F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed Project will primarily target the Sudanian Agro-Ecological Zone of Chad, considered as high 
potential for agro-pastoral activities, but where the risk of food and nutritional security and rural poverty 
are of serious concern. The project's activities will be implemented in three (03) administrative regions, 
namely Salamat, Middle Chari and Mandoul located in the south-eastern pole of Chad. The project areas are 
home to about 1.55 million people, representing over 11% of the total population. Targeted regions are 
further characterized by high poverty rates of 70.9% in Mandoul, 61.4% in Middle Chari, and 48.4% in 
Salamat. In these communities, the average rate of fertility is estimated at about 6.5. In terms of natural and 
human resources, the targeted areas have significant agricultural potential, representing the Sudanese AEZ 
with annual average rainfall ranging between 800 to 1250 mm. However, the rainfall is highly variable in 
both inter-annual quantitates and in geographic distribution when moving from the south towards the 
north. Wooded Sudanian savanna constitutes the main vegetation in these areas, while relatively poor 
leached tropical ferruginous soils (on hills) and richer floodplains soils favorable to the culture of rice and all-
season vegetable production dominate the main soil types. 

 
SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The Project is classified as category B project.   
As part of the project’s aim of improving agricultural 
productivity, the project will support the use of 
improved agricultural inputs including fertilizers, 
improved seeds, irrigation agriculture and pesticides 
that will require environmental assessment to 
ensure potential adverse effects are mitigated.  The 
project is expected to be beneficial to the 
environment given the aim is to ensure the impact 
of climate change is mitigated, adaptation measures 
implemented and resilience is built in to the 
production landscape.  The project will ensure that 



 
modern efficient utilization of pesticide and fertilizer 
will be introduced and farmers trained in their 
applications that will have a positive impact on the 
environment compared to the status quo. Further, a 
strict control mechanism will be put in place to avoid 
potential adverse impacts such as pollution from 
agricultural runoffs. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by 
the borrower given that the exact detailed footprint 
types and locations of project activities and their 
respective sites have not yet been identified. The 
ESMF will be consulted upon and publicly disclosed, 
both in-country and at the InfoShop before 
appraisal.  In addition, for subprojects that are 
expected to be identified during preparation, an 
ESIA will be prepared by appraisal.   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The project is not expected to intervene in any 
critically natural habitats 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not support forest exploitation . 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 is triggered based on project’ s activities to 
increase agricultural productivity which is expected 
to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as 
pesticides. Any use of pesticides will be justified 
under the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
approach that will be promoted by the project. An 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be 
developed, consulted upon by the borrower and 
publicly disclosed thereafter, both in-country and at 
the InfoShop before appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural 
Resources associated with civil works, the ESMF will 
include provisions of “Chance Finds” approach to 
ensure that these aspects will be taken into account 
in ESIAs/EMPs to be developed under the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no Indigenous Peoples People, as per the 
policy definition,  in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This policy is triggered because the project 
investments may support interventions that could 
entail land taking or limiting access to land and other 
resources. Since details of the subproject footprints 
are still unknown at this very juncture, an RPF will be 
developed by the borrower, consulted upon and 
publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the 
InfoShop, before appraisal. Where and when 
warranted Full Resettlement Action Plans (FRAPs) or 



 

The World Bank  
Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (P162956) 

 

 

  
Jan 04, 2018 Page 11 of 18  

 

Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will 
be prepared, reviewed, cleared and disclosed. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project is not building dam (big and small). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project is not intervening on International 
Waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Non applicable 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts and risks of the project activities are expected to be moderate to low, mostly 
site-specific and easily manageable to an acceptable level, typical of Category B projects. The potential negative 
environmental and social negative impacts and risks of the proposed project are associated with the implementation 
of Component 1 an 2, which are designed to support various activities for strengthening the agriculture research 
system and productive and resilient technology dissemination. These include: soil erosion due to agricultural 
developments; the spread of waterborne disease vectors and health risks associated with pesticide use, risks of 
increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other SCDs due to foreign workers on construction sites, the risk of pollution 
and environmental degradation byfertilizers and pesticides, reduced vegetation and pasture due to agricultural 
developments, etc. At the social level, though the project does not anticipate to physically display people, some of its 
proposed activities may require acquisition of land plots or restriction of access to productive natural resources, and/ 
or loss of incomes and livelihood resources without proper precautionary measures taken on time, could potentially 
lead to the involuntary resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
 
The proposed project triggers are OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management),  OP/BP 4.11 
(Physical Cultural Resources); and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). In conformity with the World Bank' 
requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact Assessment legislation, an ESMF was prepared, amply 
consulted upon, along with a RPF, and a PMP. These were approved by the Ministry of Environment through a 
national validation workshop, cleared by the Bank and publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank 
website prior to appraisal. 
 
No large-scale or irreversible adverse impacts and risks haves been identified during the participatory ESMF, IPMP and 
RPF analysis conducted. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No adverse long term impact and risk haves been identified during the EA process. Instead, the project is expected to 
deliver significant environmental and social benefits to hundred thousands of Chadians’ beneficiaries whose main 
livelihoods depend largely on agriculture crops and value. The adoption of improved technologies, the sustainable 
management practices of land and water as part of the formulation and implementation of climate-smart agriculture 
plans are expected to increase the productive capital of the land and the net carbon stock; and to increase the 
resilience of agro-sylvo-pastoral systems to climate risks. However, project activities to increase agricultural 



productivity could potentially induce indirect, but manageable impacts associated with increased use of 
agrochemicals, such as pesticides. These issues are addressed in the Pests and Pesticides Management Plan (PMP). 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project will be implemented by an new PIU under the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Agriculture 
Equipment. The Ministry has some experience in implementing the Bank’s safeguards policies as it has implemented 
the Agriculture Support Production Project (P126576). The Government of Chad (GoC) has completed the preparation 
of an ESMF, an PMP and a RPF to address issues related to the safeguard policies triggered. 
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are 
environmentally sound and socially equitable, sustainably implementable, and in line with GoC and World Bank 
operational safeguards policies and guidelines on environmental and social impacts and risks management. The 
implementation cost of the ESMF is estimated at FCFA 502 million, is proposed to be included the overall project 
budget. 
 
A Pests and Pesticide Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared based on project activities to increase agricultural 
productivity which is expected to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as pesticides. The PMP action plan aim 
to ensure safe pests and pesticides management. It includes: (i) promoting the use of alternative pest management 
strategies in the project areas; (ii) strengthening of controls during importation of phytosanitary products; (iii) capacity 
building of key actors on the rational use of pesticides; (iv) sensitization of producers on good pesticide management 
practices (transport, storage, applying, safety measures);  (v) environmental monitoring of the physico-chemical 
quality of water resources (groundwater and ponds); (vi) health monitoring of pesticides users and management of 
empty containers; and (v) a coherent budget of FCFA 328.5 million proposed to be included in the overall project 
budget. 
 
The RPF sets forth the basic principles and procedures to be followed once the physical footprints of project activities 
are known in details to properly mitigate any potential adverse social impacts (i.e. preparation of site specific 
resettlement action plan-RAP, etc.). The RPF includes specifics such as valuation of assets, public consultation and 
participation, institutional arrangement, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redress mechanism, 
budget and source of financing. CFA 192.5 million are proposed to support resettlement (RAP preparation, 
sensitization and training of key stakeholders), and to be included in the overall project cost. These do not include 
compensation costs which will be borne by the Government 
 
A 2-person team of Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists (SESS) will be established at the PIU level to 
adequately handle the implementation of social and environmental recommendations. The SESS will work in tandem 
with the WBG safeguards specialists to ensure due compliance with core safeguards policies requirements. 
 
All bidding documents for civil works will have embedded environmental and social clauses (ESC), in order to enable 
contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence and to mitigate the anticipated negative risks and 
impacts. Depending of the type, scope/nature and size of construction, a supervising engineer (Bureau de contrôle) 
will be hired by the project to oversee the construction works (including implementation of environmental and social 
measures by the constructor) on behalf of the PIU. For small size construction type, the PIU will rely on the 
 

deconcentrated technical services like Génie Rural, Regional Directorate for Environmental, as well as local level Socio-
environmental Specialist, etc. to ensure due diligence on safeguards as described in the ESC. Regular Environmental 
Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN) patrols will inspect the construction sites if the 
construction activities are in compliance with the approved site specific safeguards documents.  
 
The Borrower has some experience with the World Bank Safeguards policies’ requirements through several past and 
ongoing Bank funded projects. The proposed project will build on this experience and the 3 standalone safeguards 
instruments (ESMF, IPMP & RPF) include provisions to further strengthen the capacity of the various stakeholders. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders identified are:  
• The Steering Committee (SC) : The Steering Committee will monitor the registry and budgeting of the 
environmental and social due diligence from the Work Plan and Annual Budget (WPAB) ; 
• The Project Management Unit (PMU):  The PMU will ensure that environmental and social aspects and issues 
are taken into account in the implementation of project activities. The PMU should benefit from capacity building in 
the implementation of the project;  
• The Environmental Assessment and Pollution and Nuisance Control Directorate (DEELCPN): it will review and 
approve the environmental classification of sub-projects and also approve  the Environmental and Social Impact 
Notices (ESIN). It will also participate in the external monitoring; 
• The research institutions will provide technical manuals of research findings and ecological monitoring of 
some activities. They will also participate in the preparation of manual of good agricultural practices. 
• The National Agency for Rural Development Support (ANADER) will be responsible for extension of good 
agricultural and environmental practices in the area; 
• The Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development will take care of the environmental and fish 
production monitoring; 
• Decentralized Technical Services (DTS or « STD » in French) : The STDs are composed by the Regional an 
Departmental Directorates of Ministries in charge of agriculture, of animal resources, of Health, of Environment. These 
regional and departmental directorates of the project's intervention zones will be associated to all activities 
implemented in their range and zones of action during and after the Project;  
• Municipalities :They will participate in environmental and social monitoring through their municipal technical 
services ; 
• The Regional Committees of Actions (CRA), the local Committees of Actions (CLA), the Departmental 
Committees of Actions (CDA), the National Council of Concertation of Rural Producers of Chad (CNCPRT), Asssociations 
of Farmers, Breeders and Fishermen. All these structures will also be involved in the implementation of the ESMF of 
the Project (identification of sub-projects, screening, etc.); 
• Construction companies :  They will be responsible for the implementation of the Site-ESMFs and the drafting 
of implementation reports of these ESMFs through their Environmental Expert ; 
• Owner’s Engineer : The Environmental Expert within their organization will be responsible for the day-to-day 
monitoring of the implementation of the site-ESMF and the drafting of an environmental and social monitoring report 
to submit to the Project Management Unit (PMU); 
• NGOs: In addition to social mobilization, they will participate in the sensitization of populations and the 
monitoring of the implementation of the ESMF interpellation of the principal actors of the Project. 
  
Throughout the entire process of project preparation, transparent and engaging stakeholder participation 
consultations were organized in the project intervention areas. The key concerns raised by the local stakeholders are 

 

related to land degradation issues that affect their livelihood, mainly the reduction of arable lands due to water 
erosion and silting of lowlands, lack of access to finance, and need for capacity building to improve agricultural 
practices. They have been incorporated in the project design (protection of watersheds from erosion and secure 
irrigation potential, Farmers 
Field School program, matching grant facility, etc.). Since stakeholder consultation and participation is an iterative 
process, it will be pursued and sustained throughout the project lifespan. 
As part of the ESMF, the IPMP and the RPF, in addition to the series of intensive local stakeholder meetings (open 
and/or focus groups discussions), a national stakeholders’ workshop was organized by the Client on to share the 
results of the safeguards instruments, mainstream ownership and seek inputs from the stakeholders. The 3 
standalone safeguards instruments, approved by the DEELCPN as result of this national stakeholders’ workshop, have 
been submitted to the Bank for final approval. They have been disclosed both in-country (Feb 23, 2017) and at the 
InfoShop (Feb. 22, 2018) prior to appraisal. The ESMF describes a comprehensive consultation and participation 
mechanism and disclosure during subprojects 
preparation. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity (P163239) 

 
 

  
Jan 05, 2018 Page 1 of 17  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA22919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Albania P163239 Regional and Local Roads 
Connectivity 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 23-Jan-2018 25-Apr-2018 Transport & Digital 
Development 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Albania Development 
Fund 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers, and to 
strengthen selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets 

 
Components 

Component 1 - Accessibility Improvement 
Component 2 - Capacity Building for Municipalities 
Component 3 - Implementation Management Support 
front end fee 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 




 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
Albania has experienced rapid growth since 1990, rising into the ranks of middle-income countries in 2008. 
It emerged from the collapse of isolationist communism in the early 1990s as one of the poorest countries in 
Europe but since then has experienced a growth of nearly 6 percent per year. The rapid pace of growth helped 
the country narrow the per capita income gap with the rest of Europe from 18 percent of average European 
Union (EU) incomes in 1998 to 30 percent by 2012, and this fueled aspirations to join the EU. Growth 
successfully halved poverty from 25.2 percent in 2002 to 12.5 percent in 2008. However, the global and euro 
area crises in 2008 brought Albania's growth to a near standstill by 2012, and the country is struggling to 
recover, particularly given its historic ties to Europe’s poorer performing economies. The aftermath of the 
crisis presented an increase of the poverty rate, to around 14 percent in 2015, particularly in urban and coastal 
areas, along with rising unemployment affecting mostly youth and women. 

Recently, economic activity has picked up and the near-term economic outlook for Albania is positive. 
Economic growth is expected to accelerate to 3.8 percent in 2017 (from 3.4 percent in 2016 and 2.2 in 2015), 
supported by private investment and consumption. Investment is mostly linked to two large foreign direct 
investment-financed energy projects (the Trans Adriatic Pipeline and the Devoll hydropower plant), and 
consumption is supported by job creation and the easing of credit conditions. Net exports were helped by 
tourism and a recovering commodity market. Growth is projected to moderate to an average of 3.6 percent 
for 2018–2019 with completion of the two large energy projects and no other large projects planned.  

The Government remains committed to making deep structural reforms. Over the past years, the 
Government implemented a range of reforms, including improvements in Public Financial Management (PFM) 
(clearance of arrears, tax reforms), mitigation of fiscal risks from pensions and the energy sector, reduction of 
nonperforming loans, and improvements in doing business. Results were positive: growth picked up, the fiscal 
deficit declined, and the public debt started to fall. This provided a window of opportunity for advancing 
ongoing structural and fiscal reforms, to reduce macroeconomic risks and better support long-term growth. 

Albania applied for EU membership in 2009 and became an official candidate for accession in June 2014. 
This entails strong commitments in the transport sector, which manifest themselves in signing, with the 
European Commission, the Memorandum of Understanding for the Core Network creating the South East 
Europe Transport Observatory (SEETO)1 and in signing the Transport Community Treaty in July of this year. 
The treaty will help the Western Balkan countries align their national transport laws with those of the EU. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
Roads and highways are the predominant mode of land transport in Albania and provide essential 
connectivity for freight and personal mobility. Roads are one of the highest value public assets, estimated at 
about US$6 billion. The overall length of Albania’s road network is about 15,000 km; 4,000 km of national 

                                                           
1 The main aim of SEETO is “to promote cooperation on the development of the main and ancillary infrastructure on the South East 
Europe Core Regional Transport Network and to promote and enhance local capacity.” 


roads; and 11,000 km of regional, local, and urban roads.2 The Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MoIE), 
formerly the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, is responsible for the policy and regulatory framework 
and technical standards. The Albania Road Authority (ARA) is responsible for managing the national road 
network and the municipalities are responsible for managing the regional and local roads. The Albania 
Development Fund (ADF) was established in 1993 with support from the World Bank, to implement regional 
and local roads projects mainly financed by international development partners.   

In 2015, Albania implemented significant administrative and territorial reforms consolidating 372 
communes and municipalities into 61 municipalities to increase the cost efficiency of local units so that they 
can provide better services. The new municipalities consolidated the responsibilities from the previous levels 
of local government—municipalities, communes, and regional councils—each of which was administering 
road networks within their jurisdiction, respectively, within city/town boundaries, within commune 
boundaries, and regional roads in regional council areas. Within the current regional and local road network, 
the function comprises (a) regional roads that connect groups of villages to the national road network or with 
main administrative centers of a municipality and (b) local roads that provide transport links between villages 
and farms. 

The infrastructure planning and prioritization process still has some way to go to provide transparent and 
economically efficient outcomes. With support from the World Bank, progress has been made by the 
Government in developing Medium-term Budget Plans (MTBPs) 2015–2017 to prioritize higher impact new 
investments. A framework that is more aligned with the budget realities is slowly emerging and more fiscal 
discipline is applied at all levels to avoid accumulation of arrears in the road sector. Under the proposed 
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity Project (RLRCP), a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated 
for the selection of project roads which target investments that complement productive sectors of the 
economy and particularly in agriculture and tourism. This process provides an example for investment 
prioritization, transparency, and governance at a local level. 

Maintenance of the road network has been systematically underfunded, undermining the sustainability of 
the sector. The ongoing Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP) is addressing highest 
priority maintenance needs of 4,000 km of national roads while the proposed RLRCP will support the asset 
management of regional and local roads under the control of municipalities. 

The regional and local network is in bad condition overall, with more than 50 percent of network 
categorized in poor condition, 30 percent in fair condition, and less than 20 percent in good and very good 
condition. Some sections are impassable for parts of the year, thus restricting access to essential public 
services of health and education, as well as to economic centers. As of 2016, the maintenance expenditures 
for regional and local roads was allocated at approximately 300 Euro per km per year,3 which is extremely 
low and can only cover the routine maintenance, with no allowance for periodic maintenance or 
improvements. Investments and maintenance of regional and local roads are financed by local taxes 
combined with unconditional grant transfer from the central government. The poor condition of roads is a 
manifestation of the weaknesses in the municipalities planning, implementation and/or monitoring 
capacities.    

The Government of Albania (GoA) has taken large strides in improving conditions of the regional and local 
         

road network in the past decade but more work is necessary. ADF implemented a Rural Road Program, during 
the period 2008–2016, with World Bank support which crowded in US$386 million in financing from IFIs. The 
program improved1,200 km of rural roads in 12 regions and 61 municipalities which improved the mobility of 
over 2 million people. The World Bank’s engagement through the Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP), 
from 2008 to 2013, was evaluated as highly satisfactory which is an important milestone. The program was 
indeed highly successful, exceeding its developmental and implementation outcomes while recognizing there 
is still room to consolidate the e network improvements in a sustainable manner to enable growth in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors. 

The existing condition of regional and local road network is not able to serve the emerging tourism industry4 
and hinders the development of the agricultural sector.5 Over the past few years, the GoA has developed key 
strategic instruments including the National Territorial Development Strategy and the Coastal Management 
Strategy that provide a vision for the development of Albania over the next 15 years (2015–2030). These 
strategies highlighted a number of challenges which include improved road connectivity and the need to 
invest in municipal capacity to improve tourism destination management. The on-going Integrated Urban and 
Tourism Development Project is addressing these issues in the South of Albania while the proposed RLRCP will 
support improved access to tourism development areas in the project road areas of Albania. 

In October 2014, the GoA approved the five-year Strategy for Rural and Agriculture Development, drawing 
upon the strategic planning approach used by the EU under its Common Agriculture Policy 2014–2020. One 
of the obstacles pointed out by the strategy is lack of market access for agricultural products through an 
appropriate network of national, regional, and local roads. Considering that in Albania the agri-food industry 
is responsible (directly and indirectly) for almost half the economy-wide jobs, improving market access 
through better road connectivity is critical for the development of the country. It is also important for 
productive inclusion of women, who represent half of those employed in the sector (the highest share of 
participation of women in agriculture in the Western Balkans) and 80 percent of informal employment in the 
sector.  

Road safety remains a major social and public health issue in Albania. Although the number of accidents has 
dropped in recent years, Albania still compares unfavorably with countries in the region or EU member states, 
with the World Health Organization estimated 15.1 fatalities per 100,000 population—while it is 11.9 in 
Montenegro, 9.1 in Greece, 7.7 in Serbia, 4.3 in Germany, 5.1 in France, and 2.9 in the United Kingdom.6 In 
response, the GoA aims to reduce the number of fatalities by 50 percent in 2020, in comparison to 2009.7 The 
GoA has increased its attention to road safety reforms, including the adoption of the Road Safety Strategy and 
Action Plan in 2011 and adoption of mandatory Road Safety audit8 for all new roads. The RRMSP is 
strengthening the capacity of the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety Council, introducing road safety audit training 

                                                           
4 Tourism is a significant contributor to the Albanian economy, with 8.4 percent of total GDP in 2016, and is forecasted to rise to 10.8 
percent by 2027. Its contribution to employment is also significant, directly supporting 85,500 jobs (7.7 percent of total 
employment) in 2016, and is estimated to grow to 120,000 jobs (10.1 percent of total employment) by 2025.  
5 Agriculture is the single largest contributor to GDP in the country (22 percent in 2015) and the largest employer (41 percent in 
2015). Agricultural productivity and the competitiveness of the sector are adversely affected by the fragmented and subsistence-
oriented supply base, poor enforcement of food safety standards, infrastructure deficiencies, including poor transport networks and 
access to markets and tourism hubs, among others.  

 
6 World Health Organization. 2015 “Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015.” 
7 Government Decision No. 125, February 23,  2011, on “Implementing Objectives for Improving Road Safety.” 
8 By Amendment to Article 71/, introducing “Road Safety Audit” to the Highway Code. Decision 815 in November  2011. 

accreditation courses, supporting media campaigns, and enhancing the Accident Information System. The 
RLRCP will build on these reforms and address road safety through improvements to regional and local road 
infrastructure. 

Better links from the regional and local road network to the national road network will complement 
envisioned improvements in the country’s trade and transport facilitation competitiveness which are being 
supported under the separate proposed Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation Project. Improved feeder 
and distribution links from the regional and local road network to the national network together will reduce 
cost of trade and transport, lower the cost of importing and exporting for goods and services including 
agriculture and tourism.  These two areas will be the focus of the proposed RLRCP. 

A major emergent issue affecting sustainability of the road sector is the road network vulnerability to 
climate changes and natural disasters. Floods in recent years have increasingly affected the infrastructure 
and consequently the access of population and farmers to markets which have been substantially disrupted. 
A World Bank-executed Technical Assistance (TA) funded by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery (GFDRR) is starting to address the issue of vulnerability of the road network and how to improve 
road asset management. Implementation of the TA outcome will be implemented as one of the components 
of the proposed RLRCP. 

In recent years, several IFIs have supported road sector investments and reforms in Albania. Several IFIs 
including the World Bank, European Commission, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD), European Investment Bank (EIB), and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) are the main partners 
supporting the GoA including: (i) improvement of planning and budgeting process, (ii) introducing better 
management practices to avoid future arrears, (iii) deepening ARA reforms , and (iv) providing financing for 
priority projects. Bilateral partners including the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) and the 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) are involved in supporting the new municipalities to 
capacity building, asset and resource management under their administration with a focus on water supply 
and sanitation, solid waste, and municipal financing. The proposed RLRCP presents an opportunity to develop 
an overall investment and policy framework for the regional and local roads sector that can be supported 
through the joint efforts of different development partners. In this context, the EBRD is currently in discussions 
with GoA to match the World Bank financing with a further US$50 million loan for a parallel operation. 

Gender gap. Gender gaps in construction and transport sectors, where less than 5 percent and 17 percent of 
all employed respectively, are women, are very substantial. Therefore, promoting women’s economic 
opportunities as part of the efforts to reverse poverty trends and boost shared prosperity are part of the 
project objectives. A separate TA funded by the State and Peace Building Fund (SPBF) administered by the 
World Bank will be looking into opportunities in this regard. The results from this TA will be implemented 
through the proposed RLRCP. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers and to strengthen 
selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets
 

Key Results 
 

• Number of agricultural and tourism centers connected by improved project roads 
 

• Reduced travel time on project roads 
 

• Demonstrated better asset management capacity by selected municipalities through adoption of 
Municipal Transport Investment and Maintenance Plan. 

 
D. Project Description  

 
The Albania RLRCP is expected to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$50 million. The RLRCP will focus on the 
role that improved roads can play in enabling connectivity driven economic gains, particularly in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors, both key drivers of growth and employment in Albania. More specifically, 
the proposed RLRCP will support tourism development through improving road access to existing and 
potential tourism destinations and providing quality tourism-friendly amenities (for example, parking lot for 
tourist bus, viewpoints) and signage along the roads in the project areas. It will also support the integration 
of agricultural producers to agri-food value chains and market participation, particularly for women who make 
up the majority of the workforce in agriculture. 

To achieve these overarching goals and set an example for investment prioritization at the municipal level, 
a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated in the RLRCP road selection. The selection of project 
roads was done through a two-step prioritization process including the development of a long list of 1,400 km 
candidate roads based on consultations between the ADF and 61 municipalities and a short list of 200 km 
candidate roads using multi-criteria analysis, considering tourism destinations, agriculture potential, 
beneficiary population, and economic efficiency indicators. The selection process reflects the priority from 
the municipalities as well as the GoA’s vision on rural roads investments that support tourism and agriculture. 
This approach also allows for easy scale-up to a program for the GoA, municipalities, and other developmental 
partners to implement. 

The RLRCP will include capacity building TA in support of the municipalities to improve management of road 
assets and strengthen links between roads, improved agricultural market access, and tourism development 
plans where they exist. The RLRCP is designed to address the sustainability of road maintenance at the 
municipal level which is a significant challenge following the transfer of local and regional road assets to the 
municipal level. The RLRCP is also designed to address road safety issues in regional and secondary roads in 
the selected municipalities to provide safer and sustainable infrastructure. 

In addition, the project will implement action plans on ways to promote climate resilience and women’s 
economic opportunities in regional and local roads in Albania as follows:  

• Climate Resilient Road Assets for Albania: Albania’s vulnerability to climate change and natural 
disasters, for example, flooding, landslides, and earthquakes, within the road sector, is being analyzed 
under a separate Technical Assistance and its outcome will inform the prioritization of investment to 



provide more sustainable and resilient road assets. The TA outcomes will be incorporated into the 
RLRCP designs of specific road sections.  Improved regional and local roads at time provide an 
alternative to the national road network critical links during extreme weather events. The TA will also 
include recommendations to adjust the design standards for regional and local roads and apply them 
to the project roads. 

• Promoting Woman’s Employment in Road Sector in Albania: the capacity of local stakeholders to 
reach out and increase women’s inclusion and participation in road maintenance programs is being 
analyzed under a separate TA. The outcome will consider policy options to provide support to 
contractors that explore opportunities to promote women’s employment in high skilled jobs in their 
respective workforce.  The focus will be on more and better jobs.  
 

The project will finance the following components. 

Component 1. Accessibility Improvement (Total cost US$47.03 million; IBRD US$47.03 million) 

This component will finance the rehabilitation of regional and local roads; consultancy service for designs, civil 
works supervision, and technical and road safety audits; and road safety initiatives.  

• Subcomponent 1.1. Climate resilient road rehabilitation works (Total cost US$45.83 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of about 50 km of regional and local roads within 5 to 6 
municipalities. The roads will be designed according to Albanian standards with particular attention to their 
climate resilience (such as to flooding and landslides) given the vulnerability of the network. As a first-year 
program, three project roads in three municipalities, totaling 40 km, have been selected based on further 
surveys and a rigorous multi-criteria analysis on the short-listed 200 km of roads. The remaining roads will be 
identified and prioritized during implementation. Where roads serve tourism areas or pass through urban 
areas, attention will be given to footpaths, bicycle paths, safety improvements, orientation signage, and 
aesthetic considerations. In addition, new bike lanes and sidewalks will be build, to encourage the shift to 
cleaner modes of transport. This subcomponent will also finance all necessary designs, civil works supervision, 
and technical and road safety audits, although the designs of the first-year program were already financed by 
the GoA.  

• Subcomponent 1.2. Road Safety Initiatives (Total cost US$1.2 million). This subcomponent will 
consist of identification of potential road safety interventions on regional and local roads that are not included 
in Subcomponent 1.1 but within the project municipalities. Identification efforts shall include both road risk 
mapping using available crash data and a road safety inspection of sections linked to Component 1.1 roads. 
These interventions will address accident blackspots and include traffic calming measures, footpaths, crash 
barriers and junction design. 

Component 2. Capacity Building for Municipalities (Total cost US$0.85 million; IBRD: US$0.85 million) 

This component will build capacity in the project municipalities’ to manage their transport system and road 
assets in a sustainable way and to maximize the impacts of improved accessibility on agricultural production 
and tourism potential. It will develop standard approaches that will be implemented in a few municipalities 
in this project but can subsequently be rolled out more widely. The following activities are envisaged: 

• Subcomponent 2.1. Municipal Transport Capacity Development for all Participating Municipalities 
(Total cost US$0.45 million). This subcomponent will focus on developing municipal systems for road 
maintenance and road planning following the recent transfer of road assets to the municipal level. It will: (i) 
assess municipalities capacity, local planning instruments and processes for road planning and maintenance 
and public transport planning, (ii) develop recommendations for addressing weaknesses, and (iii) provide 
training based on the recommendations. The focus will be on road maintenance and will include support on 
programming, budgeting, sustainable financing for road rehabilitation and maintenance priorities, asset 
management and maintenance execution. Public transport planning will extend to public parking and bus 
terminals, and safety measures. The subcomponent will also finance the preparation of a standard service 
level agreement contract for maintenance between the municipalities and the service provider and will 
provide training to the municipalities on its use.  

• Subcomponent 2.2. Linking Farmers to Markets (Total cost US$0.20 million). This subcomponent will 
support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide technical support for 
linking agricultural producers to local demand, including through local markets and tourism centers. The focus 
will be on production areas adjacent to the road infrastructure supported by the project. The subcomponent 
will provide an assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under 
the 100 villages program or other development partner programs. Potential activities include  supply chain 
activities for key agricultural products; recommendations for alleviating impediments in connecting roads, 
warehouses, harvesting facilities, regulations; developing collection zones; and promoting “Eat Albania” 
restaurants. This subcomponent will also increase the World Bank’s evidence base for supporting women 
smallholder farmers and women-led agriculture small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to start and/or enhance 
their participation in agri-food value chains in Albania; analyze the barriers that women face in accessing 
markets, in general, but particularly in light of the new business opportunities that the project is hoped to 
deliver; and recommend the ways to address them.9 

• Subcomponent 2.3. Managing for Tourism Growth (Total cost US$0.20 million). As above this 
subcomponent will support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide 
technical support to promote agro-tourism in the project municipalities. The subcomponent will provide an 
assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under the 100 villages 
program or other development partner programs. The subcomponent will also provide technical support to 
concerned municipalities to plan for this growth and mitigate any possible environmental and social impacts. 
Where appropriate support may also be given to steer public and private investments in tourism related 
infrastructure and services.        

Component 3. Implementation Management Support (Total cost US$2.0 million; IBRD: US$2.0 million) 

This component includes incremental operational cost of the ADF, development and maintenance of 
Geographic Information System (GIS) and prioritization database for regional and local roads, midterm 
evaluation, and capacity-building initiatives for the ADF. It will also include the implementation of a Project 
Impact Assessment to assess the project’s impacts on key social, transport, agriculture, and tourism indicators. 
This is similar to the approach used by ADF in the previous Rural Road Program using financing from the 
development partners and outsourced expertise.    

                                                           
9 The project scope and available budget will likely not allow for addressing most of the recommendations resulting from the gender 
analysis of this subcomponent. Still, in light of the large gender gaps in agriculture and the focus that the CPF rightly puts on them, 
the team considered it important to integrate gender analysis as part of the envisaged study. The recommendations will be provided 
to the client and will also be used to inform the World Bank’s future activities.  

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The project will be implemented over four years and seven months by the ADF, which has strong experience 
and track record as an implementing agency of road projects financed by the World Bank and other 
development partners since its inception in 1993. A Project Management Team (PMT) will be established 
within the ADF, staffed by its own personnel, which will also coordinate with representatives of the respective 
municipalities. The PMT will manage project activities, such as procurement, social impact assessments, 
safeguard functions, monitoring and evaluation, and so on. When necessary, the project management 
function will be supported by consultants. A budget for such operating costs has been allocated in Component 
3. 

It is recognized that the participation of municipalities is critical during both project preparation and 
implementation. During the project preparation, the ADF has worked very closely with municipalities in the 
prioritization exercise, and several consultations with municipalities and local communities have taken place 
during the preliminary designs of the project roads. Before starting the civil works, an Investment Agreement 
and a Function and Maintenance Agreement will be signed by the municipalities, defining duties that 
municipalities must carry, e.g. maintenance requirement, after the project roads are handed over. The ADF 
will monitor the compliance of these agreements. When procuring and implementing capacity building 
activities, municipalities will provide ADF with inputs to TOR and sign off outputs.  

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities. This Component will also 
finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and 
local road network.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself financed under the same component will 
also support improving the road safety aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive 
social impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will finance rehabilitation of priority regional roads across the municipalities. Construction will 
mainly occur within the existing right-of-way, and the estimated cumulative length of project road segments 


is 50 km. Three project roads were selected for implementation in the first year, and are located in Shkoder, 
Pogradec and Fier municipalities. There is no geographical focus for the remaining roads to be financed. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Bekim Imeri, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Natasa Vetma, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is categorized as category B and not 
expected to have significant or irreversible 
environmental impacts given the rehabilitative 
nature of works to be financed.  Anticipated civil 
works will primarily entail rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads.  Potential negative 
environmental impacts may include, but not limited 
to: (i) temporary construction -related effects on 
noise, dust, and air quality; (ii) temporary localized 
water quality impacts resulting from possible 
drainage and sewage pollution; and (iii) temporary 
changes in access to, and the use of, public spaces 
during construction. The exact project locations are 
still not known as the prioritization of rural roads is 
still ongoing. For that reason, preparation of 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) is 
proposed prior to appraisal. ESMF is prepared to 
facilitate screening, assessment, and management of 
environmental and social issues for activities to be 
taken up by the project in subsequent years. The 
ESMF ensures preparation of appropriate and World 
Bank safeguard policy-compliant safeguard 
instruments during project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in 
nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that 
reason, the ESMF defines procedures for identifying 
and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. 
No new construction will be allowed in nature 


protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but 
only rehabilitation of the existing roads. In addition, 
no activities will be allowed in or in proximity of 
critical habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not have any impacts on forests 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project is not expected to trigger pest 
management policy. The investments will not 
promote or increase the use of the pesticide. 
Although the project will finance solely roads 
rehabilitation, the ESMF provides guidance for use of 
herbicides for roads maintenance. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project is not expected to trigger OP 4.11. The 
investments will be focused on rehabilitation of 
existing roads. Nevertheless, due to the countries 
cultural richness, during the earthworks chance finds 
might be possible. For that reason, ESMF includes 
provisions on chance finds and required 
practices.For each such subproject, the ESIA and 
ESMP will be prepared, prior reviewed by the World 
Bank environmental specialist, and 
cleared/consulted with the Albanian Agency for 
Protected areas (or relevant environmental 
authorities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No Not relevant 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads. Roads connecting 
villages with the regional centers, touristic/cultural 
sites and agricultural fields. Given the linear nature 
of the works the land-take impacts will be minor and 
linear, adjacent to the existing road. Thus there will 
be small land taken. Displacement of households or 
businesses is not expected either, nor any impact on 
livelihoods. Given that the project is a rehabilitation 
of existing roads, there will be no need for access 
roads, thus it is not expected to address associated 
land-take cases. To address the social safeguards 
instrument, the borrower will prepare Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that will guide the land take 
activities during the whole cycle of the project 
implementation. If for any sub-project it is expected 
that the footprint will be known during the 
preparation phase of the project then the borrower 
will prepare site specific abbreviated or full fledge 
(depending of the impact) Resettlement Action Plan. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No Not relevant 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project activities will not have impact on 
international waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Not relevant 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities and short new segments 
only where they present natural continuation / connection. Under the same component, the project will also finance 
and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and local road 
network. This implies that the project will possibly have some adverse environmental impacts; however, these would 
be site specific and would not be significant nor long-term. For the project to remain category B, ESMF defines 
following environmental criteria for eligible subprojects: a) category A sub projects will not be financed; b) for sub 
projects in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, only rehabilitation of the roads would be allowed and 
no new construction. No activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats; c) New construction should 
be limited and allowed only in some specific cases for example where segments are missing or alignment of a section 
that is currently particularly difficult of dangerous; d) The construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of roads on 
existing right of way would be allowed only in form of one or two lane roads. 
Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in the nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that reason, 
the ESMF defines procedures for identification and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. No new 
construction would be allowed in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but only rehabilitation of the 
existing roads. In addition, no activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats. For each of such sub 
projects ESIA and ESMP would be prepared, priory reviewed by WB environmental specialist and cleared / consulted 
with the Albanian Agency for Protected areas (or relevant Environmental Authorities). For all supported TA activities, 
the TORs for these activities should include environmental and social considerations in line with the triggered 
safeguards operational policies. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself will also support improving the road safety 
aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive social impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
As the project will finance mainly rehabilitation of existing roads, no major alternatives were, nor will be considered. 
Some alternatives will be taken in consideration during design when considering roads width and possible new 
connections. All those alternatives will be examined in site specific environmental due diligence documents prepared 
during project implementation. The ESMF screening procedure will help guide the Client in ensuring that the site-

specific impacts are mitigated, that no additional safeguards policies are triggered and that no category-A works are 
financed 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Albanian Development Fund (ADF) will be implementing the project. ADF has experience in managing 
environmental and social impacts of World Bank-financed infrastructure investments and other infrastructure projects 
financed by international finance institutions. The ADF project team includes experienced environmental and social 
specialists.  
To comply, the ADF prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as Resettlement 
Policy Framework, satisfactory to the Bank, to guide the overall project as the exact subproject locations are still not 
known or are currently being assessed. The purpose of this ESMF is to guide the Environmental and Social Assessment 
process, i.e. to facilitate screening, assessment, and management of environmental and social issues for activities to 
be taken up by the project in subsequent years. Environmental due diligence documents envisaged by ESMF include: 
ESIA, ESMPs and ESMP checklists. In addition to ESMF, the Borrower prepared a sample Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for Fier-Seman road rehabilitation. 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared parallel with the Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESMF)/ The documents were disclosed on the December 22th and the consultation held on January 4th . 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Major stakeholders are ADF and municipalities in which the projects will be implemented. ESMF documents was 
disclosed and publicly consulted prior to appraisal. ESMF with the call for public consultation was disclosed on the ADF 
website on December 22, 2017 and major municipalities participating in a project (paper or electronic) for two weeks. 
The ESIA for Fier-Seman road was disclosed on ADF website and in Fier municipality on January 5, 2018. In addition to 
the public call, the government and relevant non-governmental organizations were invited through official invitations 
sent out by the ADF. Public consultation meetings were held in Tirana (January 4, 2018r) and Fier (January 15, 2018). 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed and consulted parallel with the Environmental and Social 
Framework (ESMF) 
The similar procedure will be followed for site specific ESMPs during project implementation as defined by the ESMF. 
All due diligence documents will be disclosed on the ADF websites respectively, and hardcopy will be available at their 
premises as well in participating municipalities for at least two weeks following public consultation as per ESMF. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agricultural Productivity Program for Southern Africa - Angola & Lesotho (P164486) 

 
 

  
Oct 01, 2017 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23363 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Africa P164486  Agricultural 
Productivity Program 
for Southern Africa - 
Angola & Lesotho 
(P164486) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 01, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Leostho Ministry of 
Finance,Angola Ministry of 
Finance 

Angola Ministry of 
Agriculture, Lesotho Ministry 
of Agriculture and Food 
Security 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the availability of improved agricultural technologies in participating countries in the Southern Africa 
Development Community (SADC) region. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 45.00 

Total Financing 45.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 45.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 25.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 20.00 

          IDA Credit 20.00 

   


Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Southern Africa’s increasingly integrated regional market presents opportunities for greater economic growth and 
poverty reduction. Southern Africa is a diverse region of both low income and middle-income countries and is home to 
over 330 million people connected through an increasingly dynamic regional market. The region hosts two well-
established pan-African institutions covering agriculture and commerce—the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), which are actively pursuing a regional 
integration agenda. 
 
Agriculture varies in importance from country to country within the region but is the primary source of subsistence, 
employment, and income for most of the population. Particularly in the lower income countries, agriculture is the 
largest contributor to GDP, and the performance of the agricultural sector has a strong influence on growth, 
employment, food security, and poverty. In Angola, while the agriculture sector contributes only on average 5.5 percent 
to GDP, 44 percent of the employed population works in the sector. More than half of Angola’s poor are in rural areas 
and depend almost exclusively on agriculture for their livelihood.  Within Lesotho, agriculture contributes around 6 per 
cent to the GDP, employs almost 60 per cent of the labor force (on subsistence farms) and provides livelihood 
sustenance for 90 per cent of the rural population.  In Lesotho, more than half the population – 57 percent – live below 
the poverty line, many of whom reliant on agricultural activities. 
 
Both Angola and Lesotho have experienced development challenges common to the Southern Africa region: economies 
heavily reliant on natural resource exports with high levels unemployment and food and nutrition insecurity in rural 
areas. For many countries in Southern Africa over-reliance on oil and mineral resource driven growth has led to 
increased focus on economic diversification and more inclusive growth.  
 
Within Angola the 2015/2016 oil price shock highlighted the need to more forcefully address vulnerabilities and 
dependence on oil, and diversify the economy and better manage oil revenue volatility. The shock prompted the 
Government of Angola to accelerate efforts to diversify the economy and reduce dependence on food imports. The 
Government’s strategy in the face of the crisis placed a strong emphasis on agriculture as an immediate way to increase 
domestic production and reduce imports. Increased agricultural production (particularly cereals and vegetables) and 
productivity have the potential to ease the current account pressures and the foreign exchange scarcity. 
 
Lesotho’s economic growth has been driven by natural resource based exports – water and diamonds –  and is strongly 



linked to trade with South Africa, where Lesotho also struggles to compete with South Africa’s more efficient firms or 
farms. Lesotho’s National Strategic Development Plan prioritized development of several sectors – agriculture and rural 
economy, manufacturing, tourism and mining. Measures to develop processing and manufacturing capacity – including 
agro-based – are important to diversification efforts and address rural unemployment.  
 
The region’s rich land and water resources have potential but the agriculture sector has not yet been fully developed to 
contribute to economic transformation. Southern Africa region falls within the so-called Guinea Savannah zone, which 
has significant potential for highly productive commercial agriculture as with similar agro-ecologies in other parts of the 
world such as Brazil and Thailand. Angola is the third largest country in sub–Saharan Africa in terms of geographic size 
and much of its agricultural land is within the underexploited Guinea Savanah zone. A major agricultural producer before 
the civil war, Angola’s agricultural performance remains a fraction of its potential.   
 
In the past 50 years, Lesotho has gone from a position of virtual self-sufficiency in grain production to being highly 
dependent on imports of grain.  A mountainous country with limited amounts of arable land, Lesotho nonetheless has 
areas of high agricultural potential and the possibility to exploit its extensive water resources and unique highland 
growing environment – particularly for higher value crops.  
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Raising agricultural productivity is necessary if agriculture is to contribute to growth and poverty reduction. Agricultural 
productivity has increased in southern Africa, but remains well below potential. This remains the case in Angola and 
Lesotho where even average yields are below southern Africa regional averages. Most of the growth in productivity in 
Africa has come from bringing previously uncultivated land into production, rather than from intensification made 
possible by technical change. Comparisons of total factor productivity growth have shown technical change accounted 
for a large share of agricultural productivity growth in Asia and Latin America, but a very small share of agricultural 
productivity growth in Africa in recent decades. Southern Africa has experienced more technology-driven productivity 
growth than other regions in Africa, but the gains have occurred mainly in middle income countries. Analysis has 
identified several yield gaps (the difference between actual and potential yields) that could be narrowed with additional 
investments in technology adaptation and dissemination. 
 
Regional approaches to technology generation and dissemination are a more effective and strategic than national 
efforts alone. Regional integration has proven to be an effective strategy that can allow groups of countries facing 
common research challenges to increase the efficiency of their investments in agricultural R&D. Adoption of a regional 
approach to research based on the concentration of resources within a reduced number of large, specialized research 
institutes serving an expansive shared technology space can deliver many benefits. First, it can reduce duplication by 
allowing a single regional research institute to undertake work that otherwise would be done in parallel within multiple 
national research institutes. Second, it can help capture economies of scale by concentrating resources within a single 
institute, where they can achieve a critical mass. Third, it can increase the payoffs to research by facilitating 
dissemination of improved technologies across national borders, thereby vastly increasing the number of beneficiaries. 
Fourth, it can mitigate the isolation that frequently occurs in small, fragmented research institutes by creating effective 
mechanisms for facilitating knowledge exchange and technology transfer. 
 
Southern Africa continues to offer attractive opportunities for regional research. Groups of countries within southern 
Africa share similar agro-ecological zones and farming systems, suggesting that there is potential for finding shared 
solutions to common problems. Technology spillover is already occurring within the sub-region, and several high-


yielding crop varieties and improved crop and livestock management practices have been successfully disseminated 
across borders. Significant unrealized potential remains, however, for expanding spillovers.  Southern Africa is aso 
vulnerable to climate shocks and many countries are likely to face greater variability and more pronounced extremes of 
temperature and rainfall. Adaptation measures—particularly the adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices—will 
be needed to maintain productivity and ensure resilience in the face of more frequent and more severe shocks. 
 
National systems for generating and disseminating agricultural technology are operating well below their potential, 
constrained by inadequate facilities, shortages of qualified staff, and low levels of overall investment and budget 
support. These factors, in turn, are linked to the high degree of fragmentation in the deployment of resources within the 
sector, as limited financing is spread over a range of priorities. Given the small size of many countries and economies in 
the sub-region, few can afford fully elaborated technology development systems capable of addressing all of the crops 
and livestock breeds in their highly diversified production systems. This particularly true in the case of Angola and 
Lesotho, which have small number of PhD scientists (particularly for Lesotho) and infrastructure that has largely been 
devastated by the civil war.   
 
The regional productivity program model has demonstrated satisfactory outcomes.  The Agricultural Productivity 
Program for Southern Africa (APPSA) was approved in March 2013 with IDA financing to Malawi, Mozambique and 
Zambia. APPSA is part of the Bank’s larger portfolio of regional agricultural productivity programs and was third regional 
operation in a series that followed the successful implementation of the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 
(WAAPP) and the East Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP).  Like the first two programs, it was expected 
that APPSA would expand to include additional countries as they expressed interest and if financing was available.  
 
In terms of results, to date APPSA has launched 74 R&D sub-projects which are currently making 156 technologies 
available to farmers (new and “on the shelf” technologies). This includes 47 technologies in Malawi (37 seed varieties; 10 
agronomic practices); 63 technologies in Mozambique (11 seed varieties; 28 agronomic practices, 16 pest and diseases 
management practices, 3 water management practices, and 5 post-harvest technologies); and 46 technologies in Zambia 
(31 seed varieties; 15 agronomic practices). Additional results include improving cross border movement of technology 
through the introduction of new plant material and varieties; scaling up extension and dissemination of improved 
technologies to reach more farmers; improved seed production; building a larger pipeline of qualified agricultural 
scientists – particularly women scientists; and upgrading of laboratory and fields to modern standards. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
APPSA is consistent with the emerging priorities of the new Regional Integration Strategy and the Africa Region 
priorities. Africa Region has prioritized IBRD and IDA funding around macroeconomic stability, improving 
competitiveness and economic diversification, improving human capital and access to basic services; and resilience to 
shocks. APPSA touches closely on the latter three areas with a focus on increasing.   
 
The Angola CPF is currently under review, but agriculture remains a high priority and APPSA aligns to Pillar I of the 
outgoing CPF, which is focused on supporting integrated national economic diversification and regionally balanced 
development. Productivity is central with a focus on increasing yields and developing post-harvest processing 
technologies.  APPSA is also consistent with Lesotho’s FY16 – 20 CPF Focus Area II: Promoting Private Sector Jobs 
Creation, which will direct support towards improving smallholder and MSME agriculture productivity. The CPF 
specifically prioritizes raising productivity, strengthening farmers’ capacity, fostering stronger marketing linkage, 
substituting imports from South Africa, create job opportunities, and promote women’s status in rural communities. 
 
     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
To increase the availability of improved agricultural technologies in participating countries in the Southern Africa 
Development Community (SADC) region. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
Results would be measured using the APPSA results – which include the following PDO indicators: 
 

• Number of technologies that are being made available to farmers and other end users   
• Percentage of Lead Farmers in targeted areas who are aware of an improved technology promoted by the 

Project  
• Number of technologies generated or promoted by the Project in one participating country that are released 

in another participating country 
• Direct Project beneficiaries (number) 
• of which female (percentage) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
APPSA’s regional design. APPSA is currently supporting agricultural research, technology dissemination, and capacity 
building activities associated within a regional collaborative framework around priority farming systems/commodities 
value chains.  These have been identified on the basis of a regional priority-setting study that identified leading R&D 
priorities for the SADC region, as well as the priorities indicated by each country. To date APPSA is actively supporting 
research and dissemination activities around maize, sorghum, legumes (beans, soybean, cowpea, pigeon pea), rice, 
cassava, and cross cutting climate smart agriculture practices. Regional Centers of Leadership have been established in 
in legumes (Zambia), maize based farming systems (Malawi) and rice based farming systems (Mozambique).  
 
The proposed expansion would allow the addition of horticulture and roots and tubers (cassava and potato) to APPSA 
activities with Angola taking a lead on cassava and Lesotho taking a lead on horticulture. This adds a valuable dimension 
to APPSA with a stronger focus on higher value production (fruits, vegetables, potatoes) and processing.     
 
Component 1: Technology Generation and Dissemination. The first component will finance technology generation and 
dissemination activities associated with the commodity or commodity groups being targeted by APPSA. Regional R&D 
activities for the initial targeted commodities have been developed in the initial set of APPSA participating countries and 
additional activities proposed by Angola and Lesotho as part of as part of the preparation of each country’s RCoL 
proposal. R&D activities include technology generation (research), but also technology dissemination activities 
(extension, strengthening of innovation systems).  
 
All activities financed under Component 1 are undertaken through collaborative R&D projects involving the participation 
of at least two countries. To date 74 R&D projects have been developed  through the following process: (i) for each 
commodity being targeted by APPSA, priorities are identified and endorsed at national level; (ii) draft concept notes are 
developed through communication with other regional partners; (iii) for each commodity being targeted by APPSA, 
regional planning meetings will be convened by CCARDESA to facilitate the finalization of regional research and 
dissemination priorities and associated R&D project proposals; (iv) a peer review process facilitated by CCARDESA 
provides feedback on the relevance and quality of R&D project proposals; and (v) R&D project proposals will be 

confirmed and agreed at national level.  
 
Participating countries will participate in R&D projects relating to the commodity farming system being targeted by the 
RCoL that they are hosting, as well as in R&D projects relating to the commodity farming systems being targeted by 
RCoLs in other countries; or additional R&D priorities that are agreed collectively by all participating countries. 
Therefore, each country is expected to devote a share of its Component 1 funding to R&D projects related to the 
commodity farming system being targeted by the RCoL that it is hosting, but a portion of its Component 1 funds will also 
go to support R&D projects related to the commodity farming systems being targeted by RCoLs hosted by other 
countries or any other regional priorities.  
 
Technology dissemination priorities: APPSA will support the dissemination of improved technologies by providing 
resources for RCoLs to engage with a range of partners in scaling up the use of promising innovations of relevance to the 
targeted commodities. APPSA will help to strengthen the links between researchers, extension agents, input 
distributors, and farmers and other end users, but lead responsibility for technology dissemination will remain with the 
national extension system.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening the Institutional and Enabling Environment for Technology Adoption. Component 2 will 
support activities to strengthen institutional capacity of RCoLs and to facilitate the movement of improved technology. 
The choice of activities to be financed will be driven primarily by the specific needs of each country, as identified at 
national level. In general APPSA will support: (i) upgrading of research infrastructure including rehabilitation and 
construction of physical infrastructure; farm, laboratory, and office equipment; and information technology and 
knowledge management systems; (ii) upgrading of infrastructure for sanitary and phytoanitary (SPS) management; (iii) 
improving institutional administration and performance management systems within RCoLs or SPS systems; (iv) 
developing human capital including by providing scientific or technical training at the post graduate level; by upgrading 
skills through short courses or targeted training, and scientific exchanges; and (iv) strengthening seed production 
capacity, seed regulatory functions, and related services.   
 
Component 3: Coordination and Facilitation. Component 3 will finance three main categories of activities:  
 
National level research coordination and management: At national level, APPSA will finance project coordination 
activities, including planning and budgeting, management and administration, monitoring and evaluation, safeguards 
compliance, and regional engagement. If necessary, APPSA could finance consultants to ensure that all essential project 
coordination activities are carried out effectively. Government counterpart resources will be used to pay staff-related 
costs not eligible for IDA or IBRD funding.  
 
Regional facilitation by CCARDESA: At the regional level, APPSA will finance regional facilitation activities including: (i) 
planning, monitoring and evaluation activities related to regional collaboration; (ii) regional exchange of information, 
knowledge and technologies; and (iii) technical assistance and capacity building. Many of these activities will be carried 
out by CCARDESA, which will play an important role in facilitating the development of R&D projects, including organizing 
the peer review process and providing quality control. The regional facilitation activities to be performed by CCARDESA 
will be supported using funds from a subsidiary agreement between the APPSA participating countries.  
 
R&D policy analysis and dialogue: APPSA financing will support analytical work, needs assessments, and policy dialogue 
or policy harmonization activities in key areas that affect R&D at national and regional level. Work will focus on analysis 
of relevant policies and legislation for intellectual property rights, operationalization of the SADC harmonized seed 
regulatory system, implementation of biosafety regulations, and similar topics. Discussions will take place during 



implementation to determine whether Project resources could be used productively to advance the regional seed 
agenda. If the participating countries agree that APPSA could play a useful role by supporting key players other than the 
RCoLs, support for these key players could be channeled through CCARDESA. 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Project activities will take place on research stations and farmer fields (on farm trials and demonstrations). The activities 

will all take place on land that is already part of existing agricultural research stations in the respective countries. 
However, as not all land is currently in active use by the client and the exact location of all project activities are not 
known, OP4.12 has been triggered as a precautionary measure.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in Angola are dispersed through small communities in southern Angola border regions and their 

exact location is difficult to identify. Therefore, once potential project locations are confirmed, OP4.10 may be triggered 
to provide clear guidance if IP groups are encountered during the course of implementation. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Both Angola and Lesotho have some experience in implementing Bank safeguards requirements through other projects 

but capacities remain limited in the specific implementing agencies. In Angola the implementing agency is the Ministry of 
Agriculture through its Institute of Agriculture (Institute de Investigacão Agricola (IIA)). In Lesotho the implementing 
agency is the Ministry of Agriculture through its Department for Agricultural Research (DAR). In each agency, incremental 
staff and consultants will be recruited to ensure implementation of safeguards instruments and monitoring compliance of 
all components. In addition, the World Bank will provide guidance and training to ensure that the client will have the 
adequate capacity to implement, monitor and report on environmental and social issues. Both Angola and Lesotho, have 
established project implementation units for other World Bank agriculture projects that will be utilized for shared 
services, and fiduciary and safeguards issues. 
 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 



Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a result of: (i) proposed 
research activities under component 1 which could 
include breeding, germplasm, and on farm technology 
testing that can involve the application of agro-
chemicals including chemical pesticides; and (ii) 
capacity building for Regional Centers of Leadership 
under component 2, which would include financing for 
civil works investment in field rehabilitation, office and 
lab infrastructure and irrigation related upgrading or 
construction. Angola and Lesotho will prepare an 
Environment and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) as the safeguard instruments which will 
provide mitigation measures and a uniform approach 
for addressing identified potential negative 
environmental impacts as well as screening 
procedures and monitoring plans for compliance 
management.  
 
The project is proposed to be classified as an EA 
category B. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The policy is not triggered as the program would not 
involve significant conversion of natural habitats 
through its direct or indirect activities. APPSA support 
under component 1 activities are intended to improve 
the productivity of agriculture through the adoption of 
improved technologies (intensification) rather than 
expansion of agricultural production (extensification). 
Technologies developed, tested and released under 
the project would not specifically target natural 
habitats but would aim to improve the productivity of 
existing agricultural practices. Under Component 2 the 
project is expected to finance infrastructure upgrading 
on already existing agricultural research stations and 
fields. No new land would be acquired and natural 
habitats are not known to be inside or adjacent to 
research stations. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The policy is not triggered as program activities do not 
have any direct impacts on the health and quality of 
forests, people who depend on forests, nor is there an 
aim to change the management, protection, or 
utilization of forests.  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 
The program may purchase pesticides or 
agrochemicals at very low volumes as part of project 
supported research activities. No pesticides or 

     

agrochemicals will be purchased and supplied to 
farmers outside of their participation in research trials 
or demonstrations activities.  Adoption of improved 
agricultural technology generated by APPSA could 
indirectly result in increased use of pesticides and 
agrochemicals by farmers, but the scale of this indirect 
impact is not known. For this reason, each 
participating country will prepare a Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) which incorporates Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) procedures. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The policy is not triggered as implementation is not 
expected to involve any known physical cultural 
resources and will take place on land already actively 
in use for agricultural purposes either within 
agricultural research stations or farmer fields. 
Nonetheless, lessons learned from other projects in 
Lesotho have shown that in some of the districts 
where the project will be implemented, such as Leribe 
and Butha Buthe, artefacts from historical cultural 
resources have been found at some places. Therefore, 
the Chance Find Procedures will be included in the 
ESMF in case of chance finds during implementation 
project. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 TBD 

This Policy may be triggered for Angola, given the 
possibility of IP communities being present in the 
project areas. Based on the review of potential project 
locations, an IPPF will be prepared in order determine 
and provide measures to avoid and mitigate potential 
negative impacts. The framework will be specific for 
each group identified and will as well be focused on 
providing positive benefit for this vulnerable 
population. 
OP4.10 is not triggered in Lesotho as there are no 
indigenous people within the project area of influence. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy is triggered in Angola and to be determined 
in Lesotho. Although no land acquisition is expected 
under the project and activities will take place on land 
already under the management of agricultural 
research stations or farmers, in some cases land is 
currently fallow or not actively used and local 
communities may have encroached into fields for their 
own farming. While all land which is required for 
project activities belongs to the respective clients, 
there is a risk that informal occupation or use may 
occur during project implementation. OP4.12 is 
therefore triggered as a precautionary measure to 



guide implementation and mitigation measures to 
avoid resettlement impact. An RPF will be prepared in 
Angola and a determination made whether it is 
required for Lesotho during the course of preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The policy is triggered. Although the project would not 
invest in large scale dam construction the project 
would invest in small productive rural infrastructure, 
such as the establishment or rehabilitation and 
improvement of small-scale irrigation and drainage 
works for research stations under the RCoLs, and 
possibly include small-scale earth dams to harvest and 
store water. These structures, however these would 
generally be far less than 10 m in height. The FAO 
manual on small dams will guide implementation and 
be incorporated into the relevant safeguards 
instruments. The small dams would be designed and 
the construction supervised by a qualified engineer. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The policy is not triggered as the project would not 
invest in any large scale irrigation works that would 
adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flow 
within shared waterways. Small scale irrigation within 
the context of technology demonstration or research 
could be financed by the program but would be within 
the context of research facilities and would not exceed 
more than 50  hectares per station/center.  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The policy is not triggered as the area where the 
program will be implemented is not known to include 
any disputed areas  

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 28, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
An ESMF with PMP will be prepared for each country. An additional RPF will be prepared in Angola and if required in 

Lesotho. If OP 4.10 is triggered an IPPF will be prepared for Angola. Both Angola and Lesotho ESMFs will also have a 
screening process for sub-projects under component 1. 
 
 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 
 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 1 of 24  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-May-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Mozambique P164431 Smallholder Irrigated 
Agriculture and Market 
Access Project- IRRIGA  1 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 11-May-2018 19-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Ministry Of Agriculture 
and Food Security 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve smallholder agriculture productivity and market 
access in the project areas developed with irrigation and provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis 
or emergency. The Program objective of the Series of Projects (SOP) is to increase farmers' productivity and improve 
rural livelihoods through increased access to irrigation and to markets. 

 
Components 

Component 1-Institutional Capacity Building 
Component 2-Smallholder Irrigation Development and Management 
Component 3-Agriculture Intensification and Market Linkages 
Component 4- Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Component 5-Contingency and Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 57.00 

Total Financing 57.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 55.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 3 of 24  

 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 55.00 

          IDA Grant 55.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context  
1. Mozambique is a southeast African country, with a population of about 29 million people1, of which about 70 
percent reside in the rural areas.  It is estimated that about 90 percent of the rural population depend on agriculture 
as the main source of their livelihood.  With the current population growth rate of 2.7%, Mozambique’s population is 
expected to reach 46 million by 2040. The country is endowed with potentially large arable land, water, energy, gas 
and mineral resources; and is also strategically located to support economic development in the region.  

2. Poverty levels remain high and economic growth has been highly inequitable. Despite significant economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability over the last two decades between 1995 and 2015, rapid economic growth rates 
have not translated into poverty reduction. The country ranks 180 out of a total of 187 countries in the 2015 Human 
Development Index as reported by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and more than half of its 
population live in poverty2. Approximately, half (43 percent)2 of the children under age of five in Mozambique are 
stunted due to long-term effects of malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies. Economic growth has been driven 
primarily by few large-scale capital investment projects, with very limited benefits to the poor living in the rural areas. 
Poverty is particularly persistent in the country’s two most populous provinces, Nampula and Zambezia, where poverty 
rates have increased, while the rest of the country has experienced reduction in the poverty rates by over 10% between 
2003 and 2015.  

3. The country’s near-term economic prospects have been recently worsened by political and economic 
instability. Against the backdrop of the longer-term challenge of stimulating more inclusive growth, political and 

 
1 National Statistics Institute-INE (2018), Maputo, Mozambique. 
2 Disease data from the Ministry of Health and mortality data from the National Statistics Institute (MICS, 2008). 
 



economic developments in 2016 led to a rapid and dramatic deterioration in Mozambique’s macroeconomic 
framework. With large unreported debts and increased violence, the fast growth economy pre- 2016 slowed down 
significantly marked by high inflation and depreciation of local currency, coupled with falling commodity prices and 
exports. The country also suffered from the El Ninõ effects that led to extremely low rainfalls and a prolonged drought 
(2014 to 2018) which resulted in limited water supply and low agricultural productivity. This led to a humanitarian crisis 
in some of the most critical regions of the country. 

4. However, medium-term economic prospects appear positive as the country recovers from the recent 
economic crisis. Real GDP growth fell below four percent in 2016, but is expected to pick up in the range of five to six 
percent in 2018. Inflation has stabilized at around 18%, following some tight monetary policy reforms to curb currency 
depreciation and fiscal deterioration. Amidst a medium growth rate forecast, the country still faces a number of 
development constraints, including high-dependence on rain-fed agriculture; limited access to basic services such as 
water supply and electricity; and lack of resilience to climatic events due to limited infrastructure and institutional 
capacity, among others.  

5. Mozambique is among the most affected countries by climate change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Globally, 
Mozambique ranks 36th in terms of vulnerability and 144th in terms of readiness3, indicating significant risk to national 
social and economic development. The country has also been experiencing high rainfall variability, with more frequent 
droughts and floods. Highly variable rainfall, combined with limited water storage and flood control infrastructure, are 
among the main factors contributing to crop losses.  The pattern, frequency and severity of floods and droughts are 
also changing over time with significant adverse implications for agriculture productivity and production. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

6. Agriculture is the largest economic sector in Mozambique. The agriculture sector accounts for 26 percent of 
GDP and employs 78 percent of the labor force. However, most of the population is engaged in smallholder, rain-fed 
subsistence agriculture which frequently suffers from climate-induced shocks with significant negative impacts for 
overall economic growth and poverty reduction. Only about 10 percent of its 36 million ha of arable land is currently 
under cultivation. In 2012, there were about 3.9 million farms in Mozambique, of which 99 percent were smallholders, 
and only about 1 percent were medium and large scale commercially-oriented farms involved in competitive value 
chains, primarily for cash crops. More recently, however, there is an emerging trend and potential for the involvement 
of commercially-oriented smallholders in the value chains of horticulture and other crops as the case the out-growers’ 
systems develop under the implementation of the Sustainable Irrigation Development Project (PROIRRI). 

7. Low agricultural productivity is a binding constraint to Mozambique’s economic growth and poverty 
reduction. The country’s agriculture productivity levels are lower than the average of the low-income countries in 
southern Africa, particularly for maize and rice, two important crops for food security and trade in the region. According 
to FAO statistics 2016, the average yield of maize in Mozambique is 35 percent lower compared to Malawi and 76 
percent lower compared to Zambia. Average rice yields are similarly lower in Mozambique and are estimated at 60 
percent lower compared to Malawi and 50 percent lower compared to Zambia.  Key constraints include limited use of 
improved crop varieties (less than 3 percent of farmers); limited use of fertilizers (less than 5 percent of the farmers); 
inadequate agricultural support services, including extension (there are only 1,200 agricultural extension officers 
employed by the public sector in the country); very small area under irrigation (2.5 percent of the cultivated area); 
limited access to agricultural credit; limited access to mechanization and animal traction services (less than 9.5 percent 

 
3 ND-GAIN (University of Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index) is global index that summarizes a country's 
vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in combination with its readiness to improve resilience. 


of farmers used animal traction in 2014); and low connectivity and limited access to markets for inputs and outputs 
(road networks provide access to only about 33 percent of the rural population). Moreover, climate-related events and 
an inadequate land rights system present a substantial risk to agriculture productivity and sustainability and reduce 
the efficiency of land use. 

8. A gender gap persists in agricultural productivity in Mozambique. Female headed households tend to be 
poorer, and lack access to productive assets and labor. In addition, they are less likely to adopt improved technologies. 
As a result, they tend to be less productive than male headed households. In 2014, the average maize yield among 
female headed households was 50 kg less than average among male headed households, which represents an 8 percent 
yield gap. This result is consistent with the findings of the literature on agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa.  

9. The provinces of Manica, Nampula, Sofala and Zambézia have the highest agriculture potential, covering some 
of the most fertile soils in the country, along the Zambezi river basin, which accounts for about 17% of the irrigable 
land and 47% of the country’s water resources.4 Also, these four provinces are home to about 1.85 million smallholder 
farmers or 47% of all the country’s smallholder farmers. Nampula and Zambézia provinces face specific challenges: it 
is estimated that 11.21 million people or about 40 percent of the population in Mozambique live in these two provinces, 
but due to limited accessibility, rural households are more isolated and income from farm activities is three times lower 
as compared with the rest of country. In addition, there are generally low levels of irrigation coverage, and current 
investment patterns are not consistent with the highest-potential agriculture areas. 

10. Irrigation has the potential to significantly enhance smallholder agriculture productivity. Mozambique has a 
potential to irrigate 3 million ha. However, only about 180,000 ha are equipped with irrigation infrastructure, and only 
about half of this is currently fully operational. Thus, only about 3 percent of the country’s irrigation potential is 
currently being exploited. Under the World Bank financed PROIRRI – Sustainable Irrigation Development Project 
(P107598, closing in December 2018), smallholder farmers have doubled their productivity in vegetable crops and 
increased cropping intensity to three harvests per year from investments in improved irrigation infrastructure and 
services. PROIRRI developed a total of 3,000 ha under irrigation; out of which 1,700 ha for rice, 800 ha for horticulture 
and 500 ha for out-grower crops.  

11. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA) is the lead institution for agriculture development. 
MASA is responsible for formulating and implementing agricultural policies at the national level, including agrarian 
services, crop development, livestock, irrigation, forestry and food security. Irrigation development is the responsibility 
of the National Irrigation Institute (INIR) under MASA. INIR works in close collaboration with the other MASA 
departments responsible for agriculture and extension services, such as the National Directorate of Agriculture and 
Silviculture, the National Directorate of Agriculture Extension; and the Agriculture Development Fund which finances 
agriculture projects. Other relevant institutions for irrigation development include the National Directorate of Water 
Resources Management from the Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH), which is 
responsible for water resources planning and allocation, as well as the development and operation of major hydraulic 
works through the Regional Water Administrations; and the National Directorate of Land and Forestry in the Ministry 
of Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER), which is responsible for land allocation and titling. 

12. INIR was created by the Council of Ministers Decree 9/2012 of May 11th, with legal, technical and 
administrative autonomy to promote the development of an efficient and sustainable irrigation sector in the 
country. Currently INIR focuses on technical assistance to small irrigation schemes, including the oversight of design 
and construction supervision of irrigation rehabilitation, as it lacks the technical capacity to do the design and 
construction supervision of these rehabilitation investments in new irrigated areas. INIR is also responsible for 


oversight of two large state-owned irrigation enterprises operating a total of 41,000 ha of irrigated land along the 
Limpopo river basin (23,000 ha in Chokwe and 18,000ha in Xai-Xai). Other large irrigation schemes are owned and fully 
managed by private agribusiness enterprises engaged in sugar cane production along the major river basins. 

13. In 2016, the National Irrigation Program (PNI) which was approved by the Government. The National Irrigation 
Program consists of a series of reforms and investments to address critical irrigation development needs and medium-
term food security targets for the country. MASA developed three scenarios to implement the PNI, moderate, medium 
and high. In the moderate scenario, about U$ 1 billion is needed to develop a minimum of 122,500 ha (32,000 ha public 
and 90,500 ha private) of irrigated land by 2042. The initial phase of the program is focused on strengthening MASA’s 
institutional capacity to plan irrigation infrastructure and related services and to establish and provide training to Water 
User Groups and Water Users Associations (WUGs and WUAs) to improve on-farm water management, and operations 
and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation schemes. Moreover, MASA intends to coordinate with relevant sector 
institutions to promote agriculture intensification and market linkages for smallholder farmers.  

14. To support the PNI, the Government of Mozambique has requested the World Bank to support INIR’s capacity 
building program and finance priority irrigation infrastructure investments along the Central-Northern region. Under 
the PROIRRI, the World Bank supported key sector reforms, including the development of the PNI, the Water User 
Associations Decree Law5, and the draft regulations for private sector engagement on irrigation development. PROIRRI 
also financed the construction of 3,000 ha priority smallholder irrigation schemes in Manica, Sofala and Zambézia 
provinces, including the establishment and training of Water User Associations (WUAs) and Water User Groups 
(WUGs), and facilitated market linkages through existing agribusinesses. Through the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Landscape Management (SUSTENTA) Project (P149620, approved by the Board on June 30, 2016) the Bank 
is supporting small emerging commercial farmers (SECF) and strengthening market linkages in a landscape approach 
in ten districts of Nampula and Zambézia. IRRIGA will build capacity for planning, design, construction and operation 
of irrigation infrastructure as proposed under the PNI, and further develop services required to enhance agriculture 
productivity in the northern-central region of the country. The IRRIGA project therefore builds on PROIRRI 
achievements and partners with SUSTENTA to maximize value chain development.  

15. The Government has also requested project support for the establishment at the central level agriculture 
investment management unit (AIMU) that will be responsible to coordinate all donor support to the sector. 
Participation of the World Bank is therefore key to contribute to the implementation of the PNI, and is expected to 
help catalyze additional financial contributions from the other development partners and the private sector. The World 
Bank has been a long-standing and valued partner in the agriculture sector in Mozambique, supporting the 
development of institutional reforms, as well as infrastructure investments. The proposed investment operation will 
build upon and leverage the World Bank’s deep involvement in the agriculture sector over time. 

16. The Bank support will be through a Series of Projects (SOP) to support MASA in the implementation of the 
National Agriculture Sector Investment Plan (PNISA).  The SOP will support a Program aimed to increase farmers’ 
productivity and improve rural livelihoods through increased access to irrigation and markets. The program will also 
fund the rehabilitation of a combined amount of 8,000 hectares of irrigated land, benefiting 12,000 smallholder 
farmers. The project description below and appraisal details refer to the first Project (SOP1).
 

C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 

17. The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY17-21)6 which acknowledges low 
agriculture productivity as a major constraint to economic growth and poverty reduction. Specifically, the project 
contributes to the Focus Area 1 of the CPF on Promoting Diversified Growth and Enhanced Productivity and the Focus 
Area 2 of the CPF on Investing in Human Capital.  

18. The project addresses the Government of Mozambique’s priorities. Irrigation development is a strategic 
objective under Priority III (promote jobs, productivity and competitiveness) and priority IV (develop social and 
economic infrastructure) of the Government’s 5-year Plan 2015-2019. The project also supports the Strategic Plan for 
the Development of Agriculture Sector, 2010-2019 (PEDSA) and the National Agriculture Sector Investment Plan 
(PNISA), 2014-2019, which aim at increasing food security and income of agricultural producers in a competitive and 
sustainable manner, while guaranteeing social and gender equity.  

19. The project also contributes to the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) twin goals of ending extreme poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Improved agriculture and irrigation practices will contribute to increase agriculture 
productivity and income generation for the rural communities in Mozambique. It will also contribute to improvements 
in human nutrition by improving the quality and quantity of food and reducing food insecurity. Moreover, the project 
will contribute to women empowerment by improving access to water and enable multi-seasonal production, as well 
as establishing participatory governing bodies for water management. In addition, the project will promote private 
sector participation mainly through the market linkages and where possible, through public-private partnerships to 
invest and operate small irrigation schemes. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve smallholder agriculture productivity and market 
access in the project areas developed with irrigation and provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis 
or emergency. The Program objective of the Series of Projects is the same as the PDO of this Project. 
 
20. The key PDO-level results indicators for the proposed project are: 

• Average crop yield of selected commodities in irrigated production systems; 

• Proportion of the production marketed for selected commodities;  

• Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (desegregated by gender); and 

• Number of beneficiaries (desegregated by gender) 

 
D. Project Description  
21. The first phase of the project (SOP1) is expected to improve agriculture productivity and market access to 
smallholder on 3,000 hectares of irrigated land rehabilitated under PROIRRI and on additional 3,000 hectares of 
irrigated land to be rehabilitated under the project for a total of 6,000 hectares. While investments in agricultural 
intensification and market access will be primarily in these 6,000 hectares, they will be also extended to areas beyond 
those rehabilitated irrigation areas (in coordination with and involvement of the private agribusiness sector) as the 


opportunity arise. The IRRIGA project will establish and strengthen WUGs and WUAs, improve water service delivery 
and on-farm water management, expedite the introduction and transfer of improved agriculture technology, and 
improve the input and output market linkages to irrigated and non-irrigated areas.  

22. The project will be implemented in four selected provinces - Manica, Nampula, Sofala and Zambezia. The main 
criteria for the selection of these four provinces were: (a) significant agricultural potential; (b) availability of water for 
irrigation in areas currently or formerly irrigated; (c) potential for complementarity with other Bank- funded agriculture 
operations and other partners; (d) large share of population being rural and involved in agriculture for their livelihood; 
(e) high level of poverty; (f) potential for linkages with the private agribusiness sector and other development projects; 
and (f) availability of recently rehabilitated irrigation schemes under PROIRRI. 

23. The project will finance the following five components: (i) institutional capacity building; (ii) smallholder 
irrigation development and management; (iii) agriculture intensification and market linkages; (iv) project management, 
monitoring and evaluation; and (v) contingency and emergency response. Below is the summary description for each 
component. Detailed project description is presented in Annex 1. 

24. Component 1 - Institutional Capacity Building (US$8 million of IDA Grant). The objectives of this component 
are to strengthen the institutional capacity and to improve the enabling policy environment, and support the regulatory 
framework of the institutions involved in the development of irrigated agriculture, and to enhance beneficiaries’ 
capacity for sustainable development and management of irrigated agriculture. In response to a request from the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, the project will strengthen MASA’s capacity for investment planning, 
implementation, coordination and management of all donor funding for the agriculture sector development in the 
country. This component will finance three main activities: (i)strengthening irrigation institutional capacity; (ii) 
strengthening agriculture institutional capacity and market linkages; and (iii) the establishment the Agriculture 
Investment Management Unit (AIMU). 

25. Sub-component 1.1. Strengthening Irrigation Institutional Capacity. This sub-component will finance technical 
assistance to support INIR to improve the enabling environment in the irrigation sub-sector and develop regulatory 
tools and a professional code of conduct to improve irrigation services delivery. Specifically, this sub-component will 
finance studies, training and equipment to: (i) improve the institutional and regulatory framework for the irrigation 
sector to improve irrigation service delivery; and (ii) establish a national irrigation water monitoring system that will 
collect data at watershed and irrigation perimeter level. These regulatory tools and processes are broadly identified in 
the PNI and include: preparation of the public private partnership (PPP) regulations; develop regulations and contract 
models for partnerships in irrigation, and guidelines for licensing irrigation development in the country; and 
partnerships with formal education systems in the country (e.g. University Eduardo Mondlane, Instituto Superior 
Politecnico de Manica, among others), including provision of internships for irrigation engineering and irrigation 
economics graduates for practical field work up to 12 months of field work.  

26. Sub-component 1.2. Strengthening Agriculture Institutional Capacity and Market Linkages. This sub-
component will finance capacity building of institutions involved in the development of irrigated agriculture, 
specifically: (i) The National Directorate of Planning and International Cooperation (DPCI) at MASA to strength the 
statistic services, agriculture market information systems to collect, process and disseminate market and price 
information (through digital mobile devices) in the country, and provision of training to staff; (ii) the National 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services (DNEA) and the Agricultural Research Institute (IIAM) to increase their 
capacity for the dissemination of improved agriculture technologies and practices in the project areas developed with 
irrigation; (iii) the National Directorate of Agriculture and Silviculture (DINAS) to establish a satellite monitoring system 
to monitor the use of all areas developed with irrigation in the country. This subcomponent will also establish an 
“agricultural observatory” to generate reports for decision making for relevant institutions involved in the agriculture 


development. These reports will support relevant departments at MASA, including IIAM, DNEA, DNAS, MITADER, 
Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water resources (MOPHRH), and the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MIC), 
including input suppliers, traders and private agribusiness operators to improve their planning to support the 
development of the agriculture sector. 

27. Sub-component 1.3 Agriculture Investment Management Unit. This sub-component will finance technical 
assistance and incremental operating costs for the establishment of AIMU to lead agriculture sector investment 
planning and implementation at MASA. AIMU will report to the Technical Committee, composed by the National and 
General Directors of MASA, and headed by the Permanent Secretary. AIMU will initially manage and implement IRRIGA 
under the strategic guidance and supervision of INIR and then gradually evolve into the MASA operational unit for 
agriculture programs implementation, thus hosting all the MASA’s investment operations with donor funding in close 
coordination with the Policy Unit of MASA, in charge of the PEDSA and PNISA. The goal is to create a strong, long-term 
operational capacity within MASA and achieve economies of scale while reducing the burden on other functional areas 
tasked with regulatory and policy functions. 

28. The AIMU will consist of five teams, including financial management, procurement, safeguards management, 
monitoring and evaluation and technical design and supervision team (TDST). Under the IRRIGA Project, the unit will 
be responsible for the design of irrigation schemes and assurance of technical quality in all phases of the development 
of the irrigation schemes.  

29. Component 2: Smallholder Irrigation Development and Management (US$28 million of IDA Grant). This 
component will finance engineering design of 5,000 ha for irrigation development; and construction supervision, 
equipment and civil and hydraulic works for 3,000 ha of irrigated land in the project areas to improve water availability 
and resilience of irrigation services.  Forty potential districts have been identified in the four beneficiary provinces 
based on Government strategies for agriculture development, market needs and existing agro-climatic conditions, land 
and water availability, and existing markets. The location of the potential districts is presented in MAP 1. Out of the 
3000 ha, 500 ha have already been assessed (feasibility) under PROIRRI and 2,500 ha additional schemes which will be 
further assessed in the first eight months of project implementation to determine the exact scope of irrigation works 
to be financed by the project. The timeline for project implementation is presented in Annex 1. 

30. Sub-component 2.1: Irrigation Infrastructure Investment: This sub-component will finance technical assistance 
for detailed engineering design for 5,000 ha irrigated land, of which 3,000 ha will be rehabilitated and modernized 
under SOP1 and 2,000 in SOP2. The rehabilitation and modernization will consist of: (i) upgrading the water intake and 
transmission main; (ii) rehabilitation and expansion of water collection and storage structures; (iii) upgrading the 
distribution system; (iv)installation of water distribution and control structures; and (v) rehabilitation and protection 
of the catchment area and embankments for conservation and erosion control. The AIMU will be responsible for the 
technical oversight and quality control of the irrigation infrastructures to be constructed under this component. Priority 
will be given to gravity-fed open canal irrigation systems, as they are relatively simple to operate and maintain, and 
are less costly compared to pumped systems. Pumping will be considered, if at all, only for high value crops and under 
exceptional cases. The construction of the irrigation infrastructure will take into consideration environmental and 
social risks and will utilize the relevant safeguards instruments to implement appropriate mitigation measures. 

31. Sub-component 2.2: Irrigation Infrastructure Management: This subcomponent is designed to support the 
establishment and capacity strengthening for the Water User Groups (WUGs) and Associations (WUAs) in all irrigation 
schemes in the project areas to manage, operate, and maintain the irrigation and drainage systems operational. 
Specifically, the project will finance technical and logistical support to establish WUGs and WUAs; develop manuals 
and associated learning materials and media products, and deliver trainings on operation and maintenance of the 
schemes. The project will also finance incremental operating costs for transitional O&M and investment costs for WUAs 




operational offices and equipment. 

32. The expected outputs from this subcomponent would be: (i) the establishment of WUGs and WUAs in all areas 
developed with irrigation infrastructure to manage, operate, and maintain the irrigation and drainage systems at 
turnout and tertiary levels, and (ii) improvement of the level of bulk water service delivered to the WUAs. Expected 
benefits include: (a) improved maintenance of irrigation systems; (b) improved water distribution; (c) increased level 
of water fee collection; and (d) enhanced transparency and accountability. 

33. Component 3: Agriculture Intensification and Market Linkages (US$13 million of IDA grant). This component 
will improve productivity, production, cropping intensity, competitiveness and market access for 9,000 smallholder 
farmers cultivating roughly 6,000 ha of land in the project area. This component builds on successful interventions 
models in the country and the region. It will finance training, technical assistance, equipment and matching grants. 
This component will finance three main activities and specific eligibility criteria will be further developed in the PIM to 
ensure equity and avoid double dipping with beneficiaries already receiving assistance under PROIRRI. 

34. Sub-component 3.1. Capacity Building for Smallholder Farmers – Under this sub-component, the project will 
support organization of farmers into producer groups and provide training through Farmers’ Field Schools (FFSs), and 
through the Integrated Program for the Transfer of Agricultural Technologies (PITTA-Programa Integrado de 
Transferência de Tecnologias Agrárias), using methodologies currently under use by MASA.  Training to farmers will 
include: (a) supporting the establishment of smallholder farmers’ organizations and producers’ groups; (b) 
strengthening the knowledge of farmers on improved agricultural practices, technology, inputs and marketing; (c) 
strengthening the functional literacy and numeracy of farmers; (d) improving household nutrition; (e) improving soil 
fertility and integrated nutrient management; (f) promoting climate smart and conservation agriculture and other 
climate smart agriculture technologies and practices; and (g) conducting demonstration trials at the farm level (FFS). 
The project will also support training to staff from the local government institutions and service providers, including 
local NGOs, to provide technical assistance to the project’s smallholder farmer beneficiaries to prepare business plans. 
It is expected that up to a total of 9,000 farmers and 200 Government staff and more than 100 local service providers 
will benefit from the project support. 

35. Sub-component 3.2 Investment Support to Enhance Smallholder Agricultural Production. This subcomponent 
will finance vouchers for eligible farmers to allow access to improved farm technologies.  These would include but not 
be limited to: seeds, inputs, mechanization services such as those using draft animals, power tillers, tractors, etc. for 
individual farmers. The mechanism will enable market access to agricultural inputs and services and improve the 
capacity of suppliers to plan and delivery quality inputs and services based on voucher system. The voucher serve as a 
financial credit for the purchase of inputs and services and will be co-financed by the beneficiary. This approach will 
build on and expands a model promoted in country and in other neighboring countries such as Zambia with FAO 
support, which proved successful in equipping farmers and promoting local input providers.  It is expected that this 
sub-component will assist up to 9,000 farmers, of which half are expected to be women. The Project Implementation 
Manual will specify a sliding scale for financial support, with an increasing co-financing percentage paid by the 
beneficiary as the value of support provided by the project to the farmer increases.  

36. Sub-component 3.3 Matching Grants for Market-led Production and Value Chain Development – This 
subcomponent will finance matching grants to support business proposals to improve production, post-harvest, value 
addition, equipment, storages and marketing facilities. Matching grants will either finance business plans for groups of 
producers (window 1, including equipment, storage facilities, and technical assistance), or for Small and Medium 
Enterprises (window 2, for processing and value addition to improve existing businesses that benefit producers in the 
project area by purchasing production, grading, packaging etc.). Typical investments would include technical assistance 
and equipment to clean, sort, grade, wash, weigh, package, store or any other activity that add value.  


37. The matching grant structure will be similar to that implemented under the World Bank financed SUSTENTA 
Project. Window 1 will typically be up to US$100,000 of which 50 percent will be grant, 40 percent credit from a 
commercial bank to be repaid by the beneficiaries and 10 percent beneficiaries own contribution. Window 2 projects 
would be above US$100,000 and up to US$1 million. Specific details of the matching grants schemes will be further 
detailed in the PIM and matching grants manual (MGM).  

38. The eligibility criteria for the grants (see Annex Table A1.3) will take into consideration the capacity level of 
the farmer’s organization, including the availability of a business/investment plan, agronomic skills and experience, 
and alignment with project supported value-chains. The implementation arrangements and grant delivery structure 
will be reflected in the PIM and harmonized with similar programs under implementation by the Government of 
Mozambique.  

39. Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6 million of IDA grant). The objective of 
this component is to ensure project management efficiency and efficacy, by ensuring the use of resources in 
accordance with the project’s objectives, procedures, and fiduciary guidelines; and finance monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) activities during the project implementation and report regularly on implementation status and performance, 
and the achievement of project indicators and development objective. Specifically, the project will finance (i) 
incremental operating costs for project implementation at the national level led by AIMU and at the provincial level 
led by Provincial Implementation Units (PPIUs); and (ii) the establishment of a Management Information System (MIS) 
for irrigated agriculture, and the project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. 

40. Component 5: Contingency and Emergency Response (US$0). This component will provide immediate response 
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency. This is a “zero-dollar” Contingency and Emergency Response Component. 
In the case of an adverse event that causes a major disaster, the Government of Mozambique may request the World 
Bank to channel some financial resources from this component to address the emergency. If agreed by the World Bank, 
part of the project resources will be re-allocated to this component to finance any critical emergency activities under 
this component. This component will facilitate access to rapid financing by allowing reallocation of uncommitted 
project funds in the event of a natural disaster, either by a formal declaration of a national or regional state of 
emergency or upon a formal request from the Government of Mozambique. Component 5 will use IDA Immediate 

Response Mechanism. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 

41. The project will be implemented by MASA at three levels of implementation: the national, provincial and district 
levels (Figure 1). Detailed implementation arrangements are provided in Annex 2 and will be further detailed in the 
PIM.  

42. At the National Level. MASA will be responsible for the overall implementation of the project, in consultation 
with the other relevant Ministries to ensure that the project activities are consistent with the national policies and 
programs. A Project Coordination Committee (PCC), chaired by the Minister (or - by delegation – by the Vice Minister), 
with participation of MOPH, MITADER, and Ministry of Industry and Trade (MIC), will have the overall decision-making 
responsibility regarding the management of the project, review decisions made by AIMU, issue directives to guide 
project interventions, methods and criteria. The PCC will be responsible for the approval of work plans and budgets, 
and oversight on compliance with World Bank fiduciary requirements. The Permanent Secretary of MASA will be the 
executive level head responsible for strategic direction of the project with support from the Technical Committee of 
 

the National Directors. AIMU will be responsible for day-to-day management of the project and will be composed by a 
Program Coordinator (PC), a communication specialist, an environmental safeguards specialist, a social safeguards 
specialist, an M&E specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist and the lead specialists for 
TDST. The detailed composition of the TDST is presented in Annex 2.  

43. AIMU. MASA will establish AIMU at the national level that will be (i) responsible for the project coordination and 
management of fiduciary issues in conformity with the standards and requirements agreed with the World Bank; and 
(ii) manage the project in accordance with the Financing Agreement and other project documents such as Project 
Appraisal document and the PIM.  

 

Figure 1. IRRIGA implementation Arrangements 

 



44. At the provincial level.  Each beneficiary province will have a Provincial Project Implementation Unit (PPIU) with 
a minimum of five staff including provincial coordinator, irrigation engineers, safeguard team and will collaborate with 
beneficiary districts to facilitate the project implementation.   

45. The Provincial Directorate of Agriculture will be responsible for implementation of the project in coordination 
with the provincial government directorates and district governments. A Provincial Project Coordination Committee 
(PPCC), chaired by the Provincial Governor, will oversee project implementation, including monitoring project progress 
at the provincial level and making decisions in line with the objectives and institutional arrangements that are 
consistent with the project document and legal agreements. The PPCC will approve and monitor the implementation 
of activities at provincial level. The Provincial Director of Agriculture (within the provincial government) will be 
responsible for strategic direction of the project at the Provincial level with support from the Provincial Project 
Implementation Unit, (PPIU) headed by a Provincial Project Coordinator (PPC) that will be responsible for day-to-day 
management of the project at the provincial level.  

46. Activity implementation on the ground will primarily be handled by service providers with involvement of local 
technical staff at Provincial Directorate of Agriculture. Component 2 will hire qualified engineering firms to undertake 
the design of the schemes and supervise the construction based on TORs agreed with the World Bank; Component 3 
will be implemented by services providers hired on competitive basis, based on TORs also agreed with the World Bank. 
Component 3 will provide training and demand based support in the e-vouchers for eligible farmers, and farmer groups 
for production, processing and marketing sub-projects. A specific Cost sharing grant will be prepared by the Project to 
guide the implementation of the grants in accordance with World Bank and Government of Mozambique Policies. The 
AIMU, PPIU will be responsible for overall coordination of implementation of the approved projects.   

47. At the District Level. Agricultural activities and marketing take place at district level. Given that the capacity is 
in most cases weak, the project will provide capacity building and targeted technical assistance. The District Office of 
Economic Activities (SDAE) will be responsible for project implementation at the district level, in coordination with 
District Services for Planning and Infrastructures and consultation with the District Administration. The SDAE will be 
actively involved in site identification and general oversight of the irrigation infrastructure development at the district 
level, identification and selection of sub-project proposals for matching grants with the Administrator’s guidance. The 
preparation and implementation of sub-projects for matching grants is at the level of irrigation scheme and smallholder 
farmer groups and associations.  To effectively participate in the implementation of the project, local SDAEs will have 
to carry out their work in accordance with their usual functions (training, extension, technical advice, among others), 
but they will require capacity building. To facilitate this process, the project will assist in: (I) capacity building; (ii) 
provide technical assistance; and (iii)engage service providers to assist local SDAEs. The farmers will also be involved 
in the design and construction works for the irrigation schemes and will be fully responsible for O&M of the schemes. 

 

B. Results Framework and Monitoring and Evaluation 

48. The Project will establish a Progress and Results Information Monitoring System (PRIMS) at MASA to monitor 
the implementation progress and the project outcomes. The system will be programmed as a web-based data 
reporting and management tool that will help: (i) to collect, document, analyze and generate reports on project 
progress and results indicators; (ii) to cross reference annual work plan and budget (AWP&B) tables with progress and 
results information; (iii) to integrate progress and results data of all sub-projects (i.e., monitoring of business plan 
implementation); (iv) to store and document geo-referenced data on seasonal water flow and use, agricultural 
production at plot level, and input/output markets; and (vi) to serve as a project related grievances monitoring 
database. The PRIMS will be procured in the first year of implementation.  


49. The Results Framework (RF) and the arrangements for monitoring results are reported in Section VII. The RF 
will be used to periodically track progress in achieving the project’s objectives. Also, the critical processes to achieve 
the project’s objectives, such as procurement, safeguards, technical assistance and institutional development 
activities, will be closely monitored. The project will rely on existing data sources at MASA and other Government 
agencies including the National Institute of Statistics, supplemented by regular data collection, and special surveys and 
assessment updates will be carried out by contracted specialists. Both quantitative and participatory M&E methods 
will be used to assess the social and gender inclusion of project participants. All teams involved in the implementation 
of the project will participate in the process of data collection, compilation, analysis, and use. The project will finance 
MIS costs under component 4. 

50. MASA will recruit an M&E specialist using project funds to be responsible for tracking progress on project 
results indicators. The M&E specialist, reporting to the AIMU, will be responsible for managing the PRIMS. The PRIMS 
will include an activity-specific database aligned with the annual activity plans and the M&E Plan for all outcome and 
intermediate performance indicators. The M&E specialist will be responsible for regular updating the PRIMS and 
producing quarterly progress reports. Two evaluations of project outputs and outcome will be commissioned, first at 
midterm and the second at completion. An M&E unit will be established within AIMU and the MIS and procedures for 
data collection and reporting will be prepared to the World Bank’s satisfaction. The project will finance M&E costs, 
including the impact evaluations (midterm and completion) as well as the implementation completion report, ICR.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will support the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in 3,000 hectares in four provinces of 
central and northern Mozambique: Manica, Sofala, Nampula and Zambézia. The exact locations for the 
interventions have not yet been selected, though they are expected to fall within the above-listed provinces. 
The irrigation schemes will be assessed before investment is considered to ensure, economic, financial, 
social and environmental feasibility. In addition, no infrastructure investment will be made before critical 
issues such as land and water user rights have been fully secured. The project will not support construction 
of large scale irrigation structures to minimize the extent of environmental and social impacts. Priority will 
be given to gravity-fed open irrigation systems, as they are relatively simple to operate and maintain, and 
are less costly compared to the piped systems, and will consist of: diversion weir from the river, main canal 
from the weir to the irrigated area, distribution network canals, drainage network, internal road, protection 
dykes (for flooding risk), and land levelling. Dams are not required because the irrigation schemes will target 
permanent streams/rivers with enough water for irrigation and downstream use. The design and 
construction of the infrastructures will take into consideration the need to avoid and minimize 
environmental and social risks. Under the ongoing PROIRRI project it can be concluded that associated 
negative environmental and social impacts include water abstraction on downstream users, loss of wetland 
habitat because of the irrigation infrastructure needed, point and non-point pollution of water sources, soil 
erosion and siltation, acquisition of land for development of irrigation infrastructure, water and land-use 
related conflicts. However, some other potential impacts may have moderate intensity and significance, as 
well as being non site-specific, such as reduction of downstream water flow and eventual social conflicts 
among downstream water users. IRRIGA is rated as a Category B project, since most of these impacts are 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 15 of 24  

 

minor or of low-intensity, site-specific, thus relatively straight forward to manage with adequate 
participation of the Local Government entities. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Mario Rizzolio, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Proposed project investments under Components 2 
and Component 3 involve irrigation and 
infrastructure activities (irrigation related 
infrastructure, grain storage and processing 
facilities). Such investments have a potential of 
causing environmental impacts that require due 
safeguards consideration. Some of the associated 
negative environmental and social impacts include 
water abstraction on downstream users, loss of 
wetland habitat as a result of the irrigation 
infrastructure needed, point and non-point pollution 
of water sources from use of pesticides, fertilizers 
and other agrochemicals, soil erosion and siltation, 
water and land-use related conflicts. The specific 
location/site and scope of all project components 
are not yet known. Therefore, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared, consulted upon, and publicly disclosed 
prior to appraisal. Once there is information specific 
to individual sub-projects, site/project specific 
Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs) will be prepared during implementation. 
The ESMF includes a set of Environmental and Social 
Clauses (ESC) for project implementers, provisions 
for stakeholder engagement as well as a grievance 
redress mechanisms. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project does not expect to involve or invest in 
Private Sector activities as defined under this policy 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 16 of 24  

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Overall, promotion of irrigation and agriculture 
intensification could lead to some negative impacts 
on natural habitats. Such impacts may include 
natural habitats degradation due to an increased 
land use pressure, water bodies and soil 
contamination from use of pesticides, fertilizers and 
other agrochemicals including reduced quantity and 
quality of water upon which natural habitats 
depend. Hence, OP 4.04 was triggered and the 
borrower prepared an ESMF which includes 
appropriate measures to address any potential 
impacts on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The OP/BP4.36 is not triggered. IRRIGA will not have 
any direct or indirect impacts on health and quality 
of forests per this policy definition, or on people 
who depend on forests, as activities will mainly 
involve rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Promoting intensification through improved inputs 
under Component 3 may lead to an increased use of 
pesticides (though at a low scale to boost agriculture 
productivity) which  could affect the quality and 
quantity of water or lead to soil contamination and 
degradation including risks to the health and safety 
of the farmers from the use pesticides or 
agrochemicals. To address such impacts the 
borrower has prepared and implemented under 
PROIRRI a Pest Management Plan (PMP) which 
includes guidelines and procedures that are essential 
in disseminating sustainable agricultural practices by 
promoting ecological and biological control of pest 
management. The PMP also contains specific 
measures to address health and safety risks to 
community and farmers due to mishandling of 
pesticides or disposal and storage of empty 
containers. The PMP was duly updated, under 
IRRIGA, tconsulted upon and publicly disclosed prior 
to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The proposed project will involve civil works and 
could potentially involve chance finds of PCR during 
construction. The ESMF include Chance Find 
Procedures. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

The policy does not apply to Mozambique, as there 
are no populations/communities that meet the 
definition of Indigenous Peoples as described in the 
policy. 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 17 of 24  

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The exact nature and specific location of the project 
interventions (in Manica, Nampula, Sofala and 
Zambezia provinces) will be determined during 
implementation, and because the project will 
finance activities such as civil works for irrigation 
schemes that may disrupt farmers activities  
restricting their access to water and potentially 
resulting in the loss of crops, OP 4.12 has been 
triggered. Land acquisition is expected to be low in 
magnitude and it is unlikely that the rehabilitation 
and expansion of agricultural areas would potentially 
result in physical displacement. Consequently, MASA 
has updated the Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) of the PROIRRI to adequately address issues of 
land acquisition resulting in physical impacts on 
people and/or loss of assets, means of livelihoods or 
resources. 
The RPF sets forth the principles and procedures for 
managing issues of land acquisition requiring 
compensation and/or the physical displacement of 
persons/households. The RPF has been consulted 
and was sill be disclosed both in-country on 15 May 
2018 and by the World Bank on 17 May 2018 prior 
to Appraisal. The RFP includes specific guidance for 
screening subprojects for resettlement and 
livelihood impacts, and for the preparation (prior to 
subproject approval) and subsequent 
implementation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) and/or Abbreviated Resettlement Plans 
(ARAPs). 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

This policy is triggered since IRRIGA will support 
activities that will involve rehabilitation of water 
storage or water control structures, canals and 
rehabilitation of small dams/water diversion weirs. 
The project will not finance any large dams as 
defined under this policy. Nonetheless, the borrower 
prepared an ESMF that includes basic guidelines and 
measures to address potential environmental 
impacts from rehabilitation of small dams. Such 
measures will be included in the project design and 
will be reviewed by qualified engineers prior to 
commencement of the works. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 
IRRIGA will support construction and rehabilitation 
of irrigation schemes along Buzi and Zambezi River 
basins. However, the activities supported by the 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 18 of 24  

 

project will have a low likelihood of interference in 
intentional watershed, given the downstream 
location of the areas of the project intervention 
relative to riparian countries (Mozambique is the 
lowest riparian country of these rivers).  LEGEN has 
determined that the project qualifies for an 
exception to the notification requirement in OP 7.50.  
A memo for exception to notification prepared 
which was duly cleared by the AFRVP. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy is not triggered. The area in which the 
project will be implemented is not known to include 
any disputed areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project may have some unintended negative environmental and social impacts such as soil erosion, siltation, 
salinization, water pollution with fertilizers and pesticides, health risks for farmers due to agrochemicals usage, limited 
water availability for downstream users and biodiversity loss in mountain water springs, and loss of wetland habitat as 
a result of the irrigation infrastructures needed. Additionally, expansion of irrigation areas may also result in land 
acquisition and limited water availability for downstream which could then lead to loss of crops and livelihoods with 
potential to generate water and land-use related conflicts. Most of these impacts are minor or of low-intensity, site-
specific and thus relatively straight forward to manage, with involvement of the Local Governments entities and 
WUAs. Nonetheless, some other potential impacts may have moderate intensity and significance, as well as being non 
site-specific, such as reduction of downstream water flow, eventual social conflicts among downstream water users, 
drawing from PROIRRI's identified environmental and social impacts, or maybe labor influx issues with local 
communities. Overall, no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected under IRRIGA. 
 
Other impacts associated with the civil works include health and safety of the workers and communities, dust 
pollution, and construction waste/debris. Some of the schemes rehabilitation/expansion works and equipment 
installation will be along the cultivated fields. Although the works will primarily occur along the edges of the fields, 
some works may disrupt farmers activities restricting their access to water and potentially resulting in the loss of 
crops. It is not anticipated that the project will lead to significant land acquisition or significant restrictions on access 
to sources of livelihood. Moreover, some of the construction works may require the hiring of external work force, thus 
leading to the risks of labor influx in rural areas. Such risks should be manageable and will be adequately addressed 
through application of standard Bank safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESIA/ESMP and RAP).  
 
The predecessor project, PROIRRI continues to face compliance issues. The ESMPs for the subprojects (32 irrigation 
schemes) were recently approved. The PIU has submitted a remediation plan which needs to be consolidated and 
implemented, to which end time and resources will have to be allocated. 
 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 19 of 24  

 

Borrower capacity to implement sound safeguard management procedures is low, but improving, therefore although 
global environmental and social impacts from IRRIGA are considered to be moderate, the environmental and social 
risk assessment of the overall project, including the PIU  (AIMU - Agriculture Investment Management Unit) capacity 
to perform adequate project safeguard management and procedures, is considered to be substantial. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
As examples of potential indirect and/or long term impacts of IRRIGA, downstream water contamination from on-farm 
agro-chemicals application, reduction of downstream water flow and eventual social conflicts among downstream 
water users can be put forward. However, water availability studies were undertaken through other WB financed 
projects in the same target area, such as SUSTENTA and involving National and Regional Water authorities. These 
studies demonstrate that river flows are high and current uses are very low, hence easily accommodate the extra 
water need for IRRIGA and for other future water uses. Recent figures related to water availability, made at river basin 
level (for Lúrio, Meluli, Licungo, Zambezi, Pungoe and Buzi) clearly show that future cumulative water demand with 
IRRIGA ranges from 0.16% to 4.6% of these river's mean annual runoff. The ESMF includes an examination of potential 
cumulative and induced impacts to followed upon during implementation. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project will not support construction of large scale irrigation structures in order to minimize likely environmental 
and social impacts. Priority will be given to gravity-fed canal irrigation systems. The feasibility studies, the design, the 
safeguards instruments and construction of the irrigation infrastructures will take into consideration the need to avoid 
and minimize to the extent possible, environmental and social risks. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project implementation arrangements related to the environmental and social safeguard requirements, national 
legislation and Bank policies, will be under responsibility of the Agriculture Investment Management Unit (AIMU) at 
MASA. 
 
The capacity of MASA to implement safeguard policies is still inadequate, but improving. MASA through AIMU 
(Agriculture Investment Management Unit) is currently implementing other WB funded projects and its overall 
capacity has been gradually strengthened at central ad local levels to address the increasing safeguards risks in this 
sector. AIMU comprises among others, a Project Coordinator and two dedicated safeguards specialists (environmental 
& social) who will ensure management of project’s safeguards requirements. IRRIGA safeguards capacity will build on 
experiences learnt from PROIRRI implementation while also establishing strategic synergies with other WB projects 
coordinated by FNDS (MOZBIO, SUSTENTA) with overlapping geographical area to ensure harmonization of procedures 
and protocols among projects and institutions. In addition, measures are being taken to ensure that the remedial 
measures still pending implementation under the ongoing PROIRRI project are satisfactorily addressed so to serve as 
he basis for IRRIGA safeguards management.  
 
The existing safeguards specialists at central level, will be further assisted at the provincial level by a team of social 
and environmental technicians who will closely oversee implementation and ensure compliance with safeguards 
policies in each of the targeted provinces. In addition, detailed team roles, responsibilities, as well as capacity building 
(training) requirements and procedures for sound management of environmental and social impacts were adequately 
included and budgeted for in the ESMF. A series of regional training seminars/workshops will be organized for all 
actors involved in the implementation of social and environmental safeguards policies, upon project effectiveness. 



 

The World Bank  
Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (P164431) 

 

 

  
Apr 25, 2018 Page 20 of 24  

 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During preparation of the ESMF, RPF and PMP a Public Consultation Process was undertaken in all provinces targeted 
by the IRRIGA, plus Maputo province, aiming to inform, hear and gather recommendations from different potentially 
affected and interested groups on project design, environmental and social impacts and risks related with the project 
activities. 
After project approval a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared to identify key stakeholders that are 
affected, and/or able to influence project design and its activities while also identifying effective methods and 
structures through which to disseminate project information and to ensure regular, accessible and transparent 
consultation; guide AIMU to build mutually respectful, beneficial and lasting relationships with stakeholders; Establish 
a Grievance Redress Mechanisms; and define roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the SEP. 
The main stakeholders to engage in this project are Farmers, Associations of Farmer, women associations, vulnerable 
groups (youth, elderly, disabled), Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development  (MITADER), DPTADER,  
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Provincial Directorate of Agriculture and Food Security, District Services of 
Economical Activities (SDAE), District Services of Planning and Infrastructure (SDPI), National Directorate of Water 
Resource Management (DNGRH), Regional Administrations of Water (ARAs), Ministry of Industry and Commerce, 
NGOs, Academia and other ongoing projects such as SUSTENTA, MozFIP, MOZBIO, among others. 
At IRRIGA subproject level, during the prefeasibility phase and through the implementation of the E&S Screening Form 
(ESSF), stakeholders will be consulted in the identification and assessment of the social and environmental risks of a 
proposed project so that project design alternatives can be identified prior to proceeding to project feasibility. 
 

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE 

April 17, 2018 
Report No.: 126014 

  

Operation Name First Programmatic Economic Recovery and Resilience Grant  

Region AFRICA 

Country Chad 

Sector Agriculture (15); Governance (35); Social Protection & Labor (25); 
Transport & ICT (25) 

Operation ID P163424 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) Republic of Chad 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance and Budget 

Date PID Prepared April 17, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal April 20, 2018 

Estimated Date of Board Approval June 19, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision  

 

I. Country and Sector Background  
 
1. The collapse of global oil prices, a persistently unstable regional security situation, and the high 
fiscal cost of ongoing humanitarian efforts, have strained Chad’s public finances. The Government has 
responded with a proactive but severe fiscal adjustment and the economy has experienced a deep and 
extended recession with high social costs. The crisis has also weighed heavily on the country’s ability to 
implement much needed structural reforms for non-oil sector recovery and social inclusion.  

2. Following a global oil price drop, Chad’s economy contracted 6.3 percent in 2016 and 3 percent 
in 2017. Chad’s oil sector has not only driven growth during boom years, but also translated falling oil 
prices into a sharp recession since 2016. The export price for Chadian crude oil fell from an average of 
US$100 per barrel in 2013-14 to US$34 in 2016, putting an abrupt end to growth rates around 6.3 percent 
per year in 2013-14. Oil-related fiscal revenues dropped from 11.7 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to just 
3.5 percent in 2016. Chad’s crisis has been aggravated by limited economic diversification and widespread 
poverty. In 2017, the economy struggled to recover and remained in recession, to a large extent due to 
an unexpected oil production shortfall.  

3. The new context of lower oil revenue, together with the challenging security and humanitarian 
situation, has greatly intensified economic, fiscal and social pressures. In the absence of adequate macro 
policy buffers and in the presence of immediate financing needs, the government had no room to 
undertake counter-cyclical fiscal policy to support economic recovery and protect social spending 
effectively. Monetary policy options have also been limited as the regional central bank is trying to 
manage the fallout from the oil price shock across Central African Economic and Monetary Union (CEMAC) 
members (including Chad). Regional security threats have negatively impacted growth by reducing cross-
border trade and kept foreign direct investment away. Significant security expenditures are linked to 
Chad’s continued efforts combating transnational terrorist groups (such as Boko Haram), supporting 
regional stabilization (peace-building) initiatives (2.8 percent of GDP in 2016), as well as providing for a 

vast number of refugees and displaced persons (around 2.8 percent of 2016 GDP per year).1 Domestically, 
the government keeps diffusing tensions between agricultural communities and pastoralists. 

4. The government has demonstrated its determination to responsibly manage what has turned 
out to be a much deeper and longer fiscal crisis than expected. Continued efforts to restructure external 
commercial debt came to fruition in February 2018, when an agreement in principle was reached. This 
agreement will allow Chad’s public debt to return to sustainability and moderate risk of debt distress (as 
per the March 2018 Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis). The substantial oil-collateralized loan with 
an international commodity firm – Glencore – had heavily reduced fiscal revenues and rendered debt 
unsustainable (see Box 1 for details). As a result, between 2014 and 2016, public spending was cut by 10.8 
percent of non-oil GDP, and since 2016 an emergency fiscal consolidation action plan has been adopted 
and extended in the 2017 Finance Law. Despite such sharp adjustment, Chad’s fiscal situation remained 
challenging during 2017, with a financing gap that required domestic arrears accumulation.  

5. Poverty reduction gains achieved over the past decade have been threatened by the current 
economic crisis.2  In the absence of a well-targeted and effective social safety net, the poor and vulnerable 
have likely been deeply affected by the crisis. During the oil boom, poverty rates declined (from 55 percent 
in 2003 to 47 percent in 2011), however, the absolute number of poor increased from 4.9 million to 5.6 
million due to population growth. Progress on non-monetary poverty also presents a mixed picture. Since 
the beginning of the crisis, dwindling fiscal resources have disrupted vital public services despite the 
government’s efforts to protect priority social spending. Payments to community-based teachers and 
health workers, funding for student scholarships, social-program benefits, and the provision of 
agricultural inputs have either been delayed or halted altogether at various occasions, and all public 
investment projects have been suspended.  

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 
6. The primary objectives of the series are to enhance fiscal and oil sector risk management and 
transparency, promote economic diversification, and improve social protection for the poor and 
vulnerable. To achieve these objectives, the programmatic series is organized around four intertwined 
pillars: First, it aims at enhancing fiscal risk management through (a) improved debt management, (b) 
rationalization of tax expenditures, (c) streamlining the payroll for enhanced fiscal space, and (d) improved 
oversight and transparency in the management of SOEs. Second, to improve the contribution of the oil 
sector to fiscal sustainability and economic resilience it promotes (i) a functional oil revenue management 
mechanism; (ii) transparency in the sector; and (iii) improved control over oil production costs. Third, to 
increase diversification and resilience of Chad’s population in face of economic and climatic shocks, the 
operation (a) contributes to greater agricultural productivity for more sustainable and inclusive growth; 
and (b) strengthens the contribution of the ICT sector to inclusive growth through enhanced affordability 
and coverage of services, as well as improved transparency for public and private service delivery. Fourth, 
it increases social protection for the poor and most vulnerable groups including refugees, by developing 
an effective and well-targeted social safety net system, and implementing cash transfers.  

 

                                                 
1 Of the more than 750,000 displaced people currently living in Chad, 403,780 are refugees. The number of refugees is equivalent 
to over 3 percent of the population, the fifth-highest level in the world. See: UNHCR and World Bank IDA18 refugee Sub-Window 
Board Consultation Paper (September 19, 2017). 
2 The latest poverty data are available as of 2011 only. 



III. Rationale for Bank Involvement 
 

7. Building on the 2017 Emergency Fiscal Stabilization Operation (EFSO), this series shifts Bank 
support towards a structural resilience and growth agenda. The authorities aim at sustaining growth 
recovery, fostering economic diversification in the medium term, and developing coping mechanisms for 
the poor and vulnerable. Four intertwined pillars combine structural measures to enhance fiscal risk 
management with boosting economic diversification and social resilience. Improved debt management, 
SOE oversight and oil revenue management are complemented by increased productivity in agriculture 
and competitive, open access information and communication technologies (ICT). Finally, putting in place 
a well-targeted and fully operational social protection system for the poor and vulnerable adds an explicit 
micro layer of resilience.  

8. The program supported by the proposed series is closely aligned with the three pillars of the 
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-20. The CPF was discussed at the Board on December 10, 
2015. The CPF, which succeeded the interim strategy note for FY10-12, is based on three engagement 
themes: (i) strengthening fiscal management; (ii) improving the returns to agriculture and developing 
agricultural value chains; and (iii) building the stock of human capital and reducing socioeconomic 
vulnerability.  

9. The proposed series follows a sequence of efforts by the World Bank to help the Chadian 
government cope with the impact of multiple exogenous shocks and lay the groundwork for sustained 
growth recovery and social inclusion. In December 2015, the Board approved the Fiscal Consolidation 
Program Support Grant (FCPSG), Chad’s first development policy operation in a decade. The FCPSG aimed 
to reinforce macroeconomic stability, protect critical expenditures, and initiate a medium-term structural 
reform agenda. It supported measures to broaden the tax base, rationalize public spending, enhance PFM 
transparency, and streamline business-registration procedures. In December 2016, as a protracted slump 
in global oil prices coupled with persistently high security and humanitarian costs further strained Chad’s 
fiscal resources, the Board approved US$80 million in additional financing for the FCPSG through Crisis 
Response Window allocation. The FCPSG’s implementation has been broadly on track, with a substantial 
in of the number of taxpaying firms and newly registered businesses observed despite the difficult 
economic climate. While less progress has been achieved in enhancing public procurement and limiting 
recourse to extraordinary spending procedures, the government is now preparing to implement a new 
procurement code, while the fiscal consolidation and the recent shift to cash-based budgeting are 
expected to curb the use of extraordinary spending procedures. Considering the country’s dire macro-
fiscal situation, the World Bank also approved a US$65 million emergency development policy financing 
operation - the EFSO – in June 2017, which builds on the FCPSG and has helped the government meet 
urgent financing needs while laying the groundwork for more substantive reforms. 

IV. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

10. The government’s Negotiation Committee will oversee the implementation of the reform 
program supported by the proposed operation. The Negotiation Committee, which is chaired by the 
Ministry of Economy and Development Planning, is an inter-ministerial committee charged with 
coordinating the preparation of the proposed operation and monitoring the reform program. The 
participating ministries, departments, and agencies will provide information on the status of their 
respective programs, and the committee will monitor their progress against program objectives. The 
committee previously collaborated with both the IMF and the World Bank during the successful HIPC 
completion process and the implementation of the FCPSG. A results framework will define concrete 



indicators and empirical benchmarks to monitor progress and facilitate ex post evaluation following the 
end of the program. 

V. Risk and Risk Mitigation 
 

11. The overall risk rating for the proposed operation is high. Political and governance risks, 
macroeconomic risks, and risks related to institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability are 
especially serious.   

12. Following the agreement in principle to restructure the debt to Glencore, debt vulnerabilities 
declined significantly. Public debt remains in distress for the time being. Once the final agreement is 
reached and progress is made on clearing the outstanding external arrears, other things equal, the risk 
rating would be expected to be upgraded to moderate under the current LIC DSF methodology. 

13. Risks of delayed structural reforms in sensitive areas because of political resistance cannot be fully 
mitigated and remain high.  Against the backdrop of continued exposure to oil price and production 
shocks, the government has demonstrated a strong commitment to fiscal discipline and an ability to 
maintain a sound fiscal stance in a challenging economic context. While CEMAC membership has 
bolstered macroeconomic stability in recent years, CEMAC’s low foreign-exchange reserves and the 
constrained fiscal space of its members pose additional downside risks.  Risks related to institutional 
capacity for implementation and sustainability will be mitigated by leveraging ongoing and planned World 
Bank projects in the policy areas supported by the proposed series, as well as technical assistance from 
Chad’s development partners, including France, the AfDB, EU, IMF and CEMAC. 

 

VI. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
14. The proposed series is expected to have a significant positive impact on poverty reduction in 
the medium and longer term. The proposed operation is expected to help decrease poverty in the 
medium and long term through the promotion of inclusive growth in agriculture, and the development of 
more affordable ICT services and broader coverage in underserved areas. In addition, a properly targeted 
expansion of the social safety net system has the potential to have a significant impact on allowing 
households to move out of poverty and strengthen household resilience to shocks. The overall impact on 
poverty therefore is expected to be positive in the medium and longer term.  

15. Medium term efficiency gains in fiscal and debt management and better overall risk 
management are expected to improve fiscal space for social protection and other public services as well 
as pro-growth investment. While fiscal rationing and stabilization policies of the Government may have 
a negative short-term impact on poverty through public sector job losses or decreases in public services, 
however, medium term efficiency gains in fiscal and debt management and better overall risk 
management should clearly improve fiscal space for social protection and other public services as well as 
pro-growth investment. Improved control of fiscal risks should also contribute to macroeconomic stability, 
which is beneficial to growth and poverty reduction. The social costs associated to the elimination of 
irregularities in the payroll is likely to have only negligible social costs. However, the payroll audit may set 
the stage for deeper reforms of the civil service (beyond the scope of this operation), which would likely 
involve significant social costs and would require careful evaluation and adequate mitigation.  



 
16.   The proposed reforms in agriculture and ICT may lead to a more diversified economy and 
improved public services. As around 80 percent of Chad’s labor force is active in agriculture, productivity 
gains stemming from enhanced dissemination and adoption of agricultural technology and more effective 
input supply chains is bound to result in broad positive effects for vulnerable and poor households. The 
development of more affordable ICT technologies is also expected to contribute directly, over the medium 
term, to the provision of better public services. This would benefit the poor who tend to rely 
disproportionately on public services. Cheaper, more effective ICT services in Chad, may also contribute 
directly to inclusive growth in agriculture by facilitating extension services, but also have cross cutting 
positive spillover effects for most sectors using ICT as an input. Ultimately, effective ICT is also expected 
to support faster and more efficient implementation of social safety nets and related transfer and social 

protection systems nationwide. 

 
17. The expected medium-term impact of the reforms included in this operation on gender equity 
is positive.  In the medium to longer term, increased fiscal space for health, education, and social safety 
nets would have positive impacts on services benefitting women. Increased spending for health may 
contribute to decrease very high maternal mortality rates. At 856 deaths per 100,000 women, Chad ranks 
only above CAR and Sierra Leone in international comparisons.3  In addition, increased funding for 
education and social safety nets may support improved school attendance for girls. Families with limited 
resources often prioritize the education of sons, and, despite recent improvements, the 2014/15 
Demographic and Health Survey shows that 44 percent of girls aged 15 to 19 have never attended school, 
compared to 30 percent of boys in the same age group.  To help address this, the implementation of the 
NSPS clearly identifies women as the most vulnerable population, and targets them specifically as the 
primary recipients of cash transfers and cash for works programs. 
 
Environment Aspects  
 
18. The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have 
significant negative effects on the country’s environment, forests and other natural resources. 
Environmental Assessment (EA) is a legal requirement in Chad and is widely applied to all developmental 
projects. The EA process is based on Presidential Decree No. 630/PR/PM/MEERH/2010 on EA regulations 
and the ministerial decision No. 039/PR/PM/MERH/SG/DGE/DEELCPN/2012 with respect to the general 
guidelines and procedures for environmental assessment. The department of environmental assessment 
and pollution control in the Ministry of Environment and Fisheries is institutionally saddled with reviewing 
and clearing environmental impact assessment (EIA) documents. 
 
19. As per the Policy on Development Policy Financing, the World Bank assessed whether specific 
country policies supported by the DPF series are likely to cause significant effects on the country’s 
environment, forests, and other natural resources. The assessment concluded that the policies 
supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the country ‘s natural assets. 
All the actions supported throughout the operation are policy-oriented; they do not support direct 
investment in environmentally impactful investments or involve policy actions with significant 
environmental consequences. The assessment of potential impacts related to actions supported by the 
DPF will rely on the existing national legal and regulatory framework, and will be monitored and addressed 
through the national procedures in place in Chad. 
 

                                                 
3 World Health Statistics 2016, World Health Organization. 



20. Prior actions and triggers designed for increasing social protection for the poor, vulnerable and 
refugees are also largely environmental neutral. Although some cash for work under the social 
protection programs could be expected to have some small physical footprint, the Government will 
finance significant capacity-building activities including environmental and social safeguards through the 
Cellule Filet Social (CFS) established on March 10, 2016. In conjunction with department of environmental 
assessment and pollution control, the CFS will play a key role in minimizing any environmental and social 
adverse impacts and enhancing the positive ones derived from social protection programs. Further, the 
operation’s focus on ensuring adequate fiscal space to preserve pro-poor spending and maintain the 
government’s capacity for effective social protection policy could indirectly support environmental 
objectives by mitigating the need for rural households to resort to environmentally unsustainable 
practices in the event of a natural disaster or a shock to agricultural production. 
 
21. Prior actions with respect to reforms in the agriculture and ICT sectors may have positive or 
little impact on the environment. Improved seeds will increase productivity at the intensive margin, 
thereby reducing the need to increase cultivated land size and grow at the external margin. Although this 
operation focuses uniquely on open access to Chad’s fiber backbone, potential extension of geographic 
coverage of mobile networks at a later stage could involve the destruction of some flora and fauna. 
However, any potential environmental impact could be minimized by avoiding areas were the impact will 
be substantial. Also, the licensed operators would be encouraged to begin revegetation of excavated sites 
immediately the sites have been backfilled. 
 
22. The Government’s reform agenda encompasses a robust institutional framework for 
environmental protection. The NDP includes a pillar dedicated to environmental protection and 
adaptation to climate change built on four key elements: (i) the protection of Lake Chad and other critical 
ecosystems; (ii) improved land management in rural and urban areas; (iii) the mitigation of risks related 
to natural disasters; and (iv) the fight against desertification and the conservation of biodiversity. The 
1998 Environmental Code was augmented in 2009 by a decree on pollution and environmental damage. 
The use of charcoal is officially forbidden in Ndjamena to minimize indoor air pollution, and the country 
is promoting the use of improved cooking stoves. Nevertheless, indoor air pollution remains a major 
health risk, and access to clean fuels is limited. The Environmental Code also defines principles for solid 
and hazardous waste management, though these are poorly enforced. The GoC promulgated a Forestry 
Law in 2008 that clearly distinguishes between conservation and production activities.   
 

VII. Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 65.00 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 65.00 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC22908 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164563  Niger Refugees and 
Host Communities 
Support Project 
(P164563) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 11, 2018 Sep 12, 2018 Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global 
Practice 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministère du Plan Cabinet du Premier Ministre, 
Projet de Gestion des 
Risques de Catastrophes et 
de Développement Urbain, 
Stratégie de Développement 
et de Sécurité dans les zones 
sahélo sahariennes du Niger 
(SDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic services and economic opportunities for refugees and 
host communities in select areas. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 80.00 

Total Financing 80.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 80.00 



          IDA Credit 47.50 

          IDA Grant 32.50 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

Niger is one of the world’s poorest and least developed countries in the world, with a per capita income of 
US$390 in 2015 and almost half of Nigeriens living beneath the poverty line (45.7 percent in 2014). In 2015, 
Niger ranked last of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index. The Nigerien economy is 
highly dependent on its agricultural sector and a few commodities (uranium, oil and gold), making it vulnerable 
to climate and price shocks. With a variable and changing climate, the country suffers from recurrent drought 
and food crises. Niger has one of the fastest population growth rates in the world (4 percent in 2015) and the 
youngest population in the world, with a dependency ratio of 113 in 2015. Niger has significant institutional 
deficits, ranking 99 of 168 countries in the 2015 Corruption Perceptions Index. 

 

Niger meets the very definition of a country at risk of fragility, conflict of violence. The country—which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016—has managed to remain stable in a difficult regional 
environment. Some of the factors that account for this achievement include: (i) a relatively strong social 
cohesion and (ii) a political settlement in which the elites manage to solve their disputes in a regulated manner. 
However, several factors contribute to the country’s fragility. These include demographic trends combined 
with notable climate change–related events and the deterioration of natural resources in the most populated 
areas; the contestation of the political elite and state institutions; external stresses; and a lack of economic 
opportunities. Because several risk factors — such as climate-related events or the tightening of the elite 
coalition — could trigger instability and violence, Niger remains a country at risk. 

 

Niger is hosting over 280,000 people displaced by conflict: approximately 158,000 refugees, 109,000 Internally 
Displaced People (IDPs) and 16,000 Nigerien nationals who returned from Nigeria as a consequence of the 
conflict. This displacement has been caused by two regional conflicts: the crisis in Mali (accounting for 22 
percent of the total displaced) and the Boko Haram regional crisis (78 percent).  



 

Since 2011, there has been an increasing number of attacks on Niger’s territory. The country, which held 
presidential and general elections in March 2016, has managed to remain an “island of stability”, but the 
relatively strong social cohesion is fragile. Niger is part of internationally-supported military efforts against 
Boko Haram (through the Joint Multi National Force) and in Mali, but increased military spending is putting a 
severe strain on public finances. The Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA) highlights the security and economic 
impacts of regional conflicts and forced displacement on Niger, including the crises in Libya, Mali and Nigeria 
and notes that the expansion of Boko Haram into Niger has had an adverse impact on economic activities in 
the Diffa region and also raises concerns about the weakness of the Nigerien Army (e.g. following the attack in 
Bosso, Niger had to call on Chad for military assistance). The RRA argues that each military defeat raises the 
risk of a military coup in Niger. 

 

Overall, the situation remains in flux. Despite a recent slowdown, further flows of population may be caused 
by Boko Haram until the region is fully stabilized. The authorities are eager to demonstrate the normalization 
of the situation both in the Diffa region and along the Mali-Niger border, but insecurity remains very high. On 
the one hand, there may be pressures to eventually encourage the return of forcibly displaced people in the 
Diffa area, on the other hand there seems to be a degree of acceptance that the situation along the Mali-Niger 
border may last.  

Across all forced displacement situations, the conditions for women and girls are very specific. Gender-based 
violence and survival sex are relatively prevalent. Early marriages are often the norm, including within host 
communities and economic opportunities and access to education are very limited for women and girls. Unless 
the gender dimension of the situation is effectively dealt with, progress is likely to remain elusive. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Niger has adopted a relatively progressive approach to managing refugee situations. This is also reflected in 
the solidarity demonstrated by host communities in particular in the Diffa Region. The overall legal and 
protection environment in Niger is conducive to an effective socio-economic response to the forced 
displacement crisis. Niger is a party to applicable international conventions on refugees, IDPs, and stateless 
persons, and it has domesticated some of these instruments. In particular, refugees are to be treated equally 
under the law with respect to key socio-economic rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, 
access to basic services, and freedom of expression and movement. Efforts are underway to strengthen the 
legal framework applicable to IDPs in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. 

 

Niger is party to the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1951 Convention), 
1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (1967 Protocol) and 1969 Organization of 
African Unity Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa (OAU Convention), without 
any reservations. Niger has also domesticated these instruments: the government has affirmed both in national 
legislation and at representations to the CERD that refugees are to be treated equally under the law with 
respect to all rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, access to basic services, and freedom 
of expression and movement (CERD 2013). Article 10 of the 1997 law ensures the equal treatment of refugees 
in the protection of property; freedom of movement; and access to health, education, and housing. Elsewhere, 


the Labor Code prohibits discrimination on the basis of nationality in hiring, and Décret n° 87-
076/PCMS/MI/MAE/C of June 18, 1987, permits foreigners to be contracted for employment provided that the 
contract is approved by the Ministry of Labor. 

 

Niger is also party to the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced 
Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), but has yet to domesticate it. Preliminary discussions are underway 
for the domestication of the convention and authorities have indicated willingness to improve the legal 
framework on IDPs, especially in light of the situation in the Diffa Region. Finally, Niger is signatory of both 
1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons (Convention on Statelessness) and 1961 Convention on the 
Reduction of Statelessness. Efforts to align domestic legislation with the provisions of both conventions are 
underway, with an ongoing review of the domestic legislation on nationality and civil status registration. 

 

Malian refugees are recognized on a prima facie basis and enjoy a favorable protection environment with 
the right to settle where they wish and to access basic social services and the formal and informal job market. 
A tripartite agreement between UNHCR and the Governments of Niger and Mali, signed in 2014 provides a 
legal framework for voluntary returns in respect of the related international standards. The parties consider 
that the conditions in parts of northern Mali are not yet conducive to returns in safety and dignity. As a result, 
voluntary repatriation is currently not promoted. Persons that wish nevertheless to return to Mali are 
counseled on the prevailing situation and sign a Voluntary Repatriation Form. They receive one-time cash 
assistance to pay for their transport (UNHCR 2016). Out-of-camp policy applied in Malian refugee-hosted areas 
with success, leading to the creation of so-called Zones d’Accueil des Réfugiés. Several institutions work closely 
with UNHCR to process status determinations for refugees, including the Comité National d’Eligibilité (CNE), 
the Comité d’Appel, the secretariat within the Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés, and the Comité 
de Recours Gracieux (CRG).  Regional administrations such as those in Diffa are also key partners to the national 
government and international NGOs.  The Direction Générale de l'État Civil et des Réfugiés is in charge of 
ensuring administrative protection to refugees and asylum seekers. 

 
Relationship to CPF 

 

The CPF recognizes the need to mitigating the three negative consequences of forced displacement in Niger: 
(1) the effect on the economy of increased insecurity and the subsequent outlays on security and humanitarian 
assistance; (2) increased food insecurity (exacerbating the effects of drought, environmental degradation, high 
grain prices and poor food access); and (3) increased poverty due to the loss of productive assets (land, 
agricultural tools and inputs, seeds, animals, etc) caused by forced displacement. Specifically, within the 
objective 5 of the CPF namely “Improved Social Protection System and Ability to Manage Forced Displacement” 
the CPF includes two expected outcomes to which this operation directly contributes: 5.3 Refugees who benefit 
from a vulnerability-based assistance system and 5.4. Refugees who benefit from country systems in the health 
sector The CPF also tracks the “percentage of refugees who benefit from a vulnerability-based assistance 
system” in its Result Matrix.  

 

The successful support to displaced and host population would require synergies among the proposed project 
together with (i) the Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development project, (ii) the Safety Net Project, (iii) 


the Skills Development for Growth project and (iv) the Community Action Project – Phase 3. Each of these four 
projects target chronically poor or vulnerable households living in disadvantaged and marginal areas which 
may also overlap with areas hosting refugees. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to improve access to basic social services and economic opportunities for forcibly 
displaced and host communities in select areas. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 

a. Number of direct beneficiaries out of which 

i. percentage of refugees 

ii. percentage of internally displaced persons 

iii. percentage of returnees 

iv. percentage of host population 

v. percentage of young 

vi. percentage of female 

 

b. Number of sites with access to social and economic services measured by an indicator 

i. no access 

ii. access with major constraints 

iii. access with minor constraints 

 

c. Reported increase in income/welfare/food security by beneficiaries of individual-level resilience 
activities (disaggregated by type of service, gender and target groups).  

 

d. Increased government capacity to manage refugee fluxes, as measured by capacity assessment surveys 
(Survey rating) 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 

The project will finance activities aimed at initiating the revitalization of socio-economic economic opportunities in the 
Diffa region and at equipping refugees along the Malian border with portable skills.  

 

Activities  

The activities listed below are a comprehensive representation of the government strategy on durable solutions for 
refugees and host communities as identified in the refugee development policy letter received for the IDA18 refugee sub-
window. The list reflects the entirety of needs under the government’s strategy in the targeted regions. The evaluation 
period (between September 2017 - March 2018) will allow for further assessments and an extensive consultative process 
to identify those activities within this framework that will be directly financed through this project. The overall 
comprehensive list of activities will be developed into a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework to enable 



 
The World Bank  
Niger Forcibly Displaced Support Project (P164563) 

 
 

  
Jul 18, 2017 Page 7 of 12  

     

the government in leading and coordinating the overall program, inclusive of all different partner activities, in the targeted 
regions. The identification of the specific type of activities in the targeted regions will be based on a rapid Markets and 
Needs Assessment. 

 

Components 

Activities identified under the government strategy are grouped below into three main project components along the 
three resilience levels targeted for improvement: 1) community, 2) individual, and 3) local authorities.  

 

COMPONENT 1 - Community level resilience: Access to basic social services and local capacity building 

This component will aim to build resilience on the community level through investment in community infrastructure and 
services; capacity building to government authorities; and social cohesion measures.  Investments will be identified in 
consultation with communities by updating and/or preparing the Local Development Plans. Communes/communities will 
be responsible for the identification and preparation of the subproject proposals as well as the supervision of their 
implementation and operation and maintenance. Final subprojects selection and contracting will be done by the 
respective line agencies in accordance to the national planning process. 

 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Investment in community infrastructure and services: 
1. Municipal services: Reconstructing and repairing small water supply facilities, latrines and other sanitation 

infrastructure, as well as solid waste management infrastructure and service delivery. 
2. Education: Reconstructing and repairing damaged school infrastructure such as classrooms, offices, fences, 

playground, latrines, labs, and other associated service delivery interventions. 
3. Health: Reconstructing or rehabilitating health center buildings, and other associated service delivery 

interventions in respect of staff, furniture and supplies. 
4. Economic infrastructure: Constructing or rehabilitating of rural markets, community storage facilities, rural 

roads, small bridges, culverts, and small irrigation schemes.   
5. Natural Resources: Restoring and protecting natural resources and supporting environmental management 

measures to decrease environmental impacts of protracted refugee presence. 

 

B. Community Resilience and Social Cohesion Measures: 
1. Community associations: Setting up and strengthening community associations that bring together local 

authorities (government, traditional and religious) and representatives of all different segments of the 
population in order to build and reinforce social cohesion.  

2. Small social cohesion grants: Supporting initiatives that address key drivers of the conflict and needs 
emerging in the post-conflict period such as out-of-school children and youth literacy, sports for peace 
activities, community radio programing, cultural activities that promote common identities, sexual and 
gender based violence prevention campaigns and de-stigmatization campaigns. 

3. Community-based psychosocial support: Providing targeted support to communities to address potential 
mental health risks resulting from the forced displacement experience.   

 

COMPONENT 2 - Individual level resilience: Strengthening economic opportunities and professional training 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Transitional Support towards Stabilization and Self-Reliance by (a) increasing and improving the access to basic 
necessity kits; (b) restoring immediate access to productive assets by providing agricultural inputs and livestock 
for farming families and trading commodities for non-farmers; and (c) setting-up Cash for Work programs to 


support community assets recovery and reconstruction. The cash-for-work component activities will be closely 
linked to the priority infrastructure investments in component 1. 

B. Support to Business Development and Individual Skill Building: provision of professional education, on-the-job 
training,  “portable skills” and support of small business development opportunities for youth/women. provide a 
package of interventions that combines short-term trainings (including basic financial literacy) and accompanying 
mentoring/technical assistance, access to small matching grant, and citizen engagement mechanisms. The focus 
of skills trainings might differ between locations based on an assessment of the market and needs in the region.  

 

COMPONENT 3 - Capacity building of local authorities 

This component will focus on two main types of activities: 

A. Local planning and decentralized service delivery: Providing capacity building interventions for communes and 
local implementing institutions to ensure adequate capacities in the areas of community‐driven planning process, 
local development management, service delivery capacities enhancement, mainstreaming of project 
interventions with the government’s development planning and budgeting process, as well as coordination of all 
development stakeholders on the local level and community level. 

B. Preparedness of Government institutions to manage displacements:  Strengthening government actors to be 
more prepared for potential future displacements by supporting their administrative management capacity (i.e. 
supporting and coordinating biometric registration of population) as well as humanitarian management capacity 
(i.e. contingency planning for displacements). 

 

COMPONENT 4 - Contingency Emergency Response Component 

This contingent emergency response component is included under the project in accordance with OP/BP 10.00, 
paragraphs 12 and 13, for situations of urgent need of assistance. This will allow for rapid reallocation of project funds in 
the event natural or manmade crisis in the future, during the implementation of the project. This component will have 
no funding allocation initially, but will be used to draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow 
the government to request the WB to reallocate financing from other project components to cover emergency response 
and recovery costs, if approved by the WB. 

 

COMPONENT 5 - Project Management 

This sub-component will cover: (a) strengthening the capacity of the Project Steering Committee for overall Project 
coordination; and (b) strengthening the capacity of the Project Implementation Unit for project management, 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation, including: (i) fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement management); (ii) 
environmental and social assessments; (iii) preparation of project reports; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project preparation based on 

the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target regions in consultation with local population 
and authorities and detailed technical studies to be undertaken. The general areas include sites hosting refugees in Diffa 
region and along the Malian border in Tillaberi, Tahoua and Agadez regions. 
 


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for which Environmental and 

Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF), Resettlement Policy 
Frameworks (RPFs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Pest Management Plans (PMPs) were approved by the Bank.  
The Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Études d’Impacts (BEEEI), the National Environmental Agency 

(NEA), and its decentralized structures, have the capacity to assure the external monitoring of the implementation of the 
of the ESMF, RPF and PMP under the project, including ensuring and validating that the provisions of the ESMF and RPF, 
leading to further sub-projects environmental and social assessments, are followed (i.e., sub-projects categorization, 
review, clearance and monitoring of the sub-project-specific EIAs/EMPs and RAPs), on behalf of the Government.  
Overall project environmental and social safeguards compliance, with national laws and regulations and applicable World 

Bank operational policies and procedures, will be devolved to BEEEI. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Demba Balde, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Emmanuel Ngollo, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will rehabilitate and upgrade 
infrastructures in several locations. As the sites and 
works are not yet finalized, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed both in-
country and at the World Bank Website before 
appraisal. The ESMF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments (Environmental and Social 
Management Plans ESMPs, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments ESIAs) as necessary. These 
instruments will also be consulted upon and disclosed 
in-country and at World Bank Website. A Social 
Assessment will be conducted in parallel to 
complement the safeguards documents. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Due to the location of interventions in areas were 
infrastructure and/or productive activities were 
already in place, no negative impacts to critical or 
sensitive natural habitats are expected. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
No interventions are financed in forest areas, nor do 
they involve forests. 




Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged 
under the project, it is expected that intensification of 
agricultural production and productivity will likely lead 
to an increased use of pesticides. 
The Government will update its existing Pest 
Management Plan and submit it to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosure in-country and at World 
Bank website, prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is 
triggered because Niger is viewed as a rich cultural 
heritage area. Though it is unknown at this time which 
sites may contain such resources, due to the lack of 
specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned 
investments under the project. Chance Find 
Procedures will be applied as indicated in the ESMF. 
The ESMF will address potential impacts and includes 
suggested mitigation measures. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts 
related to civil works, which may lead to minor land 
acquisition, loss of assets and/or access to resources. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared, consulted upon, approved and disclosed in-
country and at the World Bank website prior to 
appraisal. The RPF will formulate standard methods 
and procedures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements for screening, review, approval, 
implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific 
safeguards instruments such as Resettlements Action 
Plans (RAPs) if necesary. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

The project will not finance the building of dams and is 
not supporting dam infrastructure. Subject to 
technical studies the project may finance local flood 
prevention structures that may temporarily retain 
excess water during peak volume events, but which do 
not pose dam safety issues. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

OP 7.50 is not triggered as there are no infrastructure 
investments likely to affect water flow of Niger or 
Komadougou international waterways under the 
project. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known 
disputes over project areas. 

 


     

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 13, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 

developed, the Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be updated. All three documents will be submitted to the Bank for 
clearance and then disclosed in-country and at the World Bank website, prior to appraisal. 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program 4 PforR (P161876) 

 

Program Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDA146849 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Rwanda P161876 Transformation of 
Agriculture Sector 
Program 4 PforR 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA 29-Mar-2018 15-May-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
(MINAGRI) 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve the capacity of selected public agricultural institutions and to enable an increase in commercialization of 
agriculture value chains in Rwanda 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 3,700.00 

Total Operation Cost 289.92 

Total Program Cost 289.92 

Total Financing 289.92 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 100.00 

     World Bank Lending 100.00 
 

Total Government Contribution 189.92 
     
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 

1. Rwanda is increasingly recognized as a global exemplar in the pursuit of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) and in meeting the global challenges of climate change. Rwanda’s economy has 
been amongst the fastest growing among the sub-Saharan African (SSA) region. Despite remaining one of 
the poorest on the continent with per capita incomes of US$1,720 (2015, in purchasing power parity 
terms) the economy is nevertheless undergoing rapid structural transformation. Overall Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) growth has averaged 7.6 percent per annum (p.a.) over 2000 – 15, with urbanization rates 
of 7 percent p.a. over the same period. 
 

2. After slowing to 5.1 percent in 2017, real GDP growth is expected to pick up in 2018-19, 
averaging 5.9 percent, and inflation has increased above the National Bank of Rwanda’s (BNR) target 
ceiling of 5 percent.1 BNR has raised interest rates to prevent capital outflow and this will likely force a 
tightening of monetary policy in 2017 – 18. BNR has reduced the repo rate by 50 basis points to 5.5 percent 
to encourage commercial banks to lower lending rates to drive growth in private-sector credit and 
stimulate economic growth.2 Rwanda’s large current account deficit (16 percent of GDP in 2016) has been 
exerting downward pressure on the Rwandan franc (FRw). Higher oil and commodity prices (as well as 
large purchases including new planes for the national carrier) have seen the import bill increase although 
this is expected to be mitigated by recovering commodity prices in tea, coffee and minerals – Rwanda’s 
three main exports. On the fiscal side, the fiscal deficit is expected to narrow from an estimated 4.7 
percent of GDP in 2016/17 to 4.4 percent of GDP in 2018/19, financed by external project-based debt and 
some budgetary loans from development partners and multilateral institutions.3 Notwithstanding these 
emerging domestic and international trends, the overall policy stance of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) 
is likely to remain in line with the existing Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS) 
(approved in 2013) and its successor to be finalized and approved in 2018. 

 

3. Rwanda’s Vision 2050 sets an ambitious agenda for further improvements in the standard of 
living, targeting middle-income country (MIC) status by 2020. Parallel targets to reduce food insecurity 
and malnutrition and to further reduce poverty from 45 percent today (according to the national poverty 
line; the headcount rate is 63 percent according to the US$1.25 per day measure) are evidence of a deep 
political commitment to the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Except for a period 
between 2000/01 and 2005/06 when the Gini coefficient rose slightly, rapid growth has not been 
associated with an increase in equality. At the same time, the country has embarked on several flagship 
projects to promote a highly skilled service economy, notably around conferences and hospitality and 
information and communication technology (ICT). 

 

4. However, Government spending programs are currently under pressure. The increase in total 
public spending in 2013-2015 has been exclusively for capital expenditures and net lending as recurrent 
expenditures have held steady. The adjustment program of recent years to address growing external 
imbalances restrained the overall fiscal envelope. Health expenditures, for example, have declined both 

 
1 EUI Country Report, January 2018. 
2 ibid 
3 EUI Country Report, November 2017 



as a percent of GDP and in terms of their share in the budget in recent years. Going forward, resource 
availability will be further constrained because of a continuing decline in external grant financing. 
Although the headline fiscal deficit will be more expansionary in FY18/19, the decline in grant financing 
will continue to depress the overall fiscal envelope. Going forward, Rwanda’s fiscal spending will remain 
constrained due to the elevated debt and subdued tax revenues.  

 

5. The Government is also concerned by the emerging demographic trends and the rapidly 
expanding ambitions and expectations of new entrants to the labor market. Demographic projections 
suggest that by 2032 rural areas will be home to an additional 2.5 – 3.5 million Rwandans; land is already 
so scarce (50 percent of rural farm households farm less than 0.35ha) that few can be meaningfully 
accommodated in farming. With a working age population projected to increase from 5.2 million (in 2014) 
to 6.6 million – of which 4 million will be youth (14 – 35 years old), realizing labor productivity potential 
and meeting individual aspirations will require off-farm employment opportunities. This need not imply 
urban-based employment. Agriculture and the food system broadly (i.e. non-agriculture sector jobs 
nevertheless part of the food system such as retail, agro-processing, food logistics etc.) can provide 
substantial rural-based non-farm employment (RNFE). Current economic modeling indicates around two-
fifths of the 200,000 new labor market entrants annually could be gainfully employed in this sector.  
 

6. Continued urbanization will present many challenges as well as opportunities including for the 
agricultural sector. By 2050 Rwanda’s population is projected to reach 22 million of which 70 percent 
would reside in urban areas. Assuming similar patterns are observed elsewhere in the region, food 
preferences will change with increasing incomes, with increasing demand for more standardized and 
packaged or processed food and food safety will become increasingly important. This will threaten existing 
supply chains from domestic producers, with likely upward pressure on the food import bill and foreign 
currency reserves. At the same time, tapping into this emerging market can be an important opportunity 
for expanding domestic value chains, diversifying out of food staples and further value addition across the 
agriculture and food system. Meeting these challenges for the domestic market can also serve as a 
launching pad for successfully penetrating regional and international markets. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Notwithstanding, Rwanda’s impressive progress and likely future growth, the country remains 
largely agrarian with agriculture the mainstay of jobs, income and livelihoods for much of the 
population. The sector continues to account for around one-third of GDP. Because of its forward and 
backward linkages, it remains a key driver of overall economic performance and poverty reduction 
(accounting directly for over one-third of the overall reduction in poverty from 59 percent in 2001 to 45 
percent in 2011). 
 

8. Historically, aggregate agricultural performance has been driven by productivity improvements 
and land expansion. Aggregate production of key food staples such as maize, beans, Irish potato, sweet 
potato etc. has increased steadily since the end of the Genocide. According to recent analysis by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), agriculture’s aggregate growth rate of 5 percent p.a. 
in recent years has been made up of land expansion (2 percentage points) and productivity growth (1.7 
percentage points) with the remainder from increased labor productivity. Rwanda is already among the 
most densely populated countries in SSA and land expansion has been achieved through developing inland 
swamps and valleys with rapidly declining potential for further gains.  



 

The World Bank  
Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program 4 PforR (P161876) 

 

9. Despite productivity gains, yields remain below their potential. Crop yields have greatly 
increased since 2000 but yield growth started to plateau as of 2011. (For instance, cereal and cassava 
yields have trebled, sweet potato yields have doubled yet they have made marginal progress in the last 
five years and remain at around 40 – 50 percent of their potential.) Similarly, livestock productivity has 
remained consistently low over time due to lack of good quality animal feed and poor husbandry 
management practices. Diversification into higher value crops has been limited to date, partly because of 
limited farmer knowledge and traditional risk aversion, and also because the public-sector support 
services has been excessively focused on a narrow range of food staples under the Government’s flagship 
Crop Intensification Program (CIP).  

 

10. Farm size is a major challenge.  The average is only 0.6 ha, with perhaps 0.12 ha per worker.  
Production on numerous small plots of land can impose technical inefficiencies related to water control 
and distribution, crop choice and interactions, and planting materials used, while limiting the potential 
for mechanized plowing. The government has made significant progress on land consolidation.  Land 
under consolidated use rose from 28,788 ha in 2007 to 502,916 ha in 2012, primarily through 
consolidation of production rather than of ownership (World Bank, 2014).  The consolidation process has 
not involved mandatory consolidation of ownership, and planting, cultivation and harvesting are still 
carried out by the individual land owners, albeit on a communal schedule (Pritchard, 2013).  

 

11. The agriculture value chains face key constraints at every stage. Research and extension is 
dominated by public institutions which are understaffed. There are insufficient extension services to 
support both quantity and quality, and there are weak linkages between research and extension. Input 
supply systems are driven by the public sector, there is low awareness of the advantages of quality inputs, 
domestic seed production is low and there is limited access to finance. Production potential is restricted 
by land size, subsistence and rain-fed farming, mono-cropping, limited access to irrigation and 
mechanization. Post production is impacted by poor storage techniques and insufficient storage and 
drying infrastructure and safety and quality of produce affected by poor storage and drying. Processing is 
characterized by low capacity utilization. - Less than 10 percent of total production is processed. The 
supply of raw material is irregular and limited. The agricultural workforce has a low level of technical skills. 
Finally, markets are informal and unorganized, Rwanda country branding is weak, and the price-sensitive 
domestic market poses a challenge for start ups to enter the market. 
 

12. The government has focused on extending the rural roads network with a main objective of 
connecting to regional markets and opportunities exists for scaling up regional connectivity. A 
significant proportion of Rwanda’s rural population, whose livelihoods depend on agriculture, lacks access 
to rural transport facilities, including feeder roads. In 2015, only 13,350 km of roads were in good or 
passable condition, but Rwanda targets to have 30,000 km of passable roads by 2028. Poor connectivity 
hampers agricultural development and prevents farmers from increasing access to markets, enhancing 
their competitiveness and improving their incomes and livelihoods. A national feeder roads strategy has 
been developed which establishes the Feeder Roads implementation framework with clear-cutting 
institutional responsibilities for different stakeholders in the Feeder roads sub-sector, promoting labour-
based technology in feeder roads development and outlining mechanisms for funding feeder roads 
development and maintenance. 

 

 

13.  Rwanda’s proximity to many of the continent’s key food markets and increased global/regional 
consumption for key export crops including bio-fortified staples, presents significant opportunities 
(especially through EAC and COMESA) for enlarged export markets, transport corridors and cross-border 
trade cooperation. Global and regional markets for higher-value agricultural items are also becoming 
more demanding in terms of quality, food safety, and branding, but also more remunerative. Rwanda is 
well-placed to benefit from expanding regional food markets, providing the facilitating investments in 
infrastructure and institutions are in place and the private sector responds. 

 

14. Moreover, existing farming practices are ill-suited to the challenges of climate change, with the 
agriculture sector accounting for 45.6 percent of national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and poorly 
equipped to adapt to changing weather patterns. Climate change projections are highly uncertain, and 
so precise changes to agro-climatic conditions in what is an agro-ecologically diverse country are hard to 
predict. What is certain, however, is that the system is not yet equipped to model, forecast and adapt as 
changes occur and greater evidence becomes available to hone down climate change forecasts. According 
to a recent assessment by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), few climate smart 
agricultural practices are currently deployed. Current on-farm practices are leading to rapid declines in 
soil fertility and land degradation. 
 

15. In addition, Rwanda remains challenged by malnutrition especially among rural households 
with extremely small land holdings, and pervasive food insecurity. The national rate of stunting remains 
high at 38 percent while the latest Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey (2016) reports that 
around one-fifth of households remain food insecure. The pattern of stunting and food insecurity is 
complex and not only related to food availability – food insecurity is greatest in the western and northern 
areas and stunting is observed even in relatively non-poor areas due to inadequate child care and poor 
sanitation practices, in particular. A narrow focus on a few traditional food staples under the CIP resulted 
in limited dietary diversity, yet there are emerging opportunities with bio-fortification. The Government’s 
existing kitchen garden program is reportedly contributing to broader nutritional intake, although further 
improvements are required. 

 

16. In Rwanda the labor force is growing at a rapid pace annually with census projections showing 
that the working-age population will grow by about 240,000 per year between 2016 and 2025. This 
growth is substantially larger than the increase in jobs during the last 15 years. Acknowledging the 
demographic trends, the ongoing Second Five-Year Economic Development and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy (EDPRS-2) of the Government of Rwanda (GoR) has an ambitious target of creating 200,000 off-
farm jobs annually. For off-farm jobs, both the formal and informal sector will be important. The 
informal non-farm sector absorbed 70 percent of the new workers between 2006 and 2011 and will 
continue to absorb workers who seek a better living outside agriculture. Employment in the formal 
sector, while growing quickly, will remain low for the foreseeable future given it is starting from a low 
base. Even so, the sector remains important since most of the perceived ‘good’ jobs are created by the 
formal private sector. Increases in agriculture productivity and job creation in industries related to 
agriculture (agro-processing, agribusiness) will also support employment outcomes for the most 
vulnerable, unskilled workers. 

 

17. Women perform the bulk of the labor in the agriculture sector, putting in approximately 51 hours 
per week on farm and domestic duties compared to men who work 40 hours. Most women farmers lack 


the means to purchase high-quality seeds and proper storage facilities to protect their crops. Many also 
never received education on effective farming methods to increase yields and to ensure that the soil on 
their land remains healthy. This creates a cycle of subsistence farming leaving very little or no profit from 
outputs for farmers to use as a source of income or capital.  

 

18. Despite the observed growth, the non-farm enterprise sector maintains a limited presence. 
Rwanda’s non-farm enterprise sector has been growing from a small base. The number of business 
establishments has increased to 149,404 in 2014 – an increase of 18 percent since 2011 – providing 
employment to 361,901 workers in 2014. However, employment in business establishments represents 
only a small portion of overall employment in Rwanda, with agriculture still being the dominant activity. 
The enterprise sector provided employment to 6.2 percent of working-age Rwandans in 2014 (361,901 
jobs of a labor force of 5,785,000). In addition, there is a limited presence of medium- and large-sized 
private firms and vibrancy in the sector has yet to fully emerge.   

 

19. Considering these trends and projections, Rwanda is committed to identifying and addressing 
the policies, regulations, and investment areas that will stimulate inclusive productivity growth for 
broadening nutritious food production and increasing private sector investment. Furthermore, there is 
commitment across the GoR to pursue new opportunities for farm income diversification to secure further 
reductions in rural poverty, strengthen resilience against the impacts of climate change and to transform 
the dominant subsistence farming sector into a competitive and market-led agriculture sector. Their 
objectives for the food and agriculture system mirror the scale of their broader national goals in terms of 
ambition and conviction to achieve them. 

 

20. To codify these ambitions and articulate a road map to achieve them, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) revised and updated their National Agricultural Policy (NAP) in 2017. 
The National Agricultural Policy 2017-2030 responds to the changes facing agriculture and the food system 
nationally, regionally and globally. Under this policy, the role of government in agriculture is envisaged to 
fundamentally shift from making direct interventions in the sector – especially with a focus on production 
only – to a market enabler, thereby promoting enhanced farmer cooperation and private-sector-led 
development of the agri-food economy. The policy seeks to build upon Rwanda’s growing reputation as 
supplier of high-quality, sustainably produced agri-food products, especially for the increasingly 
demanding consumers in Africa’s growing urban centers. It places added emphasis on principles of 
resilience to changes in climate and markets and seeks to seize opportunities offered by advances in 
digitalization and information and communication technology (ICT), and to leverage these also for 
vocational-skill development and for more effective sector administration. The policy also aims to 
promote inclusion through mainstreaming preferential treatment for better participation of women and 
youth in agriculture programs and development. 
 

21. MINAGRI has prepared its fourth Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4) which 
is an articulation of how the Government proposes to implement the updated NAP. PSTA 4 is 
structured around four Priority Areas which are well aligned to the NAP. Priority Area 1: Innovation and 
Extension focuses on improving agronomic knowledge and technology in terms of basic research and 
innovation, development of efficient proximity extension services, as well as promoting knowledge and 
skills of value chain actors; Priority Area 2: Productivity and Resilience focuses on promoting sustainable 
and resilient production systems for crops and animal resources; Priority Area 3: Inclusive markets and 



value addition seeks to improve markets and linkages between production and processing; and Priority 
Area 4: Enabling Environment and Responsive Institutions that provides the regulatory framework and 
defines and coordinates public sector involvement. In addition, although women and youth are 
mainstreamed across all priority areas, Priority Area 4 features specific measures and incentives to 
increase gender equity and to introduce skilled youth to commercial farming and jobs along the 
agricultural value chains. PSTA 4 builds on the experience of implementing the previous strategic plan 
(PSTA 3) and provides a basis for ‘future-proofing agriculture to prepare for risks such as those inherent 
in climate change, considering the constraints and opportunities of Rwanda’s demographic, 
geographical and strategic conditions. 
 

22. In addition to MINAGRI, key actors in the sector include the National Agricultural Export 
Development Board (NAEB) and the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB). NAEB is responsible for the 
implementation of policies and strategies for promoting and developing agricultural and livestock 
products for export. RAB is an autonomous body largely responsible for research and extension, 
strengthening the linkage with policy, and establish efficiency in service delivery through institutional 
integration in the agricultural sector.  

 

23. PSTA 4 will also be aligned to National Policies and Strategies including Vision 2050, the Third 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS III), and relevant sub-sector strategies. 
The EDPRS III was designed to address the Rwanda’s commitment to the SDGs, Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC’s) on agriculture, and the Paris Climate Agreement.  The African Union 
has confirmed that PSTA 4 is aligned with goals of Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development 
Program (CAADP) and key regional programs. 

 

24. The proposed Program for Results (PforR) operation will be nested within PSTA 4. PSTA 4 is in 
the final stages of approval – led by a core team within MINAGRI and benefiting from a broad group of 
development partners, including the World Bank and CAADP institutions. PSTA 4 has been endorsed by 
the GoR and will be formally approved at the CAADP Business Meeting on May 15, 2018. Reflecting 
emerging best-practice with PforR operations, the specifics of the PforR Program are drawn from the 
broader PSTA 4 and nested within the Government’s strategy. 

 
PforR Program Scope 

 

25. The responsibility of agriculture public sector institutions, and of MINAGRI in particular, to lead 
the national transformation process outlined in PSTA 4 is clear. The achievement of this transformative 
agenda will require intense policy work with a particular focus on how to promote and support 
agribusiness at all stages of key value chains while balancing commercialization with the consideration of 
poverty reduction and environmental sustainability in a complex, dynamic and risk prone national and 
regional context. The nature of this leadership will be less through the direct delivery of service but will 
be through “thought leadership”, problem solving, policy definition, capacity building, joint enterprise or 
strategic partnership, resource mobilization, regulation, coordination, information management and 
communication. 

 

26. There have been several organizational reviews of agriculture sector institutions as well as review 
and reform exercises intended to inform the transformation of the public sector as a whole.  In addition, 
 

various reports and evaluations, including the 2016 Agriculture Public Expenditure Review and the 2017 
Mid Term Review of the PSTA 3 Strategy have raised significant issues of an institutional nature.  
Furthermore, recent sub sectoral reports or strategies including the Agriculture Finance Diagnostic and 
the National Agribusiness Investment Promotion Strategy (NAIPS) make clear the need for institutional 
reform.  

 

27. The PforR Program has incorporated the recommendations from these reviews and studies into 
its design.  In addition, the design draws on the lessons learned from previous attempts to build capacity 
within MINAGRI, including the first PforR Program. Specifically, the attempts to undertake reforms 
without significant attention to a well design reform process, sustainably addressing Human Resource 
constraints, ensuring communication/coordination are prioritized and ensuring new ways of working are 
well designed and appropriately incentivized.  As a result, the PforR Program makes a sequenced, focused 
and results based approach to the institutional change process central to its design.  

 

28. The scale and complexity of PSTA 4’s institutional reform agenda is significant. However, it will 
take time for MINAGRI to fully establish and strategically apply its “thought leadership” capacity.  Many 
of the expected outcomes will only be fully delivered, at the required scale, during the latter years of PSTA 
4 implementation. In that context, the PforR Program, which supports the first three years of PSTA 4, is 
focused on a series of mutually reinforcing interventions -  some of which are activities, that will deliver 
intermediate outcomes but, more importantly, incentivize organizational reform, create new policy 
instruments, build increased capacity, and establish new systems that will build a sound institutional 
platform to enable MINAGRI to deliver PSTA 4. 
 

29. The proposed PforR operation will support the first three years (2018 – 2021) of the six-year 
strategy of the PSTA 4 (2018-2024). This period of PSTA 4 is focused on establishing a platform for change 
and new ways of working, including the way MINAGRI is structured and reflecting the way it is more 
private sector facing.  

 

30. There is a possibility of supporting the final three years through additional financing, subject and 
without prejudice to normal Bank approval procedures. The activities to be supported under the PforR 
Program correspond to the MINAGRI PSTA 4 agenda. In this context, the focus of the proposed PforR 
operation will be on strengthening the capacity of MINAGRI to increase private sector investment and to 
enable the commercialization of key agriculture value chains in Rwanda’s agriculture sector. Based on 
value chain diagnostics (further elaborated in the technical assessment ANNEX 4) and taking into 
consideration the Bank’s comparative advantage regarding the PSTA 4 Priority areas, the PforR Program 
is constructed around an organizing framework of the following four results areas: 
 

31. Results Area 1: Policy and Organizational Reform – aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4: The PforR 
Program will seek to improve the structure and capability of MINAGRI in order to strengthen sector 
analysis, associated policy reforms and design/introduce relevant financing mechanisms/business models 
for attracting private sector investment. MINAGRI will demonstrate this new capacity by producing a 
Private Sector Leveraging Strategy to guide processes that will leverage private sector financing, while 
ensuring environmental and social standards are maintained. In addition, the foundations for digital data 
systems will be launched to improve management information and enable greater innovation. 
Furthermore, a new mechanism will be established to enable greater interagency coordination (including 

 

key stakeholders such as Ministry of Trade, Financial sector actors, etc.) and communication.   
 

32. Results Area 2: Enabling Agric Commercialization - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4:  The 
second PforR Results Area focuses on specific interventions to improve the quality of public investments 
in essential value chain services to leverage commercial agriculture. This includes key areas such as 
infrastructure and research, by introducing new business models that will link public investments to 
commercial markets and leverage increased levels private sector investments. PSTA 4 advocates for 
maximizing the effectiveness and efficiency of public investment by leveraging increased private sector 
investment in service provision and delivery/management of agricultural infrastructure. 
 

33. Results Area 3: Delivery of Improved Agric Value Chain Services - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority 
Areas 3 & 4.  The PforR Program will support fostering competitive agricultural value chains, which 
requires the public sector to provide critical services to support production, processing, logistics, 
marketing and the like. This approach is consistent with MFD principles.  The public function supported 
by the PforR Program is to introduce and accelerate the expansion of services that de-risk agricultural 
investments by improving dialogue between private and public actions, increasing the use of private 
sector service delivery (e.g. out-grower schemes and productive partnerships), and expanding access to 
information and financial services. These measures will help achieve a key anticipated outcome from PSTA 
4 and will improve productivity and inclusiveness of agricultural market systems and increase value 
addition and competitiveness of diversified agricultural commodities, for domestic, regional, and 
international markets. 

 

34. Results Area 4: Efficiency in Public Expenditures - aligned with PSTA 4 Priority Area 4. The PforR 
Program seeks to incentivize the dual approach of supporting: (i) a very specific action that demonstrates 
improved efficiency in public expenditure of the core delivery agency RAB; and (ii) a more general effort 
to improve the overall expenditure among the three main agencies that account for the largest share of 
sector expenditure. Since RAB is the agency responsible for key services, improvements in the budget 
execution system will be undertaken with the goal of improving their delivery function. Standards for 
budget execution help to maximize the impact of government spending and the ability to meet such 
standards signals weaknesses that undermines value for money. It also undermines the argument for 
additional public resources since there are associated concerns over malfeasance in execution that render 
MINECOFIN reluctant to allocate additional resources. Previous audits of RAB have not been approved 
because of non-compliance in several important areas. Prior qualified audits have highlighted in detail 
where weaknesses lie and both agencies are aware of where improvements are needed. 

 

35. The implementation of the program will be sequenced.  Specifically, under Result Area 1 MINAGRI 
will develop and seek approval for a Private Sector Leveraging Strategy (with sections on selection criteria 
for private investments, contract governance, and environmental/social management).   Approval of the 
Private Sector Leveraging Strategy will enable MINAGRI to focus on the delivery of Result Areas 2 and 3.  
 

36. The Boundaries of the PforR Program are summarized below in Table 2 
 



Table 1: Government program and PforR Program Boundary Comparison 

Item Government program PforR Program 

Title PSTA 4 PforR Program 

Objective Transformation of Rwandan 
agriculture from a subsistence sector 
to a knowledge-based value creating 
sector, that contributes to the national 
economy and ensures food and 
nutrition security in a sustainable and 
resilient manner 

To improve the capacity of selected national 
public agricultural institutions, to increase the 
enabling of commercialization of agriculture 
value chains in Rwanda 

Timeframe 2018-2024 2018-2021 

Program 
Cost 

US$ 1.5 billion US$ 292.2 million 

Activities Priority Area 1: Innovation and 
Extension 

• Research and innovation 

• Improved soil health and 
fertility  

• Conservation of biodiversity 

• Extension and advisory 
services 

• Skills Development  
 
Priority Area 2: Productivity and 
Resilience 

• Land husbandry and crop 
production diversification  

• Irrigation 

• Animal resources and 
production systems 

• Nutrition sensitive agriculture 

• Mechanisms for resilience  
 
Priority Area 3: Inclusive markets and 
value addition 

• Market linkages 

• Market risk and financial 
services 

• Quality assurance and 
regulations 

 
Priority Area 4: Enabling Environment 
& Responsive Institutions 

• Agriculture institutional 

 
PforR Program Results Area 3 

• Innovation (partnership agreements 
with universities and private sector) 

 
PforR Program Result Area 2 

• Private sector extension and advisory 
services 

 
 

PforR Program Results Area 2 

• Land husbandry (focused on links to 
commercialization) 

• Irrigation (focused on links to 
commercialization) 

 
 
 
 
 

 
PforR Program Result Area 2 

• Market Links (infrastructure for value 
chain development storage, cold 
trucks, etc.) 
 

 
 
PforR Program Result Area 4 
 

• Agriculture Institutional Development  

development 

• Evidence policy and 
development and regulatory 
framework 

• Commercialization of value 
chains 

• Planning, coordination and 
budgeting 

• Knowledge management  

• Evidence policy development   

• Commercialization of value chains 

• Planning, coordination and budgeting 
 

Geographic 
Scope 

National National 

 

37. The Program boundary for PforR financing provides a clear strategic focus to the PforR Program.  
There are areas of PSTA 4 that will not be covered by the PforR Program.  These areas include the 
following: 
 

a. improved soil health and fertility  
b. conservation of biodiversity  
c. skills development 
d. animal resources and production systems  
e. nutrition sensitive agriculture 
f. mechanisms for resilience 
g. quality assurance  
h. knowledge management 

 

38. The rationale for not incorporating these areas in the PforR Program includes the following:  a) 
MINAGRI is in the process of securing both public and external resources for these areas (including 
regional IPF and GASFP), b) these areas are unlikely to provide an equivalent transformation impact and 
c) a number of these areas (e.g. mechanisms for resilience and quality assurance) could not be effectively 
supported by a PforR Program.  

 

39. The PforR Program and its sub-components aim to tackle identified climate risks and 
vulnerabilities as follows: 

• Policy and Organizational Reform. Currently MINAGRI has limited capacity to fulfil its mandate 
in policy development, inter-sector and intra- sector coordination, resource mobilization and 
M&E. The PforR Program will support improving the capability of MINAGRI to properly 
address policy challenges and direct public investments across all GoR. This new capacity will 
result in strengthen regulatory institutions and policies (including rules and regulations) which 
reduce the emissions of GHGs in the agriculture, fishing, livestock, and/or forestry sectors (a 
PAP action), improvements in data management of weather monitoring systems. 

 

• Improved coordination with relevant agencies and actors. The primary focus for the PforR 
Program is to support MINAGRI in becoming a stronger market enabler.  Improving 
interagency working and coordination is a requirement in this process. This improved capacity 
for sectoral collaboration will also be applied toward tackling climate risks and vulnerabilities. 

• Commercialization of the delivery of key public goods and services. Most agriculture in 
Rwanda is practiced on steep slopes prone to erosion during the rainy season. While 
considerable progress has been made in constructing robust “bench” (wide) terraces, much 
more needs to be done to secure the land asset.  The PforR Program will support, via the 
efficient use of public funds and leveraged private investments, the restoration and 
conservation of productive landscapes. 

 
Table 2: Disbursement Linked Indicators and Climate Change Intent 

Disbursement-

Linked 

Indicator 

Definition Climate Change intent 

DLI 1: 

Organizational 

Development 

Roadmap 

successfully 

prepared and 

implementation on 

track 

• Organizational review, including capacity 
needs assessment of MINAGRI completed and 
new functional structures in place (year 1) 

• OD Plan for MINAGRI prepared and approved 
(year 2) 

• Upgrade of HR management function 
completed (year 3) 

The process of organizational 

change will enable MINAGRI to 

build increased capacity 

tointroduce institutional reforms 

and strengthening to include 

climate aspects in policies and 

regulations in flexible manner 

 

DLI 2: Improved 

analytical and 

policy reform 

competencies 

demonstrated 

• Strategy for leveraging Private Investment 
with Implementation Plan published (year 1) 

• Annual Report by MINAGRI on Public-Private 
Investment in Agriculture published (year 2) 

• Agricultural input subsidy schemes reviewed, 
alternative models for increasing efficiency 
assessed, reforms agreed and implemented 
(year 3) 
 

 

The development of new policies 

and strategies will demonstrate 

MINAGRI capacity to respond to 

new/emerging challenges 

including the identification of 

sites at greatest risk and 

enhancement of resilience of 

those sites and/or services 

DLI 3: Digital 

information 

platforms designed 

and operational 

• A common data warehouse platform is 

designed and ready for use, whereby existing 

data in Weather, MIS and ALIS I will be fully 

interfaced (at least down to the level of all 

districts) – (year 1) 

• The Farmer registration application and ALIS II 

will be fully interfaced with MIS and ALIS I in 

the common data warehouse platform. Both, 

Improved local climate 

information services and 

medium/short-term forecasting 

to support adaptation planning 

and strengthening ability to cope 

with climate change and climate 

variability impacts 

 
Farmer registration and ALIS II, will hold data 

covering all districts - (year 2) 

• (i) The Livestock registration application 
(holding cow data with national coverage) will 
be interfaced with MIS, ALIS I and II, Farmer 
registration application in the common data 
warehouse platform; (ii) Sector Performance 
Dash Board is in place and publicly accessible 
online, whereby it provides reports on 
national agricultural macro indicators, 
national Indicator of Food Security and PSTA 4 
results indicators  
(year 3) 

Improvements to the collection 

and management of data related 

to land use and livestock will 

improve MINAGRI’s capacity for 

monitoring and early response to 

potential impacts of climate-

related risks and hazards such as 

crop and livestock pests and 

diseases  

 

DLI 4: Mechanism 

to strengthen 

public private 

dialogue (PPD) and 

specific commodity 

value chain 

platforms designed 

and implemented 

• Two mechanisms designed and budgeted: (1) 
National Public-Private Dialogues (PPD) on 
themes with strategic relevance (2) 
Commodity value chain platforms (year 1) 

• Two national PPDs held and at least 3 VC 
platforms established with operating plans 
(year 2) 

• Additional 2 PPDs held (year 3) 

• VC platforms are fully functional and yielded 
evidence of satisfactory results (as per M&E of 
operating plan) (year 3) 
 

A stronger dialogue between the 

Public and Private Sector 

(including farmer associations 

and other stakeholders) will 

allow for knowledge exchange 

and greater awareness of climate 

risks, and will encourage greater 

consensus and innovation on 

how (exposure to) risks and 

shocks can be reduced and 

managed.  

DLI 5: New 

irrigation and 

terracing area 

identified, 

developed and/or 

managed where 

commercial 

viability has been a 

determining 

appraisal criterion   

Area (Ha) identified, developed and put under 

recognized PPP (target 23,296 Ha)- disaggregated 

by 

• Irrigation area (target 1260) 

• Area using radical/progressive terraces 

(target 745) (year 2) 

Area (Ha) identified, developed and put under 

recognized PPP (target 31,504 Ha) - disaggregated 

by 

• Irrigation area (target 1680) 

•  Area using radical/progressive terraces 

(target 2310) (year 3) 

 

Most agriculture in Rwanda is 

practiced on steep slopes prone 

to erosion during the rainy 

season. This intervention will, 

with support from private sector, 

promote innovative management 

practices to restore or increase 

resilience of degraded areas for 

crop production. 

 

Promote sustainable water 

management practices that 

promote water use efficiency 


DLI 6: Volume of 

private sector 

investment (in US$) 

matching public 

financing in PPP 

infrastructure 

projects  

The DLI will help to promote new financing 

mechanisms.  Only investments fully committed 

are included in the measure. 

• 4,000,0000 US$ or more (year 2) 

• 7,150,000 US$ or more (year 3) 

Investments will be targeted 

towards infrastructure (e.g. 

greenhouses, drying areas, etc.) 

that is designed to reduced the 

vulnerability of crop storage 

facilities to climate change and 

climate variability. 

 

This investment will also support 

the creation of infrastructure 

that will support improved 

business continuity during and 

after extreme weather events. 

DLI 7: Private 

sector service 

models designed, 

launched and 

achieving positive 

response    

• 6,000 farm households reached by private 
advisory services (non-outgrower scheme) 
(year 2) 

• 8,0000 additional farm households reached by 
private advisory services (non-outgrower-
schemes (year 3) 

• 10,0000 new farm household participating in 
outgrower schemes (Year 3)  

Reduction in the reliance on 

public sector as the key service 

provide will enable MINAGRI to 

refocus resources towards 

supporting farmers who have 

fewer resources to manage 

climate-related risks 

DLI 8: Reform of 

RAB 

• Implementation Plan for RAB Restructuring 

Order prepared and approved by its Board 

(year 1) 

• Deviation between budget and outturn 

expenditure 2018/19  

(year 2) 

• Unqualified audit of RAB (year 3)  

Enables the mainstreaming of 

climate change and relevant 

adaptation and mitigation 

measures across agriculture-

related stakeholders 

 

40. Role of the Development Partners.  MINECOFIN and MINAGRI will be mobilizing resources to 
finance PSTA 4.  There are indications that DFID, EU, IFAD, and USAID will be providing finance via project 
based financing or programmatic financing. 
 
41. DFID is considering providing support for the PforR Program. Once this is confirmed, the most 
appropriate mechanism for their co-financing will be established (i.e., parallel financing, co-financing, 
establishment of a multi-donor trust fund, etc.). To the extent that other development partners (DPs) 
participate in co-financing the PforR Program, it is understood that their funding would need to fit in the 
overall program envelope under PforR financing and would be allocated to the same DLIs, according to a 
similar pattern of distribution (in agreement with the Common Framework of Engagement (CFE)) of the 


MDTF, following all existing procedures of the PforR instrument (i.e., DLIs, verification protocols, PAP, 
Program Implementation). 
 
42. DFID, EU, IFAD, USAID, FAO and the Netherlands will continue to provide Technical Assistance 
(TA) to address the recognized capacity gaps within MINAGRI. These DPs are planning to continue TA 
support over the implementation of PSTA 4.  These same DPs are also part of the Agriculture Sector 
Working Group (ASWG), which provides an important forum to coordinate the complementarity of TA 
interventions, also as part of the annual planning and budgetary processes. Discussions are underway to 
explore the most appropriate modalities to be followed by these DPs, including co-financing the PforR 
operation. Having multiple DPs finance the PforR operation would streamline and reduce transaction 
costs for the Ministry by having one mechanism with agreed upon results and a common set of DLIs. It 
would also simplify the financing to support strategic results, whether policies, impacts, outcomes, and/or 
outputs. DPs who wish to provide co-financing under the proposed PforR operation will follow the same 
procedures as the PforR Program. 

 

C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
 

Program Development Objective(s) 
  
To improve the capacity of selected public agricultural institutions and to enable an increase in commercialization of 
agriculture value chains in Rwanda  
 
 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 

 
43. The physical activities planned under this PforR Program follow the scope and nature of 
activities implemented under the previous PforR operation, and moderate adverse environmental and 
social impacts are anticipated to be site-specific and reversible. Identified impacts can be effectively 
mitigated, based on existing environmental and social systems and the solid recent track record of the 
implementing agencies compliance with both national legislation and World Bank safeguards. No 
anticipated Program activities are judged likely to have significant adverse impacts on the environment 
and/ or affected people that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. However, it is recognized that the 
key sector intuitions, such as, MINAGRI and RAB will require significant capacity building to enhance E&S 
systems and staffing to ensure effective implementation and monitoring of not only public sector, but 
also PPP initiatives.  The capacity enhancement efforts for MINAGRI are included in the PforR operation, 
supported by other Donors. Based on the introduction of the new instruments and new types of 
collaboration with the private sector, the overall environmental and social risks of the PforR Program are 
proposed to be rated as Substantial. 
 

44. The previous PforR operation had several notable achievements, such as the development of a 
consolidated Environmental and Social Implementation Manual based on existing government 
guidelines; and national and district level capacity building on the application of the Manual and the 
establishment of a grievance redress call center. 
 

45. The update of the ESSA is still ongoing to incorporate a sample of the private sector entities and 



assess the environmental and social systems as they are applied for potential PPP projects, especially 
focusing on Results Area 2: Enabling Agricultural Commercialization and Results Area 3: Delivery of 
Improved Agric Value Chain Services. 
 

46. Environmental Effects. The PforR Program may include small scale irrigation schemes, similar in 
scale to sub-projects under the IDA-financed Rural Sector Support Project (RSSP; phases 1 – 3), located 
in existing sites of agricultural land use, do not involve large-scale resettlement, and consist of land 
husbandry works (e.g., terracing); drainage canals and/ or dams that are not higher than 10m; post-
harvest infrastructure, markets, and community storage facilities. Based on the experience with 
implementation of support to PSTA III, the potential environmental impacts of Program activities are 
generally well known and understood by implementing authorities at the national and local levels. 
Under the previous PforR operation, MINAGRI has adopted an Environmental and Social Management 
System based on the internationally accepted best practices and more specifically, based on 
implementation of other donor-funded projects, including Bank-financed RSSP and the Land Husbandry, 
Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation (LWH) project. This system includes national small dam safety 
guidelines, integrated pest management plans, environmental assessments and grievance redress 
mechanisms database. It is expected that the identified environmental impacts can be: (i) avoided 
through a careful site selection process, which entails conducting feasibility studies, an environmental 
impact assessment (EIA), and social screening; and (ii) reduced with diligent monitoring of 
implementation of known and demonstrated mitigation measures. At the same time, the Program will 
have a number of environmental benefits, including (i) a soil conservation and land husbandry program 
that will contribute to more sustainable land and water management and decreased erosion; and (ii) soil 
fertility management, and advance research and seed production, which will improve agricultural 
practices and increase food security in the country. 
 

47. Social Effects. No significant changes in land use or large-scale land acquisition are expected 
from the proposed PforR. The Program continues to pay specific attention to its potential social impacts, 
based on the practices established under previous PforR operation. These include: a chance of moderate 
physical resettlement and/ or land acquisition related to Program interventions and temporary 
displacement due to land husbandry works; challenges of identifying relocation sites due to the limited 
land availability; loss of income from land due to demarcation of buffer zones; potential for limitations 
on access to natural resource use in or around protected areas; consolidation of land use; acquisition of 
land for agro-processing and off-farm activities; benefit sharing of commercial farming if land is rented; 
male capture of community institutions; obstacles for women and youth participation; difficulty of 
purchasing agriculture inputs for the very poor due to their limited access to micro finance; conflict over 
land ownership and use; and weak participatory decision making and lack of transparency. The Program 
is also expected to have significant social benefits for the rural communities in the target areas, such as 
increased productivity and commercialization of agriculture and improved quality and accessibility of 
agricultural services, thus improving citizens’ incomes and overall welfare and quality of life, especially 
for the rural poor and vulnerable. Based on the approach established during implementation of other 
Bank-supported operations, the Program targets farmer groups with specific attention to gender issues, 
including in group and cooperative leadership, inclusion of vulnerable groups, and training in conflict 
resolution and family welfare.  
 

48. Sustainability. Ensuring environmental and social sustainability of Program investments requires 




mainstreaming sustainability planning at all levels of the government, including the continuous 
participation of target communities. Currently, the challenge for the sector institutions under the 
Program is to ensure that decentralized decision making, transparency, and accountability are 
institutionalized to enhance sustainability of investments. This need has been recognized by MINAGRI, 
RAB and participating private sector entities and will receive support from the DPs.  
 

49. Capacity. Institutional arrangements for environmental management, including ESIAs, are 
mandated and established at all levels of government. The legal/regulatory procedures and policies for 
expropriation of land in the country adequately respond to the relocation and compensation for loss of 
assets, services, homes, and land. However, a common challenge is the ineffective implementation of 
these requirements and responsibilities due to lack of institutional capacity and financial resources at 
the local level. The assessment of specific capacity of the private sector is ongoing, however, more 
coordination efforts will need to be made by MINAGRI to ensure effective compliance monitoring of the 
PPP interventions. The capacity-building program will continue from the previous phase and focus on 
improving the environmental and social management practices among the government agencies and 
private sector organizations, including in the areas of: (i) implementation and oversight of the 
environmental and social assessment system within the Program; (ii) sustainability aspects of site 
selection and technical designs of the land husbandry and irrigation activities; (iii) documentation of 
involuntary resettlement and project-affected people and vulnerability assessments, including, where 
necessary, preparation of resettlement action plans (RAPs); (iv) screening of potential environmental 
and social impacts and public consultation; (v) enhancing gender-sensitive capacity building of local and 
national staff and service providers and gender responsiveness in agricultural service delivery; and (vi) 
good monitoring practices, including proactive use of grievance redress mechanisms; sampling of soil 
and water quality, and others.  
 

50. OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities will involve water 
extraction for irrigation activities from the streams flowing into international basins of the Nile and Lake 
Tanganyika. Following the practice of the RSSP (phases 1-3), the Bank has notified riparian states as part 
of Program preparation. The Bank has assessed, however, that the proposed activities under the 
Program will not result in any adverse impacts to the riparian countries. Irrigation development and land 
husbandry are not expected to have adverse impacts on water quality levels. Even though agricultural 
intensification and increased use of agricultural inputs are objectives of the Program, pre-Program input 
use levels are very low, and modest increases and sustainability measures built into the Program design 
are not expected to have an adverse impact on water quality. In addition, environmental and pest 
management plans are routinely implemented in the Program to mitigate such impacts to minimal 
levels. The PforR Program will not have any adverse effects on the quantity or quality of water flows to 
any other riparian states. 
 

51. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank 
supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints 
to the existing program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The 
GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. 
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection 
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with 
its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought 




directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to 
respond.  For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance 
Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit 
complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org 

 
 
E. Financing 

Program Financing (Template) 
 

Sources Amount 
(USD Million) 

% of Total 

  Counterpart Funding 189.92 65.50 

       Borrower      192.20      65.7850 

  International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 34.50 

       IDA Credit      100.00      34.22 

Total Program Financing 282.92  

 

 
 .   

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Ethiopia Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project (P163383) 

 
 

  
May 10, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC22113 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Ethiopia P163383  Ethiopia Resilient 
Landscapes and 
Livelihoods Project 
(P163383) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jun 15, 2018 Aug 02, 2018 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Cooperation 

Ministry of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To improve livelihoods, climate resilience, carbon storage, and land productivity in vulnerable rural major watersheds. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  

    
 
 

 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 

The intersection of land management, rights, and use forms the key development issue for millions of rural 

Ethiopians facing water insecurity, food insecurity, land tenure insecurity, and livelihood insecurity – all 

amplified by climate variability and change. Climate impacts in Ethiopia are felt primarily through water stress, 

which is affected by land use and degradation that undermines watershed function. In Ethiopia, the estimated 

cost of land degradation is 2-3% of GDP, before accounting for downstream affects, such as increased flood risk.  

The proven remedy centers on delivering a combination of better natural resource management and resource 

rights, jobs and livelihood enhancements, and gender outreach throughout targeted major watersheds. 

Restoration effects include a range of resilience-related results, including increased soil moisture and soil fertility 

important for higher and less variable crop yields, improved water availability, and increased carbon 

sequestration – all of which are high priorities for the government.   

 

Much progress has been made by the government and thousands of local communities to address these challenges 

through proven investment packages financed by the World Bank. However, this work requires more innovation, 

more financing, more coordination, and much greater scale if the country is to meet its resilience and low carbon 

objectives while achieving middle income status in less than 10 years as planned. 
 

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The World Bank has been financing Ethiopia’s Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MOANR) 

in six regional states to transform the way landscapes are managed by convening sectors, resources and partners 

(IDA, Norway, Canada, Germany, GEF, LDCF) to invest in a holistic and coordinated fashion. With financing 

from IDA through the Second Sustainable Land Management Project (SLMP-2), natural and economic wealth is 

being built on over 1.3 million hectares of degraded communal and smallholder lands through an integrated 

package of activities throughout targeted watersheds that include (i) management of natural resources (soil and 

water conservation structures, agroforestry, participatory forest management, enclosures to reduce free grazing 

and allow assisted natural regeneration, small irrigation, water point development, climate-smart technologies on 

household farmland, and land use planning approaches), (ii) improved land rights through issuance of legal 

landholding certificates to one million people, including landless youth, and (iii) livelihoods support including 

for improved cookstove adoption that reduces women’s labor,  respiratory illnesses, and fuelwood demand.  

 

Results from SLMP-2 financing are well documented in 135 major watersheds in 135 woredas (districts) in the 

six highland regional states during a major drought. Water and food security are boosted. Approximately 9 million 

tons of additional CO2e will have been accumulated in restored productive lands – a proxy for system function 

as well as a contribution to climate change mitigation over 4-5 years. Degraded lands are brought back into 

production for local farmers. Dry season base flow of streams and depth to water table are improving. And, 

protective vegetation cover was either maintained or expanded, as verified by remote sensing. A short video of 

the SLMP-2 approach and achievements is available here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nak-

UUZnvPI&t=1s.  Smallholder farmers regularly express how their identity and sense of place has also been 

restored through landscape restoration and improved legal resource rights. Many community members who were 



ready to migrate remained in their birthplace. Afterwards, they could send their children to school. They could 

increase nutrition by combining forage and livestock management, produce vegetables and fruits using small-

scale irrigation, and diversify with poultry, apiculture, and woodlot production. Moreover, local people 

established community watershed teams to discuss natural resource problems and opportunities, plan and 

implement interventions on the ground in an empowered, participatory manner.  

 

This transformative approach contributes to key national strategies, including the Growth and Transformation 

Plan-2 (GTP-2), the Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) Strategy, and accompanying 2015 Climate 

Resilience Strategy for Agriculture and Forest, Ethiopia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), 

the Ethiopia SLM Investment Framework, the emerging National Forest Sector Strategy and National REDD+ 

Strategy, as well as sector strategies for energy, water, and agriculture.  

 

With support from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience and the BioCarbon Fund, the Bank is further 

supporting the government’s CRGE Facility and four line ministries led by the finance ministry to develop a 

Multi-Sector Investment Plan (MSIP) for climate resilient production landscapes, while taking into account 

relevant activities on water resources, irrigation, and energy. 
 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

The operation features in the Bank’s CPF for FY 17-21 as a government flagship addressing the CPF’s 

resilience pillar, with a funding commitment from IDA-18 for US$100 million. It would leverage and scale up 

support to the MOANR’s proven Sustainable Land Management Program while also contributing to the climate, 

forest, water, energy, and land tenure targets in the client’s GTP-2 and CRGE Strategy as well as the 

forthcoming GTP-3.   
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

 
 

To improve livelihoods, climate resilience, carbon storage, and land productivity in vulnerable rural major 

watersheds. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
10 million hectares restored, supporting at least 20 million people facing increasing food, land tenure and water 

insecurity, and accumulating at least 20 million tons of CO2e per year after restoration.  

 

PDO level indicators: 

 
     

1. Land area with sustainable landscape management practices (Ha)  

1a. Communal land area treated for degradation (degraded hillsides, gullies, PFM, pastures) (ha)  

1b. Individual farmland area treated for productivity improvements (Ha)  

2. Total land area restored or reforested/afforested on both individual and communal land (Ha)  

3. Incremental carbon dioxide equivalent accumulated in the project area (metric tons)  

3a. Biomass in the intervention areas (Tons/Ha)  

4. Land area of the targeted micro watersheds with vegetation increase of at least 4% compared to baseline (Ha) 

 

Bottom 40: Ethiopia’s poorest citizens will benefit from the operation since they are the ones who are dependent on land 

resources for their livelihoods, and are highly vulnerable to climate shocks that good natural resource management and 

improved tenure security can mitigate – as proven in SLMP-2 interventions. 

 

A note on scale: These results imply that 300-1000 major watersheds are targeted, expanding from the current 135 major 

watersheds targeted in the Bank-financed SLMP-2 and just over 100 major watersheds targeted by parallel external 

financing. Interventions in 1000 major watersheds in turn implies an expansion of financing from the current 

approximately $250m for the current SLM Program (Bank and parallel financing together) to approximately $883m in 

total financing, or approximately $800,000 per major watershed depending on the package of interventions selected and 

the amount of blended and parallel financial and technical support provided by partner projects. Bilateral and multi-

lateral co-financiers are interested in significantly leveraging IDA. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
A critical mass of watershed restoration is within reach, but more must be done. MOFEC and MOANR aim to scale up and 

enhance the success of its proven flagship, the Sustainable Land Management Program, for which the Bank has been the 

largest and leading financier. The government has also requested the World Bank to be a GCF delivery partner for large-

scale impact, building on our mutual track record of delivery on the ground, and to convene financing from a variety of 

sources to be truly transformative at very large scale.  

 

The $100m of IDA would be blended with bilateral financing, Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Environment Facility 

(GEF), plus additional sources of financing currently under discussion, would provide a large and strategic financing 

package to support Ethiopia, through its existing proven Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP), to reach a 

critical mass of 10 million restored hectares of climate-vulnerable degraded watersheds upon which an estimated 20 

million people directly depend, and which could store an estimated 20 million tons of CO2e per year after restoration.  

An indirect spill over effect of replication would also occur in neighbouring watersheds, as is happening already. Reaching 

this critical mass would be a true transformative achievement, one that has started and built momentum over the years 

but requires institutions, investments, and financing models with a track record of getting to scale -- and with the right 

combination of integrated, well-monitored interventions.  

 

But it is not only about scale. Specific enhancements to the package of interventions are needed to reduce climate risks 

and sustain impact. For example:  



 

• Improved technologies are critical to reduce variability of crop productivity in the face of more extreme and 

frequent droughts, floods, and storms. As part of SLMP’s innovative landscape approach to achieve climate 

resilient productivity, a proven technique in the field ready for scaling is based on use of seeds from Ethiopian 

indigenous land races instead of imported improved varieties. Ethiopian wheat and barley varieties have seen 

approximately 60% yield improvements in the face of drought in actual farmers’ fields. This proven approach of 

deploying Ethiopia’s own genetic crop diversity for drought risk management needs to be brought to more farmers 

in the context of successful models of watershed re-vegetation and restoration and the government’s seed and 

extension system. 

• Information modernization and dissemination: improved meteorological, hydrological, and early warning systems 

are being developed, but the “last mile” of connecting improved weather information with farmers via the 

extension system and mobile phones needs to be strengthened for more timely planning and planting. 

• Small scale irrigation infrastructure is being put in place in restored watersheds and can be enhanced with PV and 

wind water pumps that displace diesel options. Resilient rural roads that also serve as water harvesting structures 

can expand from small pilots to national reach. 

• Innovative measures that integrate land management with land rights can reduce climate risks especially water 

stress. The Bank has financed a proven scheme to provide landholding certificates, inputs, and extension to 

landless youth in exchange for restoring degraded communal land, such as through terracing plus fruit tree or 

plantation outgrower schemes. 15,000 youths have been reached and this could grow to 100,000 in a new 

operation – alleviating urban migration driven partially by risks from land degradation and climate variability. 

• Innovative financing models such as the Bank’s “Performance for Results (P4R)” are proven in Ethiopia’s urban 

space and the selective use of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) in this IPF could, for example, help incentivize 

rapid, transformative expansion of the issuance of landholding certificates that are important for farmer 

reinvestment in land resource and adaptation. 

• Smart targeting of watershed restoration can expand the lifetime and resilience of key infrastructure including 

reservoirs for hydropower and irrigation. 

• Focusing on generating income streams from value and supply chain development from restored watersheds. An 

example is a large-scale commercial brewery made economically viable because a major restored watershed now 

provides cleaner and more consistently available water in a semi-arid highland setting. Another example is 

cookstoves, which according to a rigorous impact evaluation by the World Bank’s DEC and the Ethiopia 

Development Research Institute, significantly reduces fuelwood demand and deforestation. It also was shown by 

the SLMP-2 community reinvestment clubs to reduce women’s and girls’ fuelwood collection time from 3.5 hours 

to half an hour per day while reducing indoor air pollution, and saving up to 3h of cooking time per session and 

decreased fuel collection time by 1/3. Women also started to produce injera (bread) and sell it to the community. 

• More than 33,000 fuel saving stoves has been distributed or sold to households.  This figure could reach into the 

hundreds of thousands -- and solar lighting could also be included which has very high demand -- if a focused 


effort were made to bridge the last mile of distribution via women-managed local enterprise development. A shift 

to ethanol stoves could be prioritized. 

 

In line with the above and underpinned by extensive World Bank analytical work and investment experience on forest, 

climate-smart agriculture, household energy, land tenure, watershed management and landscape restoration, the new 

Resilient Landscapes project financed by IDA, GCF and others would provide large-scale coordinated financial support to 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MoANR) and its acclaimed Sustainable Land Management Program to 

make a lasting impact at very large scale.  

 

The Project would be implemented by the government based on sound, proven principles centred on: 

 

• Crowding in activities spatially to comprehensively investment in each targeted major watershed 

• Knowledge disseminated across communities by leveraging a large-scale program, 

• Improving agro-ecological, hydrological and climate information services and extension, 

• Empowered participatory approaches to community watershed management and livelihoods activities,  

• Better land use planning and policy combining bottom-up and top-down approaches informed by a stronger 

evidence base,  

• Mechanisms for deciding on more optimal trade-offs of sector objectives in the landscape,  

• Household energy solutions that impact land use, climate, jobs, women, health and education, 

• Legal land tenure security, and  

• Strengthened government and community institutions to coordinate and deploy investment, information, 

incentives, and income-generating opportunities. 

 

Strategic options for scaling up:  

 

1. Continue toward “full treatment” of existing 135 major watersheds in SLMP-2 and 18 major watersheds 

supported by Canada; 

2. Expand treatments to neighboring major watersheds in existing SLMP woredas, based on degradation/climate 

hotspots; 

3. Expand to neighboring major watersheds in new neighboring woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; 

4. Expand to Afar and Somali regional states -- perhaps a handful of western border woredas to pilot, if the 

additional GCF resources or other significant financial resources materialize;  

5. Combination of the above. 

 

Project Components 

 
Component 1. Investment in Green Infrastructure for Resilient Watersheds ($70 million IDA, others TBD).  

This component would scale-up proven sustainable land and water management practices by rural smallholders and 

communities in large watersheds (average 10,000 ha each) vulnerable to climate variability and change, recurrent drought 

and floods, and land degradation. Investment would support communal and individual lands as well as supporting 

infrastructure such as rural roads and small bridges.  Proven climate-smart practices include: soil and water conservation 

infrastructure such as terraces, small irrigation, and water harvesting trenches, check dams, small reservoirs, and other 

civil works; soil fertility and moisture management; assisted natural regeneration, enclosures plus livestock land use 

rationalization, intercropping, low tillage, gully reclamation, establishing grazing corridors, watering points and wells, 

sylvo-pastoral strategies, etc. Government Development Agents in the Bureaus of Agriculture would mobilize and support 

communities and receive continuous training to ensure quality extension. It is also important to enhance the 

interconnectivity of natural resources, which would be supported through land use planning in targeted watersheds where 

green corridors would be established to link fragmented forests, water bodies, key habitats, and rehabilitated micro 

watersheds (km). 

There would be three sub-components: 

Sub-component 1.1. Land restoration and watershed management ($40 million IDA, others TBD).  Described above. 

Sub-component 1.2. Climate-smart agriculture ($20 million IDA, others TBD). Described above. 

Sub-component 1.3. Income Opportunities and Resilient Livelihoods ($10 million IDA, others TBD). This sub-

component would finance advisory services and investment to improve access to and implementation of income 

generating activities.  These activities will help address the issue of landless/jobless youth/women and the 

resulting increased stress on the natural resource base and its potential to reduce climate risks.  Interventions 

could potentially include: 

• Ethanol and improved cookstove and solar home lighting promotion via women-managed local enterprise 

development, to close the last mile in distributing low carbon household technologies that also reduce 

land and water degradation; 

• Support to self-help groups, cooperatives and community unions such as vocational training for jobs, 

identification of business opportunities and preparation of related business plans for natural resource 

based community enterprises or others; 

• Organization of related consultation workshops, private sector forums, exhibitions/fairs;  

• Preparation of marketing strategies and sales promotions, manuals/guidelines;  

• Facilitation of access for technology, market information, credit, standard certification services; 

• Facilitate access to markets and fair trade opportunities; 

• Facilitate opportunities for international foundations and private sector engagement; and 

• Construction of warehouses, stores, product processing and workshops.   

Component 2. Strengthening Institutions and Information: and information modernization (US$ 10 million IDA, others 

TBD). This component would enhance production and management of -- and access to -- relevant environmental, climate, 

hydrological, crop, livestock, forest, geospatial, and weather information for land use decision making and disaster risk 

reduction at the levels of major watersheds, community watersheds, and farms. Land use planning (supported under 

Component 3) would be informed by vulnerability mapping and climate profiling, which would in turn be used to develop 

or update watershed plans and farm planning (under Component 1) by incorporating climate smart agricultural techniques 

financed under Component 1.  Component 2 would also support rigorous independent impact evaluations through a 

partnership arrangement between the MOANR, the Ethiopia Development Research Institute’s Environment and Climate 

Research Center, the World Bank’s Development Research Group, and the Africa Gender Lab for Impact Evaluation. 

Component 3. Land administration and use (US$ 10 million IDA, others TBD). In the same targeted watersheds in 

component 1, this component would (i) improve the legal land tenure security of rural households and groups through 

land certification and administration, and (ii) expand and enhance local level land use planning and innovations in 

landscape certification models. For the former, approximately 100,000 landless youth would receive legal communal land 

certificates, inputs, and extension in exchange for land restoration. And 2,000,000 households would receive legal 

individual landholding certificates. Half of the communal and individual/HH certificates would include a woman.  For the 

latter, the component would introduce the certification of locally managed forest plantations or natural forest, so that 

forest maturity is reached. This approach to forest management provides job opportunities for establishment and 

management including harvesting, processing and transport of forest products while helping green the supply chain for 

wood products. 

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring ($10 million IDA, others TBD). The component would finance the 

operational costs of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in MoANR and Regional State Bureaus of Agriculture. These PIUs 

will carry out all fiduciary aspects of project implementation including financial management, procurement, 

environmental and social safeguards, M&E, sector coordination of investment targeting and policy harmonization, and 

donor coordination structures. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The operation would be implemented in existing 135 major watersheds in the Sustainable Land Management Project II 

(SLMP-2, P133133) and possibly in 18 partially treated major watersheds recently supported by Canada whose funding 
has been exhausted. Additional major watersheds to be targeted will be determined during preparation, and based on 
the scale of financing made available beyond the $100m IDA. Potential new major watersheds could be selected by the 
government based on the following options: (ii) expand treatments to neighbouring major watersheds in existing SLMP 
woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; (iii) expand to neighbouring major watersheds in new neighbouring 
woredas, based on degradation/climate hotspots; (iv) expand to Afar and Somali regional states, perhaps a handful of 
western border Woredas to pilot, if significant financial resources materialize beyond ID financing.  
 
SLMP-2 safeguard instruments will be updated taking the above considerations into account as the project concept 

becomes more concrete during preparation, and pending formal site selection by the government and subsequent 
mapping of the specific project intervention area with provision of shape files for each major watershed and community 
watershed targeted for project intervention.  

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
SLMP-2 safeguards implementation was consistently rated moderately satisfactory and to date has not encountered any 

serious problems. RLLP would build upon this implementation structure and the built capacity. RLLP implementation 
would be centered in the MOANR who would be responsible for project implementation down though all levels of the 
government’s existing implementation structure for its Sustainable Land Management Program: Federal, Regional State, 
Zone, Woreda (District), and Kebele (Sub-district). These entities and their staff are generally capacitated and ready to 
implement in the existing 135 SLMP-2 woredas in Oromia, Amhara, SNNP, Tigray, Benishangul Gumuz and Gambella 
regional states. If the proposed new regional states of Afar and Somali and any Woredas additional to SLMP-2 materialize, 
these will require a start-up period of capacity building and mobilization of communities in institutional capacity to 
implement safeguards.  
For RLLP, MoANR will need to update the SLMP-2 Social Assessment through enhanced consultation in existing and 

proposed new areas to integrate the experiences from SLMP-2 implementation and address any new challenges 
identified. This work would then be used to integrate the views, concerns and recommendations into the design of RLLP 
components. If the proposed inclusion of the 18 major watersheds supported earlier by Canada occurs, the MoANR will 
need to conduct Environmental and Social due diligence to identify any gaps and integrate actions in the RLLP design for 
implementation.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Chukwudi H. Okafor, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Dereje Agonafir Habtewold, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Generally, the RLLP is proposed as a Category B 
project, and would provide positive environmental 
and social benefits by scaling up proven sustainable 
land and water management practices on communal 
and individual lands, coupled with land holding and 
use rights. The EA policy is triggered, given that the 
project would finance supporting infrastructure such 
as rural roads and small bridges, soil and water 
conservation structures such as terraces, small 
irrigation, and water harvesting trenches, check dams, 
small reservoirs, and other civil works; soil fertility and 
moisture management; assisted natural regeneration, 
enclosures plus backyard livestock land use 
rationalization, intercropping, low tillage, gully 
reclamation, watering points ,wells, and also land use 
planning , reforestation and afforestation, etc. The 



RLLP project may have range of activities such as 
construction of small scale irrigation schemes, 
community access road construction, water harvesting 
structures, small or micro-dams, degraded forest 
rehabilitation and reforestation, gully rehabilitation, 
land administration, certification and local land use 
planning. These activities may cause some unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts. These impacts may 
include biodiversity loss, natural habitat and cultural 
resources destruction, soil erosion and sedimentation, 
restriction of access to resources, flooding, involuntary 
loss of land and displacement of people, pollution and 
diseases 
Since the location, scope and nature of the major 
watersheds, micro watersheds, and specific activities 
within these sites are not known at the time of 
preparation, the instrument proposed for analyzing 
potential environmental and social risks is an ESMF. 
Thus, the SLMP-2 ESMF will be updated to capture the 
essence of implementation challenges, concerns and 
views regarding environmental and social risk 
management in the proposed RLLP. Regarding the 
possible inclusion of the 18 major watersheds 
supported earlier by Canada (not involving the Bank), 
an Environmental and Social due diligence will be 
conducted to document environmental and social 
compliance issues and identify recommended actions 
to be integrated in the RLLP design.   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project intervention areas are likely to encompass 
some natural habitats which are protected by law. 
Hence, it is necessary to reflect this OP/BP in the ESMF 
and to ensure that sub-projects are screened against 
this OP/BP and that appropriate preventive or 
mitigation measures are formulated and executed. 
The policy will be triggered because activities in the 
Project may have some impacts on wetlands, 
protected areas, conservation sites, and critical 
ecosystems. Activities involving significant conversion 
of natural habitats or if an environmental assessment 
indicates that a proposed activity would significantly 
convert or degrade natural habitats, the proposed 
activity will not be eligible for financing under RLLP. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

This policy is triggered as the Project areas are likely to 
encompass some forests which may be for production 
or protection. Under RLLP, the forest related activities 
will have positive impacts because of reforestation, 



rehabilitation of degraded forests land and communal 
lands. Community infrastructure such as access roads 
and irrigation schemes may pose some negative 
impacts if forests are found in those sites. 
Management plans with mitigation measures will be 
prepared to avoid or reduce such impacts. If there are 
projects likely to cause significant conversions of 
forests, they will not be financed under RLLP. The 
project ESMF will ensure that subprojects are 
screened against this OP/BP and that appropriate 
preventive or mitigation measures are formulated and 
executed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The triggering of this OP is predicated on the 
assumption that the Project intends to support the 
introduction of high value crops, new and high yielding 
crop varieties and animal breeds which may lead to 
increased application of agrochemicals (insecticides, 
herbicides, fertilizers, etc.). The ESMF includes a 
description of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
approaches that would elaborate on what actions 
need to be undertaken to minimize environmental, 
health and safety impacts. Experience from SLMP-2 
implementation indicates that activities, particularly 
those in agriculture and irrigation (introduction of high 
value crops and use of pesticides, introduction of new 
varieties of crops, new fruit tree species and varieties, 
high yielding varieties) may increase the use of 
agrochemicals (insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers, 
etc...). 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered given the possibility that there 
may be cultural assets and/or sites in the project area 
and on the assumption that there could be “chance 
finds.”  
The policy is triggered by the Project because the small 
scale infrastructure activities involve access road 
construction, small scale dam construction, and other 
similar infrastructure, which may potentially affect 
physical and cultural resources. The necessary steps of 
public consultations, engagement of cultural or 
religious leaders, local authorities need to be 
conducted before decision on project is made.  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

As a follow-on operation to SLMP-2, the RLLP is not 
expected to introduce new social risks related with the 
underserved and historically disadvantaged peoples. 
SLMP-2 had conducted an enhanced consultation 
process with project beneficiaries and project affected 



peoples and prepared a Social Assessment in regions 
having the characteristics associated with the 
populations defined under OP4.10 criteria, to seek 
broad support for the project from these groups. The 
findings of the Social Assessment (the identified social 
risks and risk mitigation measures), as well as the 
process used to foster free, prior, and informed 
consultations and achieve broad community support 
have been documented and publicly disclosed.  
The RLLP, as a follow-on operation to SLMP-2, will 
update the Social Assessment and Social Development 
Plan to document experiences and mitigate the 
challenges identified in SLMP-2 implementation and 
ensure the views, concerns and recommendations of 
people in Afar and Somali regional states, if included. 
Regarding the possible inclusion of the 18 major 
watersheds supported earlier by Canada, an 
Environmental and Social due diligence will be 
conducted to document any environmental and social 
compliance issues and identify recommended actions 
to be integrated in to the RLLP design against SLMP-2 
safeguard instruments. The Social Assessment and 
Social Development Plan update will also screen the 
presence of underserved and historically 
disadvantaged peoples in 18 major watersheds 
previously supported by Canada and new areas to be 
covered by RLLP but not previously covered by SLMP 
II.  
The gender and youth dimensions of the SLMP-2 
implementation will be captured in the updated Social 
Assessment and the SDP with a dedicated section to 
ensure provision of adequate implementation and 
monitoring support while addressing the practical and 
strategic needs of the youth and gender aspects of the 
RLLP design.   

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

This OP/BP is triggered based on the assumption that 
the implementation of RLLP interventions may 
potentially involve acquisition of land and/or 
restriction of access to communal natural resources. 
The ESMF, Social Assessment, and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for SLMP-2 will be 
updated based on an enhanced community 
consultation to capture views, concerns and 
recommendations based on experience in 
implementation of the SLMP-2 RPF. Experience from 
SLMP-2 implementation indicates that the scope of 


land take has been small and the nature of land take is 
voluntary. The restriction of access to degraded lands 
follow a due process using the participatory watershed 
management guideline. However, to ensure adequate 
assessment satisfactory to the Bank, the RPF update 
will include a participatory process, steps on 
community decision making process including 
identification of appropriate measures to mitigate any 
adverse impacts, if any, on the vulnerable members of 
the community. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project triggered OP 4.37 (safety of dams). No 
new construction and/or rehabilitation of large dams 
is anticipated to be financed under the proposed RLLP 
but there will possibly be construction of small dams 
particularly for irrigation of small-farm holdings, these 
may not be large (more than 4.5 meters high) and may 
not require special procedures to follow. In cases of 
small dam construction (less than 4.5 meters), 
implementers can use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth 
Dams, a guide to siting, design and construction’. In 
addition, the guideline for small dam construction 
prepared by the MOANR will be used to ensure safety 
of small dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

RLLP woredas are located in international water basins 
such as Abay, Tekeze, Baro or their tributaries. Most of 
the project activities are aimed at better watershed 
and pasture land management, afforestation and 
reforestation, biodiversity conservation as well as 
climate smart agriculture. These activities will 
contribute to reducing soil erosion and rejuvenate 
degraded landscapes hence lesser siltation of rivers 
and streams in the targeted watersheds. None of the 
project activities will therefore adversely change the 
quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparian 
countries. The physical interventions the RLLP project 
is expected to undertake include shallow groundwater 
recharge and micro-scale community-level irrigation. 
While the impact of individual sub-projects would be 
negligible and the cumulative abstractions minor, 
riparian countries will be notified in accordance with 
the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Feb 13, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
ESMF, SA, and RPF prepared for SLMP-2 will be updated. This activity will be launched on January 1, 2018 and updating 

of each document will take 45 days. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 1 of 13  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Sep-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC22230 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Kenya P163980  Kenya Marine Fisheries 
and Socio-Economic 
Development Project 
(MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Jul 16, 2018 Nov 20, 2018 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of Kenya Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Development Association (IDA)  100.00  

Total Project Cost  100.00  

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 


B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Kenya’s economic growth has been robust over the past years. For the third consecutive year, economic activity has 
increased, reaching an estimated 5-year high of 5.9 percent in 2016, and once again placing Kenya among the fastest 
growing economies in Sub-Saharan Africa.

1
 Projections indicate continued growth with a rate of around 6 percent in 

2018 and 2019. Kenya’s population is estimated to grow equally fast, with an annual increase of 1 million.
2
 In 2015, the 

country’s population stood at around 46 million.
3
 Natural resources are the basis for livelihood and economic 

development. Agriculture, including forestry and fishery,
4
 represents a major economic driver and a dominant source of 

employment, having accounted for more than 30 percent of GDP in 2015.
5
  

2. The effects of sustained macroeconomic growth are translating into improved quality of life and poverty reduction, 
but inequality remains high. Between 2006 and 2016, poverty measured against the official national poverty line is 
projected to have dropped from 46 percent to 36 percent.

6
 Inequality, however, remains high. Kenya’s Gini coefficient 

stood at 48.5 in 2005.
7 

In remote and sparsely populated areas such as the north-eastern parts or the coastal areas, 
poverty rates can be as high as 80 and 60 percent, respectively. There is a growing rural-urban split, and the richest 10 
percent of the population receive 40 percent of the nation’s income.

 
 

3. In 2008, the Government prepared a long-term development strategy, Vision 2030, which aims to transform Kenya 
into a globally competitive middle-income country by 2030.

8
 The strategy has three pillars: an economic pillar that 

aims to achieve GDP growth of 10 percent per annum; a social and environmental pillar that aims to build a just society 
enjoying equitable social development in a clean and secure environment; and a political pillar that aims to build a 
people-centered, results-oriented, accountable democratic political system. Promoting equal opportunities across the 
entire Kenyan territory is key to realizing this vision.  

4. In an effort to narrow long-term, deeply entrenched regional disparities and to increase the responsiveness of the 
government, Kenya adopted a new Constitution in 2010. County governments now play the primary on-the-ground 
role in delivering services (in the agriculture, water, environment, urban, and health sectors), while the national 
government retains a policy-making, regulatory, and research role.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. While the fisheries sector contributes less than one percent to GDP, it plays a significant role in employment 
generation, food security, and rural development. Fish production from inland fisheries, marine artisanal fisheries, and 
aquaculture, increased from 150,000 metric tons in 2010, to about 190,000 in 2014, with a market value of more than 

                                            
1
 World Bank (2017). Kenya Economic Update – Housing Unavailable and Unaffordable. April 2017, Edition No. 15 

2
 Ibid 

3
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

4
 Agriculture includes forestry, hunting, and fishing, as well as cultivation of crops and livestock production. 

5
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

6
 An updated national poverty line and measures will be published in 2017 based on the second Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 

completed in September 2016. Poverty incidence measured using the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP terms) was 
33 percent in 2006 and is projected to have dropped to 24 percent in 2016. 
7
 World Bank (2017). World Development Indicators Database 

8
 Government of the Republic of Kenya (2007). Kenya Vision 2030.  

US$250 million.
9
 Fish production from marine resources only, amounts to around 9,000 metric tons of catch annually.

10 

Imports and exports of fish products have also been increasing. Fish products were being imported and exported in the 
amount of US$15.5 million and US$39 respectively in 2013, compared to US$4.6 million and US$38.9 million, 
respectively, in 2010.

11
 The sector employs more than 2 million people directly and indirectly, working as fishers, 

traders, processors, suppliers, and merchants of fishing accessories, and thus serves the development and stabilization 
of Kenya’s rural communities, both coastal and riparian.

12
  

6. The artisanal marine fishery is recognized as one of the most important contributors to the food security of coastal 
villages, however, weak governance, particularly an unregulated fishing regime, has led to overexploitation and 
degradation. Fishing effort in Kenya’s marine waters is primarily directed inside territorial waters (i.e., 12 nautical 
miles), is largely artisanal and characterized by small crafts propelled by wind and paddles, and thus almost entirely 
restricted to the fringing reef and near-shore areas. The coastal region is among the least developed in the country, 
with more than 60 percent of the population living below the poverty line, and most relying on coastal and marine 
ecosystems for employment, livelihood and nutrition. On the other hand, Kenya’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), which 
broadly extends 200 nautical miles from the coastline and covers a total area of 142,400 km

2
, is exploited mostly by 

distant-water fishing fleets, comprised mainly of purse-seiners and long-liners.
13 

Unrestricted access to fisheries in near-
shore waters, increased fishing effort driven by a growing population, and destructive fishing gear are destroying 
critical marine habitats and seriously affecting the state of fish stocks. Most nearshore fish stocks are considered fully 
exploited, and in many instances at levels that exceed Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY), thereby contributing to 
economic overfishing. The World Bank and the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-financed Kenya Coastal Development 
Project (KCDP) has been supporting the development of Fishery Management Plans (FMPs) as well as stock 
assessments to improve the management of these inshore fisheries. However, the management plans are yet to be 
implemented and used by decision makers and other key stakeholders.  

7. Poor market access and lack of basic infrastructure are causing post-harvest losses, thereby reducing economic 
returns. Lack of appropriate post-harvest fish handling and preservation facilities increase transport time and thus the 
risk of spoilage, ultimately leading to low fish prices or wastage. In 2014, post-harvest losses were estimated at 2,700 
metric tons, representing about 30 percent of total landings for marine fisheries.  

8. The impacts of climate change further compound the challenges coastal communities are facing not only due to 
shoreline erosion, floods, and extreme weather events, but also because of their limited ability to adapt as a result of 
insufficient income and lack of basic infrastructure. In Kenya, 2.8 million people are estimated to live within 25 km of 
the coast, and this number is expected to increase to nearly 4 million by 2030. While the impacts of climate change on 
Kenya’s coast are not yet fully measured, or analyzed, marine and coastal ecosystems are expected to be affected as a 
result of rising ocean temperature, irregular rainfall, sea level rise, ocean acidification, changes in ocean current 
patterns, and more frequent and severe extreme weather events. 

9. With improved management and control, Kenya aims to increase the contribution from offshore fisheries to its 
economic development. Kenya is increasingly engaged in regional initiatives aimed at controlling Illegal, Unreported, 
and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, and in managing regional fishing efforts through its involvement in the IOTC, the 
Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), the African Union-Interafrican Bureau for Animal Resources 

                                            
9
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

10
 Ibid 

11
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 

12
 Republic of Kenya (2014). Fisheries Annual Statistical Bulletin 2014. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries – State Department of 

Fisheries 2014.  
13

 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2016). Fishery and Aquaculture Country Profiles: The Republic of Kenya 


(AU-Ibar), and FISH-I Africa.
14 

 With support from the KCDP, Kenya has recently established an advanced Vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) in Mombasa, which will become fully operational once licensed vessels deploy the required 
on-board beacons to link with the base station at the State Department of Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE).  

10. More broadly, and driven by a growing population and the need for sustainable growth in ocean-related economic 
activities, the Government of Kenya (GoK) has made a strong commitment towards improving the management of its 
marine fisheries by embarking on a new approach – the Blue Economy. The blue economy approach aims to increase 
the number of livelihoods and level of income linked to the oceans, while concurrently conserving its resources and 
ecological integrity to ensure sustainability of the coastal/marine fisheries sub-sector.

15
 Sustainable management of 

fisheries stock, enhancing economic returns including through development of local semi-industrial fisheries, and 
improving coastal livelihoods are key focus areas of the GoK. Several State Departments were established through 
Executive Order No.1/2016, with the SDF-BE being tasked with coordinating economic ocean activity, which includes a 
comprehensive mandate to protect marine ecosystems. In addition, a new Fisheries Management and Development 
Act is currently under implementation, and a new national fisheries agency to bolster management of the fisheries 
sector, the Kenya Fisheries Service (KeFS), was established in September 2016. KeFS is in the early stages of becoming 
operational.  

11. The proposed project would support the GoK in implementing its blue economy agenda. MAFIDEV would scale up 
some of the successes of the KCDP. Furthermore, MAFIDEV would support the GoK in the operationalizing the KeFS, 
and help strengthening the marine fisheries and aquaculture-based livelihoods in coastal communities, by building on 
the benefits derived from the Hazina Ya  Maendeleo ya  Pwani (HMP), a coastal development fund providing grant 
support to demand driven community sub-projects which was established under KCDP. 

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

12. The proposed project is aligned with the Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2014-2018
16

 as updated during 
the Performance and Learning Review in 2017, whose overarching goal is sustainable reduction in poverty and 
increased shared prosperity. Aligned both with Kenya’s Vision 2030 and its Medium-Term Plan, the CPS highlights three 
priority areas of engagement: (i) competitiveness and sustainability – growth to eradicate poverty; (ii) protection and 
potential – human resource development for shared prosperity; and (iii) building consistency and equity – delivering a 
devolution dividend. The project would directly contribute to the competitiveness and sustainability pillar of the CPS 
through development of a robust marine and coastal fishery economy, thereby addressing the government’s growth 
and poverty reduction strategies. By focusing on the coastal region, the project is expected to contribute to economic 
prosperity, employment, and livelihood of the coastal communities, where deep-rooted poverty and inequality are still 
a major concern for the government. 

 
 

                                            
14

 FISH-I is a regional Task Force to stop illegal fishing in the western Indian Ocean region 
15

 World Bank and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2017). The Potential of the Blue Economy: Increasing Long-term 
Benefits of the Sustainable Use of Marine Resources for Small Island Developing States and Coastal Least Developed Countries. World Bank, 
Washington DC 
16

 World Bank. 2014. Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Kenya, FY2014–2018 (Report No. 87024-KE).  




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve management and increase value-addition of priority fisheries and 
aquaculture, and to strengthen access to livelihoods for coastal communities in Kenya. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The key project outcomes are: 

 Index of captured indicator species (size, volume and fishing effort) (tbd) 

 Number of fishing vessels in Exclusive Economic Zone with valid licenses (#)  

 Total production of aquaculture in coastal areas (disaggregated by type of aquaculture) (metric tons) 

 Coastal communities with access to livelihood activities (number) 

 Increase value addition of catch of indicator species (tbd)  

 Share of targeted beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on project interventions (disaggregated by 
gender)  

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The project objective will be achieved through targeted interventions grouped under the following proposed 

components. 

1) Component 1 – Governance and Management of Marine Fisheries and Aquatic Resources: Strengthening of 

marine fisheries and aquaculture governance is a critical element to increasing economic benefits from marine 

fisheries. This includes regulating fishing effort to enhance stock productivity and ensuring availability of reliable 

fisheries information for management decision-making. The proposed component would: (i) strengthen marine 

fisheries and coastal aquaculture governance; and (ii) minimize overfishing and destructive fishing practices, 

maintain or improve stock productivity, and enhance the integrity of associated ecosystems. The expected 
outcomes are: (i) improved institutional capacity of KeFS; (ii) improved FIS that supports management decision-

making; (iii) fisheries management measures implemented for four priority nearshore fisheries; (iv) functional (at 

least seven) joint Co-Management Areas (CMAs); (v) effective surveillance of Kenya’s EEZ; (vi) improved 

understanding of the status of stocks and fishing effort in priority fisheries; and (vii) regulatory framework for 

coastal aquaculture in place.  

2) Component 2 – Promote Investment in Marine Fisheries and Coastal Aquaculture: Most of Kenya's marine 

fisheries resources are close to, and in some cases beyond, maximum sustainable harvesting levels. Thus, in the 

context of enhancing overall economic benefits, there are limited options to increasing production sustainably. 

However, there is a greater scope to improve value addition of existing production, in particular through 

improved post-harvest handling, product development and better access to markets, as well as through 

aquaculture development. This potentially creates a space for private sector investment, which in turn will 

generate opportunities for community-level income generation. The objective of this proposed component is to 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 


promote efficient utilization and value-addition of the resources by increasing investment in the marine fisheries 

and aquaculture sector. The component objective will be achieved through facilitating sectoral value chain 

analysis and identifying opportunities for investment in upgrading and/or new processing facilities and marketing 

initiatives, targeting the full range of nearshore resources, industrial offshore tuna fisheries and aquaculture. Such 

facilitation of private sector investment may include enhancing the business-operating environment, potentially 

including relevant infrastructure improvements. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved fisheries-related 

infrastructure; (ii) stable growth in the total economic value generated by sustainable use of the fishery and 

aquaculture resources; and (iii) improved business environment for investments in the fishery and aquaculture 

sector.  

3) Component 3 – Strengthening Marine Fisheries and Aquaculture-based Livelihoods in Coastal Communities: 

Outside Mombasa and tourism centers such as Malindi-Watamu, Diani and Lamu Island, rural coastal 

communities in Kenya remain relatively poor, and would thus be a main target beneficiary group under the 

proposed project. Even the coastal tourism economy is highly vulnerable to fluctuating global economics and 

security challenges in East Africa; therefore, fisheries resources remain the critical livelihood resource for rural 

coastal households in Kenya. Since nearshore capture fisheries resources are already at, or in some cases beyond, 

maximum sustainable harvesting levels, as with private sector development under Component 2, opportunities to 

strengthen coastal households lie more in fisheries value addition, aquaculture production and other enterprise 

development, than in increasing effort on capture fisheries. Accessing these opportunities requires information 

and knowledge sharing, skills development and better access to credit. Strengthening coastal livelihoods is an end 

in itself. However, it also supports a positive feedback loop in terms of strengthening nearshore fisheries 

management. Fishers with more secure livelihoods are better able to engage in fisheries co-management 

initiatives, which, although in the short-term might involve reducing fishing effort and catches, in the medium to 

longer-term allow stock recovery, improved fisheries productivity and further improvements to coastal 

livelihoods. This proposed component would enhance the social and economic benefits that coastal communities 

derive from sustainable use of living marine resources. Expected outcomes are: (i) increased income of coastal 

households from project-supported enterprise development and value-addition initiatives; (ii) increased access to 

and repayment of credit among coastal communities; and (iii) project beneficiaries are distributed by gender and 

age in accordance with stated targets.  

4) Component 4 – Project Management: This proposed component would ensure efficient and effective 

implementation of project activities and fiduciary management. Project management including monitoring and 

evaluation, and safeguards management activities are supported under this component.  

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project investments will be located in the coastal counties of Kenya, including Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi, Taita Taveta, 

Lamu and Tana River. While the exact location of project interventions is not known at this stage, it is known that Kwale, 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

     

Kilifi, Taita Taveta, Lamu and Tana River counties are home to Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the 
OP 4.10 criteria in terms of their language, culture, attachment to given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live. The livelihood strategies of the VMGs within these counties range from 
nearshore fishing – the closer a community is located to the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and small 
scale businesses, the farther a community is from the sea. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The overall project implementation would be carried out by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the State Department of 

Fisheries and Blue Economy (SDF-BE), Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries. The SDF-BE has been newly 
established, however, previously it existed as State Department of Fisheries and represented one of the implementing 
agencies of the KCDP. The PCU would hire environmental and social safeguards staff to be responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of safeguards instruments. The initial assessment finds the safeguards capacity of the future PCU to be 
rather limited, therefore a technical assistance, capacity building and monitoring environmental and social risks and their 
mitigation will be included as part of Component 4 design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Svetlana Khvostova, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Lilian Wambui Kahindo, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Ben Okindo Ayako Miranga, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The initial screening revealed that the project is likely 
to have negative environmental and social impacts, 
taking into account that the project activities include 
small and rehabilitation of large infrastructure, such as 
reconstruction of fishing port facilities in Mombasa, 
improvement of landing sites infrastructure, upgrading 
fish markets, small scale fish-handling and processing; 
and product development and packaging facilities. It is 
proposed that the project is assigned EA Category B. 
Given that the nature of the proposed project 
activities, including their design and location are not 
known at this point in time, the project would follow a 
framework approach to managing safeguards. An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
would be prepared and publicly disclosed before 
project appraisal. During project preparation, the 
team will identify initial investments ready for 
financing, for which subproject specific ESIAs (and if 
necessary RAPs) will be developed and also disclosed 
prior to project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 




environmental risk and ESIA/ESMP will be prepared by 
the PCU. The preparation of the ESMF and ESIAs will 
be accompanied by a set of public consultations with 
the project stakeholders, which will be documented in 
the assessments. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Most of the marine coastal area is classified with some 
form of protection, including several national parks. 
Some of the marine protected areas are under 
effective management as they were supported under 
Kenya Coastal Development Project (KCDP).  However, 
others are at various stage of degradation and in need 
for targeted activities to enhance management 
effectiveness including an active monitoring system. 
The project will design its investments to avoid 
negative impacts on environmentally sensitive areas 
and will work with relevant stakeholders, such as 
Kenya Wildlife Service, to enhance the management 
effectiveness of protected areas including the 
establishment of buffer zones and providing capacity 
building to the communities. The ESMF will include 
identification of risks and description of mitigation 
measures specific to avoidance and minimization of 
impacts on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The Project may include some investments in some 
areas with potential negative impacts on mangroves 
while in other areas may benefits from restoration of 
mangroves. The ESMF will include specific provisions, 
including a TOR for a mangroves management plan, 
for cases where such impact is unavoidable. Project 
preparation will determine the potential impacts on 
mangroves, however the large scale impact is not 
anticipated. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 TBD 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

It is unlikely that cultural resources will be impacted, 
however, the presence of objects of cultural heritage 
will be identified during screening as part of project 
preparation. The ESMF will include a sample chance 
find procedure to be adopted by the contractors. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Five of the six coastal counties targeted under the 
proposed MAFIDEV (i.e., Tana River, Lamu, Kilifi, Kwale 
and Taita Taveta) are home to Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Groups (VMGs) who meet the OP 4.10 
criteria in terms of language, culture, attachment to 
given lands and being subordinate to the more 
dominant communities among whom they live, as well 
as other Vulnerable Groups. Under the Kenya Coastal 



 
The World Bank  
Kenya Marine Fisheries and Socio-Economic Development Project (MAFIDEV) (P163980) 

 
 

  
Jun 06, 2017 Page 10 of 13  

     

Development Project (KCDP), a VMG Framework was 
prepared followed by a comprehensive Social 
Assessment (SA), which found that the livelihood 
strategies of the VMGs within these counties ranged 
from nearshore fishing, the closer a community is to 
the sea – to subsistence farming, livestock keeping and 
small scale trades, the farther a community is from the 
sea. The findings of the SA resulted in the 
development of a VMG Plan (VMGP) to mitigate risks, 
which was disclosed in December 2015.  
Activities under Component 1 of the proposed 
MAFIDEV will include regulating fishing effort to 
enhance stock productivity and ensure availability of 
reliable fisheries information for management 
decision-making. While this may result in medium- to 
long-term benefits, in the short term, it might 
negatively affect the livelihood strategies of the fishing 
VMG communities. Since the exact location of project 
interventions is unknown at this point in time and in 
order to continue addressing the livelihood needs, 
strategies and aspirations of the VMGs, the project will 
prepare a VMG Framework. The VMG Framework will 
build on the VMG Framework and SA developed under 
KCDP, accommodate lessons learnt, and be publicly 
disclosed in Kenya and in the World Bank Info Shop. 
Furthermore, the proposed MAFIDEV will build on the 
KCDP best practices and engage the VMGs at all stages 
of the project including at the project design stage.    
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Large scale involuntary resettlement and land 
acquisition are not expected to be required for the 
proposed types of investments, as the project expects 
to include rehabilitation of existing infrastructure or 
expansion of existing facilities. While resettlement of 
households can be avoided, in most cases, some 
economic displacement and restriction of access to 
resources is expected to be an impact for the project. 
Since the exact locations of project interventions are 
unknown at this stage, a framework approach would 
be adopted through which the project will develop a 
Resettlement Policy Framework to outline the types of 
compensation required for the project activities and 
guide preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans 
during project implementation. The project will also 
develop a Process Framework (PF) to establish the 
mechanism for compensation, participation, and 



implementation of improved management of 
nearshore and offshore fisheries. During project 
preparation, the PCU will identify initial investments 
ready for financing, for which subproject specific RAPs 
will be developed (if necessary) and disclosed prior to 
project appraisal. Throughout the project 
implementation, each subproject will be screened for 
resettlement risks and a RAP prepared by the PCU as 
necessary. The preparation of the RPF, PF and RAPs 
will be accompanied by a set of public consultations 
with the project stakeholders, which will be 
documented in these documents. Particular attention 
will be paid to the identification of vulnerable groups 
among the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), who may 
require special resettlement assistance during project 
implementation. Such PAPs and the nature of their 
vulnerabilities as well as the necessary support to 
them will be clearly documented in the RAP. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered, which will be 
determined during project preparation. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 TBD 
The policy may need to be triggered due to Kenya’s 
maritime dispute with Somalia. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguards related studies are expected to be carried out from October 2017 through January 2018.  More details 

will be available after the first preparation mission which is likely carried out in Oct 2017. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGER - AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK TRANSFORMATION PROJECT (P164509) 

 
 

  
Mar 04, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23726 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Niger P164509  NIGER - AGRICULTURAL 
AND LIVESTOCK 
TRANSFORMATION 
PROJECT (P164509) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA Aug 13, 2018 Nov 15, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Plan Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected agriculture and 
livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis or emergency”. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 



B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Niger is a large, landlocked country in the arid and semi-arid Sahel region. The country’s 
population is estimated at over 22 million, half of it less than 15 years old and growing rapidly at about 
3.9 percent per year.. Two-thirds of the country is inhospitable desert, and more than 84 percent of the 
population is concentrated in the areas along the Niger River in the southwestern part of the country 
and along its long southern border with Nigeria. The climate is mostly arid; annual rainfall in 85 percent 
of the country’s area is less than 350 mm.  However, some areas in the south and along the Niger river 
get some 600 mm of rain, making rainfed agriculture with dryland crops possible. 
  
2. Niger’s political institutions have been strengthened since the restoration of constitutional 
order in 2011. The Government of Niger (GoN) is pursuing important measures to combat organized 
crime and terrorism and to promote the safety and property rights of its citizens. Military and law 
enforcement agencies have created new crisis response units, and border security has been 
strengthened in close collaboration with regional and international partners. As a result, both unrest in 
various zones of Niger and insecurity in the border zone with Mali have diminished. Nevertheless, the 
country continues to face significant risks related to domestic and regional instability, as well as 
organized crime and transnational terrorism. The rise of Boko Haram in Nigeria and the recent expansion 
of its operations to neighboring countries, including Niger, is cause for concern.  Further, there are now 
over 100,000 refugees from Nigeria in the Diffa region.   

 
3. Niger is a founding member of the Sahel Alliance, an organization that committed its members 
and development partners to combine their efforts and better coordinate their actions to create the 
conditions for sustainable growth and lasting peace.  It aims to achieve more effective aid coordination 
and enhance the support from development partners to the region, in order to more generally 
contribute to stabilizing the security situation and eradicating poverty, by developing solutions for rural 
areas, creating employment for young people, improving energy infrastructure and the fight against 
climate change, and strengthening governance. 

 
4. Since 2000 Niger has had a good track record for macroeconomic stability. It has embarked with 
some success on reforms to foster private sector-led economic growth, reduce its debt, and improve 
social indicators. Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, and has started 
exporting refined oil products. These three commodities account for approximately 70 percent of the 


country’s exports. However, despite improvements, Niger continues to face persistent, long-term 
development challenges linked to its large geographical size, home to a largely rural population often 
beyond the reaches of public services, where the bulk of the poor reside. 

 
5. Although poverty incidence is declining, Niger remains among the poorest countries in Africa, 
with an estimated average per capita gross domestic product (GDP) in current prices of US$420 in 2014, 
well below the average GDP of US$1,600 for Sub-Saharan Africa (IMF, 2017).  In the 2016 Human 
Development Index, Niger was ranked second to last out of 188 countries.  Despite a decline in overall 
poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts during the 2005-
14 period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined from 60 percent to 
43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, low access to physical and 
institutional infrastructure, and weak human capital base limits economic opportunities, especially in 
rural area. 

 
6. Food insecurity and malnutrition remain a challenge. Overall, growth of major food production 
was slightly less than the population growth over the period 1980-2011, with the increase in the food 
deficit being filled by imports. Malnutrition is a big challenge with. An estimated 2.5 million people in 
Niger are chronically food-insecure and unable to meet their basic food requirements even during years 
of average agricultural production. During periods of constrained access to food, millions more can 
quickly fall into acute transitory food insecurity. Over the past years, Niger made some progress on 
nutrition indicators, but the country still lags substantially behind other low-income countries and Sub-
Saharan African counterparts. Malnutrition accounts for more than one-third of child mortality in the 
country and 43 percent of children under five years old suffers from stunting and wasting. Malnutrition 
remains high due to a host of health, sanitation, and behavioral factors, worsened by recurrent food 
shortages.    

 
7. Niger is vulnerable to climate shocks, with drought being the most important risk in terms of 
frequency and impacts. A strong correlation exists between changes in gross domestic product (GDP) 
and the meteorological conditions, demonstrating the fragility of the economy to weather-related 
events, particularly in the agriculture sector.1 The food crisis resulting from the 2011 drought affected 
almost half of the country’s population. While uncertainty remains regarding longer-term climate change 
projections (2050-2100), short- and medium-term rainfall deficits will most likely continue to plague 
Niger’s agriculture sector, and the frequency and severity of droughts may remain the same or increase. 
The agriculture, forestry, and other land uses (AFOLU) sector accounts for 89 percent of total greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, while the energy sector accounts for 9 percent. The national priority for the AFOLU 
sector in Niger’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) relates to improving the resilience 
of the agriculture, animal husbandry, and forestry subsectors. For Niger, the adaptation options 
considered as top priority are those that will permit higher co-benefits with respect to climate change 
mitigation, particularly those good adaptation practices and techniques that will permit carbon 
sequestration and reduction of GHG emissions while improving productivity. Niger’s climate change 
strategy is based on the vision of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and access to modern energy services 
for everyone in 2030.    

 

                                            
1 The 2013 World Bank agriculture sector risk assessment report indicated that Niger’s GDP growth rate dipped into 
negative territory eight times between 1984 and 2010, and drought was largely responsible. 


8. Women and young people are marginalized. The main factors that significantly impede the 
economic empowerment of rural women in the agricultural sector include: difficulties in accessing 
natural and productive resources, the overwork of rural women as they are in charge of both productive 
and reproductive/ household tasks, lack of women's leadership and decision-making, and limited access 
to information and education/ training.  Similarly, rural youth are mostly un-educated and lack 
professional qualifications. Their low social status and the difficulties they encounter to access economic 
opportunities limit their participation in decision-making at community and family level. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

9. Agriculture (crops, livestock, and fisheries) is very important for the economy and employment. 
It represents more than 40 percent of the national GDP and occupies nearly 90 percent of the active 
population. The performance of the sector is unstable from one year to another because of its high 
exposure to agronomic, climatic, health, and more recently security risks.  The shocks that follow 
agricultural and livestock crises have a strong impact on household incomes,  the general budget  of the 
State and the growth rate at the overall Nigerien economy.  
 

10. Crop subsector.  Crop production is only possible in the relatively humid areas in the south-west 
of the country (an area of some 12 million hectares; about 10 percent of the national territory). 
Additionally, there are some 19 million hectares mainly pasture lands. Most crops are produced under 
rainfed conditions with low yields, including millet, sorghum, and other cereals (including coarse/feed 
grains), as well as legumes (cowpeas, groundnuts) in more modest amounts. The remainder of crop 
production grown by irrigated conditions, including rice and vegetables.  The yields of irrigated crops, 
however, are still below potential. The average size of a family farm unit is about 5 hectares, producing 
mostly for household consumption and little marketable surplus.  The production of food/feed grains, of 
which by-products are used for animal feeding (e.g. shredded millet/corn stalks) as extensive livestock 
production, is common to each farm and remains the customary production model. Agricultural 
productivity remains low largely because of a highly variable agro-climate from year to year with a 
constrained access to inputs such as certified seeds and fertilizers.  More entrepreneurial farmers are 
facing a weak financial market, limiting access to credit, and suffering from poor access to quality 
phytosanitary products, limited familiarity with modern production practices, and the difficulty of 
accessing urban markets due to lack of aggregation, and a lack of adequate transport infrastructure and 
transport means.  
 

11. Livestock subsector. It is a key sector of the Nigerien economy that contributes 13 percent to the 
national GDP and provides 7 percent of the country's export earnings. The national herd is estimated at 
more than 10 million cattle, 24 million small ruminants, and a little over a million and a half camels.2 
Three main types of livestock farming co-exist in Niger: (i) the "pastoral systems" characterized by animal 
mobility (extensive breeding systems for camels, small ruminants, and cattle), (ii) the traditional livestock 
farming systems practiced by villagers throughout the country, for ruminants and poultry, and (iii) 

                                            
2 Despite the mortality associated with successive pastoral crises, livestock numbers have been steadily increasing 
over the past ten years, rising from 11.5 TLUs in 2005 to 14.5 TLUs in 2012. [Tropical Livestock Units/Unités de bétail 
tropical (TLUs/UBT); a TLU implies a live weight of 250 kg]. The most significant increase involved cattle (+ 38 
percent) and goats (+ 22 percent). Equines and camels had the lowest rates of increase (4 and 7 percent, 
respectively). While the increase represents a larger potential food reserve, these animals also need to be fed in 
what is often a fodder-constrained environment. 



"improved livestock systems" (mainly semi-intensive and intensive peri-urban poultry and ruminant 
fattening). Other types of farming (quite marginal, but diversified) include beekeeping, rabbit breeding, 
etc. 
 

12. Fisheries subsector. National consumption of fish is only in the order of about 2 kg per inhabitant 
per year, implying a total demand of about 44,000 tons per year.  Production between 2012 and 2017 
fluctuated within a range of 27,000 to 47,000 tons.  Most of the catches from Lake Chad are exported to 
Nigeria (in smoked form).  Some fish are imported fresh or frozen from Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Benin, and 
Côte d'Ivoire.  Potential for import substitution exists. There are currently about 70,000 people employed 
in this subsector, involving fishermen, processors, and traders, and the estimated contribution to GDP is 
about 0.7 percent. Previous projects financed by other donors have demonstrated that there can be 
relatively high fish productivity in ponds (more than 200 kg/ha/year in many ponds particularly for 
catfish, Carp, and Lake Chad perch).  Also, there exist some successful local initiatives for community 
management of fisheries. Fish output could be increased, including particularly with an expansion of 
aquaculture, while conserving fishery resources and the natural resources on which these are based.  Key 
actions would include investments in water management, particularly of excess water during the rainy 
season (continuing investments or similar to some of those under PRODEX) along with improved 
extension and transfer of technology.  
 
13. Extension and advisory services, support to processing and marketing, and availability of 
financing are weak. These constrain agriculture development.  Some of the factors explaining the weak 
status of extension are: weak human resources, limited research along with limited research and 
extension linkages, unclear extension messages, limited specialized services to support crop quality, 
animal health, and food safety; limited transport resources and operational budgets to visit farmers and 
their fields/livestock, and low use of information and communication technology (ICT). The above factors 
combine to limit effective coverage of crop and livestock extension to support production.  Similarly, 
bottlenecks in the various value chains limit support to value addition on production, such as with 
processing or packaging units of products of animal and vegetable origin, and the weakness of the inter-
professions.  However, opportunities exist as proven by private or professional initiatives regarding milk, 
dried meat, hides and skins, cowpeas, onions, sesame, nut-grass, etc. Finally, financing for the sector is 
lacking. Banks are reluctant to take risks to finance the agriculture and livestock operations, and micro-
finance institutions are weak. 
 

14. Significant water resources exist but are insufficiently used. The limited use of water is a major 
constraint for crop production.  It is estimated that only 1 percent of surface runoff and 15 percent of 
renewable groundwater are currently used, and that less than 30 percent of potentially irrigable land is 
currently irrigated.  Water resources consist of large surface water networks as well as large renewable 
groundwater reserves of around 2.5 billion m3, and 2,000 billion m3 of non-renewable water reserves. 
This water potential is underutilized. Only the Niger River flows permanently throughout the year, while 
five other large rivers feeding the Niger river flow only part of the year. There are also about a thousand 
ponds, including 175 permanent ones that are mostly used by livestock herders for watering their cattle.  

 
15. Other constraints for agriculture development include: (i) institutional, legislative and regulatory 
deficiencies (means and capacity of intervention of the State services, including some of its laboratories 
for analysis and diagnosis, unsuitable texts and/or not-applied data and unused monitoring/evaluation 
systems); (ii) low level of organization of sector actors (POs, unstructured IPs and other cooperatives 

without economic organization capacity); (iii) lack of technical and economic benchmarks on the 
intensification of farming and livestock systems; (iv) difficult access to advisory support (low coverage 
and weak messages of the extension network and local veterinary services) and quality production inputs 
(low access to improved seeds, livestock/poultry feed capacity limited and uncontrolled); (v) low genetic 
potential of the most common plant varieties and animal breeds or under-valued potential; (vi) 
inadequate investment and support for the sector (lack of industrial-scale infrastructure and outdated 
equipment for production, processing, storage, transport and marketing, low value of by-products); (vii) 
overexploitation and non-sustainable use of land resources; (viii) limited decentralization and land 
insecurity; and (ix) national system for preventing and managing crises (of climatic, sanitary, and 
commercial origin) that is not well adapted or developed.  

 
16. Main assets of the agriculture sector. These include: (i) a substantial potential for irrigated 
farming, (ii) the presence of a numerically large and diversified herd with untapped potential for 
increased productivity through animal health, feed, genetic improvements, and better husbandry 
practices; (iii) the presence of plant varieties and animal breeds recognized for their adaptive and 
productive potential in their agro-climatic environment; (iv) traditional know-how and good experience 
of producers in certain areas (flood recession cultivation, livestock fattening, artisanal milk production, 
poultry); (v) competitiveness of certain export sectors (onions, cattle/meat); and (vi) important sectoral 
contribution to the fight against poverty (the main source of household income), and to food and 
nutrition security. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

17. The proposed project is fully aligned with the Niger Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD). The proposed project is aligned with the CPF and SCD as it 
would contribute to poverty alleviation and improved food security through increased farm productivity 
and value addition in selected agricultural value chains, thus improving rural livelihoods. It would 
generate employment in general and in particular for women and young people in the targeted areas. 
The SCD underlines that “improving the productivity in agriculture remains a first priority for poverty 
reduction.”  The CPF has an overarching goal of empowering women, while engaging with men as allies, 
to bring down the unsustainable population growth rate in Niger and to enable development policies to 
succeed. In the medium term, reduced demographic pressures are expected to free up scarce public 
resources to fund services, such as health and education and enable further empowerment of women 
and girls in a self-sustaining virtuous circle. Within this overarching logic, the FY18-21 CPF, approved by 
the Board on April 10th, 2018, focuses on the importance of boosting agricultural productivity, 
diversifying exports, and raising incomes in the rural sector where 80 percent of the population live. 
Investments in the agricultural sector, including livestock and fisheries, are therefore essential, such as 
through the proposed project. Specifically, yields can and should be increased, including, for example, 
via use of more productive varieties, small-scale irrigation, agroforestry and intercropping, which the 
project would emphasize, while increasing the involvement of youth and women.  
 
18. The proposed project is also aligned with the Government’s sector strategy in support of 
agriculture and livestock.  The strategy is described in the Plan for Economic and Social Development II 
(PDES II), focused on "food security and sustainable agricultural development," implemented in 
particular through the 3N (“Nigeriens feed Nigeriens") Initiative. The Initiative aims to contribute to the 

overall overarching goal of eradicating hunger, while helping to improve the productivity and income of 
farming households, especially the most vulnerable. The approach is also intended to operationalize the 
Rural Transformation Program of the Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDIC). 
It contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted in 2015 by the 
United Nations World Assembly, including SDGs 2 and 1. The general orientation of the proposed project 
is also in line with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Plan (CAADP), the ECOWAS 
Common Agricultural Policy (ECOWAP), and the Agricultural Policy of Africa (PAU; UEMOA). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

19. The Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase productivity and commercialization for selected 
agriculture and livestock value chains and strengthen the country’s capacity to respond to eligible crisis 
or emergency”. This objective is fully aligned with the Government's vision for agricultural and livestock 
development. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
20. Key performance indicators include: (i) increased productivity of project-targeted agriculture and 
livestock systems: this would be measured based on area irrigated and increased yields (kg per hectare 
or per head), including the reduction of losses due to the most prevalent animal diseases; (ii) incremental 
sales in targeted value chains, including for dairy/milk, cattle/meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé 
(aggregated over all the targeted value chains); and (iii) reduction in the Government’s response time to 
agriculture and livestock sector-related emergencies including sanitary crises. In addition, the following 
two core indicators regarding direct beneficiaries would be measured: (i) number of small-scale 
agriculture producers and sedentary livestock rearing and fish farming households benefiting from 
project interventions in the project-targeted production basins, particularly the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
women and youths); and (ii) beneficiary satisfaction rate with the quality of project-supported services, 
as a partial measure of citizens’ engagement in the Project. The detailed results framework would be 
developed during the course of preparation. Adequate provision would be made in terms of human and 
financial resources for the design of thorough M&E activities as part of project preparation. A baseline 
survey would be conducted to inform indicators regarding the reference situation at project inception. 
 

D. Concept Description 
 

21. The World Bank's Agriculture and Livestock Portfolio in Niger currently includes the following 
projects: (i) Export Promotion Project (PRODEX) which ended in October 2017 and for which an 
Implementation Completion Report is currently being  prepared; (ii) Additional Financing for the West 
Africa Agricultural Productivity Project, approved in 2017; (iii) Regional Support Project to the Sahel 
Irrigation Initiative/Project d’Appui Regional à l’Initiative pour l’irrigation au Sahel (SIIP/PARIIS) approved 
in December 2017; (iv) Climate-Smart Agriculture Project/Projet d’Appui à l’Agriculture Sensible aux 
risques Climatiques (CSA/PASEC) approved in 2016; (v) Sahel Regional Pastoral Support Project (PRAPS-
Niger) in operation since fiscal year 2016 to support pastoral livestock production; (vi) Phase 3 of the 
Community Action Program/Programme d’Actions Communautaires (CAP3/PAC3), with its recently 
approved additional funding in 2017 and scheduled to close  in December 2019; (vii) the Regional Disease 
Surveillance Systems Enhancement Project (REDISSE) is strengthening the national cross-sectoral 
capacity for disease surveillance and epidemic preparedness,;  (viii) a rural development policy operation 

being disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. This project will provide financial support for the 
implementation of the PDES II whose  objectives include “increasing rural productivity growth” and 
“supporting growth enabling sectors.” It has numerous actions planned, including in energy, mineral 
exploitation, financial sector, etc.; it also seeks to provide input subsidies and improve agricultural 
extension in pilot communes; and (ix) The Competitive and Growth Support Project, which is closing on 
March 31, 2019 and  includes the rehabilitation and upgrading of slaughterhouses and their respective 
environments for developing meat production. In spite of the above projects/investments, there still 
remains a significant gap in terms of the overall performance of the agriculture and livestock sectors.  
 
22. Scope of intervention and complementarity with other projects. The PIMELAN would capitalize 
on the lessons learnt and best practices by past and on-going Bank projects. The targeted production 
systems and activities would be complementary to those supported by other Bank-financed projects. On 
the crop production side, the project would focus on increasing irrigated production with a focus on 
onions, and horticulture production (tomatoes in particular); it would also focus on fodder production as 
a link to the livestock production. It would capitalize on the results of the Small Irrigation Project (SMP; 
closed in FY 2009) and PRODEX (closed in October 2017, which already built on SMP) as well as PASEC 
that focuses on climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and PARIIS that focuses on irrigation. Regarding livestock, 
the project would focus on sedentary livestock systems to enhance cattle and small ruminant production 
and meat processing, the milk and poultry value chains (meat and eggs), and fish farming and processing; 
it would complement PRAPS-Niger which focuses on pastoral systems. The PIMELAN would deal with 
value chains in an integrated manner; it would focus on processing and marketing activities downstream 
of production. It would also address as a major thrust the financing constraints of the sector through TA 
support to partner financial institutions (PFIs) and funding for matching grants to producers and other 
V/C participants, following mechanisms already used by other projects. It would also coordinate with IFC 
and complement on-going or planned IFC work on agri-business development. 

 
23. The proposed Project would be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by 
an IDA credit in the amount of US$100 million over a six-year period. The Project would have three 
interrelated components: (i) improving the quality of public and private services in support of agriculture 
and livestock; (ii) support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains; and (iii) crisis prevention & 
management, and project coordination. The project would be complementary to the ongoing agriculture 
and livestock projects. 
 

24. Integrated value chain approach. The rationale for the proposed project is to boost productivity 
in the selected agriculture and livestock value chains (V/Cs). The selected V/Cs would be: (i) Crop 
production: irrigated onions and vegetables; and (ii) Animal production: cattle and small ruminant meat, 
cows, poultry, goat and camel milk, hides and skins, as well as fish farming. This project would adopt an 
integrated value chain approach for the selected V/Cs from production to marketing on the domestic 
and regional markets or export to international markets. It would support financing through small credits 
or grants for services and activities of entrepreneurs who are ready to engage in intensification of their 
production, development of value-added activities to primary production through diversification of 
processing activities, and the logistics between agricultural production and the market (including 
processing, storage, and transport). This would require the close involvement of Partner financial 
institutions. 

25. The project would address cross-cutting priorities.  The main cross-cutting priorities proposed to 
be addressed under the project are: (i) capacity-building of extension and advisory support for crop and 
animal production; of input supply services (including seeds, feed supplements, and genetics); and of 
veterinary services; (ii) land restoration and sustainable land management; (iii) empowerment of women 
and youth; (iv) climate change mitigation and adaptation; (v) public health and nutrition; and (vi) 
environmental and social safeguards. 
 
26. Preparatory activities. Before making a final choice of actions to be selected, preparation work 
would identify the difficulties and constraints to be considered to guarantee the success of the project 
through a detailed mapping of the sectors and locations already covered by other IDA projects and those 
of other partners. The authorities would determine whether the priority actions should relate to sectors 
and/or locations not supported so far, or the promotion and scaling up of sectors already supported and 
promising in terms of supply of the domestic and export market. Due to the diversity of beneficiaries, 
and therefore the needs that would ultimately be identified (in terms of production sectors but also of 
typology of actors), a selective approach would be preferred, with a preferential focus on women and 
young people (see below). 

 
27. There have been recent developments in the Agriculture Sector in Niger, such as the reform of 
agriculture extension services and facilitation of the policy environment for investing in the sector.  On 
August 2, 2017, three important decrees were issued. These created: (a) the National System of 
Agricultural Extension/Système National de Conseil Agricole (NSAE/SNCA); (b) the Promotion Agency for 
Agricultural Extension/l’Agence de Promotion du Conseil Agricole (PAAC/APCA); and (c) the Investment 
Fund for Food Security and Nutrition/Fonds d’Investissement pour la Sécurité Alimentaire et 
Nutritionnelle (IFFSN/FISAN). A Committee has been set up to help with the operationalization of these 
bodies and to develop a roadmap, including the preparation of procedural manuals, the recruitment of 
the DGs and the technical directorates, etc.  PIMELAN would provide support to make them fully 
operational and effective. 

 
28. The preliminary project description is presented below.  
 

Component 1: Improving the quality of services in support of agriculture and livestock--US$ 25 million  
 

29. The objective of this Component would be to increase the productivity of agriculture and 
sedentary livestock farming systems for selected crops and non-pastoral value chains (milk, meat, fish, 
poultry, onions, and niébé) through the strengthening of the capacity and efficiency of services which 
would provide more and effective support and advice to producers. In doing so, it would build sustainable 
human, institutional, and policy capacity for key public and private actors in the agriculture and livestock 
(including aquaculture) sectors, in order to improve crop and animal husbandry practices (and therefore 
output), including climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices, as well as improved access and delivery of 
quality extension services (crop production, animal health, feed, and breeding), which would also help 
farmers to strengthen their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards.  Activities would 
include:  
 

(a) Support to crop and livestock extension and advisory services in order to increase 
producers' knowledge and capacities to facilitate increased productivity. Knowledge 
developed under the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme (WAAP) would 


be disseminated to help reduce crop and livestock losses and contribute to improved 
public health; and involvement of extension services would help in finding synergies 
and complementarities with PRAPS-Niger, PASEC, and the SIIP. Support would include 
knowledge development for the selected crop and livestock value chains through 
increased transfer of Good Agriculture Practices (GAPs) by rolling out innovative 
extension models, such as livestock Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) and e-extension, 
diffusion of innovative technologies (including CSA, such as climate-resilient feed 
production and mitigation options), developing technical references, and providing the 
related training; provision of improved access to quality agricultural and zootechnical 
inputs (fertilizers, seeds, phytosanitary and sanitary products, food, genetics). 
Improved extension services are expected to increase producers’ awareness about 
climate change and improve their capacity to mainstream climate action; 

 
(b) Productivity and food safety enhancement via provision of specialized services to 

support crop quality, animal health, and food safety. The aim would be to increase the 
availability of and access to high-quality services and inputs for crop and livestock 
producers (including aquaculture). It would include crop and animal disease 
surveillance in order to improve the quality and hygiene of food of plant and animal 
origins, strengthening programs of animal prophylaxis (animal health/vaccinations) 
and fight against major pests and diseases, including prevention and management, 
weather monitoring, veterinary services enhancements and vaccination campaigns, 
quality control of crop and animal products, and seed and input certification.3 It would 
seek synergies and complementarities with PRAPS and REDISSE. Pest and animal 
health surveillance, together with weather monitoring, is expected to improve herd 
and crop resilience to climate-induced risks; and 

 
(c) Strengthening the policy planning and regulatory framework. This activity would aim 

at strengthening MoA&L’s efficiency and effectiveness by supporting policy 
formulation and developing the attendant legislation/regulations for improving the 
agriculture, livestock, and fisheries regulatory environment, and reducing distortions.  
This would include supporting the preparation of sector master plans, public 
investment plans, public expenditure reviews, support the establishment of 
agricultural and livestock infrastructures (establishment of service platforms at the 
level of the eight regions, according to approaches adapted to the target sectors, 
which would also include CSA options), and definition of food standards (quality and 
safety).  In order to support women’s empowerment and enhance agricultural 
productivity, the project would support policy development to expand women’s land 
rights and formally document their land claims to improve land access and tenure 
security for women.4 

                                            
3 This could involve the development of registers for plant and livestock varieties to help standardize food 
production and processing methods.  A livestock identification and registration system would help with disease 
mitigation and management from getting a handle on animal movements within the country.  It might be useful also 
to develop a phyto register to catalogue locally-developed seeds but also help with controls of invasive species (bugs 
and weeds). 
4  These proposed actions are fully in line with World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.7199 by Prospere 
Backiny-Yetna and Kevin McGee, entitled: “Gender Differentials and Agricultural Productivity in Niger.” The paper
     

 
Component 2: Support to public and private investments for improved production, processing, and 
market access for selected agriculture and livestock value chains—US$ 60 million  

 
30. The Component would promote public and private investment at all levels of the selected value 
chains of milk, red meat, fish, poultry, onions, and niébé (production, processing, storage, transport, and 
marketing) for the development of production, market access, and competitiveness. The objective would 
be to increase productivity (while adapting to climate change and allowing for reduction in GHG 
emissions) and to strengthen the competitiveness of the targeted sectors (including through processed 
product diversification) and facilitate market access for producers and breeders, and agro-industry. 
These activities would be aimed at supporting the intensification and modernization of cropping and 
sedentary livestock systems, as well as processing units in the selected value chains, with a view to 
reaching operators' critical sizes to increase profitability and generate jobs.  

31. The intervention principles would be the following: (i) supporting the enhancement of capacities 
of farmer, cooperative, and inter-professional organizations in the targeted sectors in order to allow the 
emergence of an improved, more competitive economic fabric; (ii) identifying pre-investment activities 
(commercial viability studies, capacity building of service providers) to prepare viable business plans for 
economic operators and improve access for project promoters to financing by partner financial 
institutions (PFI); (iii) improving market access by removing distortions and supporting aggregation and 
packaging/processing points for agricultural and livestock products; and (iv) financing public and private 
investments in all segments of the sectors targeted by the project (production, processing, upstream, 
and downstream) within the framework of Productive Partnerships, i.e. economic partnerships between 
producers and other operators of the value chains. 

 
32. Activities envisaged to strengthen value chains (VCs) could be as follows: strengthen the 
economic organization of operators (support for professional structures); facilitate the linking of supply 
and demand (structuring of supply, identification of markets, linking, and contracting prospects); conduct 
pre-investment and training activities for economic operators and private service providers, in order to 
identify viable business plans, and improve operators' access to PFI financing (development of financial 
products for livestock farming, training of PFIs in the agriculture and livestock sector, negotiation of 
agreements with PFIs to partially finance project promoters); and finance investment subprojects within 
the framework of Productive Partnerships in all segments of the targeted sectors (upstream, production, 
downstream) in the form of cost-shared grants that could finance inputs, services, training, equipment, 
and infrastructure. 

 
33. Possible windows for investment funding. Funding and co-financing of investments in the 
targeted VCs would likely be conducted through separate windows, such as: (i) Productive Partnership 
(PP) window: for larger investment sub-projects, requiring individual contributions in cash and PFI 
funding; these sub-projects could involve, inter alia, scaling up of small-scale irrigation with the use of 
solar energy instead of diesel pumps; (ii) medium-scale microproject (MP) window: for medium 
investments with combination of cash, PFI funding, and in-kind contributions; and (iii) small-scale 
microproject (MP) window: for small investments with in-kind contributions and no external funding 

                                            
explicitly recommended enhancing women’s tenure rights in order to improve agricultural productivity. It further 
recommended facilitating women’s access to and use of hired farm labor and facilitating its supervision, incl. by 
facilitating community-based child care. 

requirements. Under these three windows, women and youth would receive preferential treatment.  The 
most appropriate financing modalities, including lower and upper thresholds for different windows, 
would be determined during project preparation. 

 
34. Women and Youth. Possible types of investments, favoring women and youth where feasible, 
may include: (i) promotion of small-scale irrigation facilities and equipment in order to properly manage 
water for agriculture purposes. This would be done according to the National Small-Scale Irrigation 
Strategy developed (SPIN) in Niger. The activities to be carried may also include structures to 
manage/store excess water during rainy season; (ii) land tenure rights recognition/documentation in 
order to preserve existing assets and use rights and to avoid conflicts; (iii) land reclamation, upgrading of 
soil fertility and improving existing carbon pools (such as through rangeland management, agro-forestry, 
reduced tillage techniques, etc.); (iv) development of storage facilities (including cold chain and adapted 
to climate risks); and (v) marketing structures. 

 
Component 3: Crisis prevention & management, and project coordination--US$ 15 million  

 
35. The objective of this component is to develop mechanisms for preventing and responding to 
severe crises and emergencies in the agriculture and livestock sectors, including future extreme weather 
events and other climate risks, as well as to strengthen project coordination capacities within MoA&L. 
Accordingly, its proposed activities relate to: (i) crisis prevention and management, and (ii) institutional 
support and project management: 

(a) Crisis prevention and management: (i) support MoA&L’s capacity to deal with crises by 
providing equipment (computer hardware and software, office furniture, vehicles, etc.), 
training and resources for specialized studies and communication campaigns, and vaccines; 
(ii) develop and operationalize crisis prevention and management tools, including the 
organization of forums for crisis management at local and national levels (as well as 
participation in international crisis management forums in West Africa and the Sahel); and 
(iii) funding of an Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). In doing so, the 
project would help establish a Crisis Management Unit at MoA&L with the capacity to 
intervene quickly when needed through the provision of emergency funds for severe crises 
and institutional support.  
 

(b) Project coordination. This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA 
funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, conduct project M&E including Iterative 
Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),5 and comply with safeguard mitigation measures.  It would 
provide training and equipment to modernize MoA&L operations (computer hardware and 
software, office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed 
for project activities. It would also support general awareness and sensitization campaigns 
about project activities.  

    

                                            
5 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the 
objective to improve project efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects 
information on project implementation, even in insecure settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements 
project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project teams through different 
iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from 
beneficiaries but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 


  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The Project will be nationwide. However, during preparation it will be determined whether the focus will be on selected 

Communes in the eight regions, depending on the selection of value chains and the complementarity with other ongoing 
projects. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (Recipient) has considerable experience in implementing IDA-funded 

Agricultural sector development projects. This collaboration with the Bank has obviously provided the Ministry with some 
technical capacity with regards to the application of World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies; the 
development of appropriate safeguards mitigation instruments and their implementation and monitoring.  Staff of the 
Ministry have shown a great deal of understanding and implementing social and environmental safeguards measures on 
the ground. More recently, the Recipient successfully carried out the CAP3 microprojects in accordance with the WB 
environmental and social safeguard policies and the national environmental and social compliance requirements. This 
good standing trend will be continued and further mainstreamed as the Recipient will continue to receive guidance from 
the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists in the project team through supervision missions and virtual 
support to the Social and Environmental Focal Point. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Cheikh A. T. Sagna, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Bougadare Kone, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project is categorized as B under this OP 
policy because its potential social and environmental 
risks are expected to be moderate and mostly site-
specific, with no significant or long-term negative risks 
and impacts. The potential environmental and social 
risks and impacts are mostly related to the use of 
fertilizers, pesticides and the increased GHG emissions 
due to the land-use change during agriculture cycles.   
Since the project physical footprint is presently 
unknown prior to appraisal, and in compliance with 
OP/BP 4.01 core requirements, the Borrower will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), consult upon and disclose it prior 
to appraisal.  The ESMF will be mostly building upon 
the existing PAC3 ESMF to guide the way that 
potential negative environmental and social risks and 



impacts of future sub-projects (following the positive 
list) will be identified and mitigated during project 
implementation. The ESMF will include social and 
environmental clauses to be observed by the farmers 
and herders, especially during project implementation, 
by which time most project activities footprints will be 
known.  If, during project preparation, any specific site 
is known before appraisal, Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIA)/Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMP) will be also be prepared 
and publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the WB 
prior to appraisal. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The policy is not triggered as the project will not 
support activities in areas where critical habitats may 
be threatened. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The policy is not triggered because the project will not 
support activities related to forest exploitation or 
management or that might have potential adverse 
impacts on forested areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project is not expected to finance acquisition, 
transport, distribution, disposal, storage or use of 
pesticides or similar chemicals that could threaten 
environmental and human health.  Nevertheless, OP 
4.09 is triggered because of the following related to 
the project: (i) livestock productivity enhancement via 
animal health, animal disease surveillance, animal 
health/vaccinations, and fight against pests, 
prevention and management; and (ii) farmers, for the 
agricultural productivity purpose, may use fertilizers 
and pesticides.  An Integrated Pest Management Plan 
(IPMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered because of the nature of 
possible civil works to be financed under component B 
which might lead to the unearthing of such PCR.  
Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that any physical 
cultural resources will be impacted; nonetheless, the 
existing “Chance finds procedures” will be embedded 
in the ESMF to ensure that these aspects will be taken 
into account during project preparation and 
implementation. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous 
Peoples in the project areas. 


Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The Policy is triggered as the proposed project 
activities will require acquisition of land that could 
lead to some losses of assets, losses or restriction of 
access to some sources of livelihoods, resulting in 
either a temporary or permanent involuntary 
resettlement of project affected persons (PAP). 
However, since the physical footprint of project 
activities areas are mostly unknown at this juncture 
and will very likely be unknown prior to appraisal, the 
Borrower will prepare, consult upon, and publicly 
disclose prior to appraisal a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). During project implementation, the 
screening process will further determine whether land 
will be acquired and whether a subproject-specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be required. If so, 
such a RAP would be duly consulted upon and publicly 
disclosed both in-country and on the World Bank 
website at the InfoShop prior to the physical start of 
project civil works. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project may finance some water retention 
structures for excess water during the rainy season. 
This matter will be reviewed during the project 
preparation stage and pre-appraisal to assess whether 
or not OP/BP 4.37 should be triggered. The Policy of 
for now is to TBD until then. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not finance activities that will interfere 
with international watercourses; either in terms of 
water withdrawal or discharge of pollutants. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project intervention areas are not under dispute. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard-related studies will be launched in early March 2018 and will be completed by May 14, 2018. 
 

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

CONCEPT STAGE 

March 13, 2018 

Report No.:  126013 

 

Operation Name 

 

Region AFRICA 

Country Niger 

Sector  

Operation ID P166124 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Implementing Agency  

Date PID Prepared March 13, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal  

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

October 30, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision Following the corporate review, the decision was taken to 

proceed with the preparation of the operation.  

 

I. Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 

Niger is predominantly a rural economy. The majority of the population and the poor earn their 

living from agriculture which is the main contributor to GDP. A key objective of the Government 

of Niger is to focus on supporting rural growth with agriculture being the leading sector of the 

rural growth strategy. The government’s priority is to increase agricultural productivity. The sector 

is handicapped by inadequate extension services,1 limited use of equipment and modern inputs, 

limited control of water, a weak organization of producers, and declines in soil fertility. Extremely 

low access to rural finance is identified as one of the key impediments to modern inputs, marketing 

channels and logistics—including inadequate storage facilities and ability to process agricultural 

products which also account for low productivity in agriculture. Strengthening of the links between 

the extractive industry and the local economy is also considered a key factor to rural growth. The 

greatest potential for the extractive industry social and economic contribution is in job creation 

either through local subcontracting and/or through the development of the informal mining sector, 

such as gold panning and small-scale mining. A framework needs to be established to formalize 

the local content in the sector and the artisanal mining sector needs to be formalized and better 

organized. Community development aimed at providing social infrastructure (roads, schools, 

hospitals, and mining cities) also enhances the benefits for the rural population. They provide an 

alternative to rural employment.  

 

                                                 
1 République du Niger, and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2009. Analyse diagnostique du système 
d’appui conseil. Mise en place d’un dispositif intégré d’appui conseil pour le développement rural au Niger. 

Counterfactual analyses show that significant gains could be made if inefficiencies in 

infrastructure were fixed. Niger could grow by as much as 4.5 percentage points per capita if it 

expands and improves its infrastructure. Power would contribute around 1.51 percentage points to 

per capita growth if generation capacity and national access rates—which as of today are among 

the lowest in the region—were increased. ICT would also make an important contribution to 

economic prospects (1.31 percentage points), provided the mobile phone and Internet markets 

continue expanding.2 Creating a favorable environment for the private sector to invest in these 

sectors, improving access of the rural population to electricity and mobile/internet, and making 

sure that the NIGELEC, the state-owned company in electricity, remains financially viable are the 

main objectives of the Government.    

 

One of the key challenges facing Niger is to increase tax revenue. First, it will help continue 

financing Niger’s development challenges and avoid painful fiscal consolidation through cuts in 

expenditures as has been the case in the past years. Second, the current vicious circle of increasing 

public debt and interest payments represents a risk that would only be mitigated in the medium 

term under the assumption of a tightening fiscal stance. Tax policy to broaden the base, the 

rationalization of tax exemptions and the strengthening of tax and customs administration are 

among the key features of the government’s strategy. Government data show that tax expenditures 

and exemptions from the investment code -only - increased from 0.5 percent to 0.9 percent of GDP 

between 2014 and 2015. A World Bank study showed that for customs revenues only, over the 

five years from 2011 to 2016, exemptions represented 47 percent of customs revenue, on average, 

peaking at 54 percent in 2015.3  

 

Niger’s macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Niger’s 

macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Growth is on an upward 

trend and expected to average 5.8 percent during 2018-21. Niger has sustained its fiscal 

consolidation policy since 2016, combining enhanced revenue policy and expenditure control 

which aims to bring Niger in line with the West African Economic and Monetary Union 

(WAEMU) fiscal target by 2021. The risk of debt distress is moderate. The macro policy 

framework is underpinned by the continued implementation of the International Monetary Fund 

(IMF) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program and the macroeconomic anchor offered by Niger’s 

membership in the WAEMU. Downside risks predominate and are mainly related to the 

vulnerability and exposure of the economy to weather, security and commodity prices. 

 

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 

The proposed operation is the second of a series of two development policy operations to be 

disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. The operation will provide financial support to Niger as 

the authorities implement the PDES II.   

 

The proposed series is fully aligned with the government’s development strategy and priorities as 

articulated in the PDES II.  It is designed to advance a number of key PDES II objectives. Pillar 1 

supports the PDES II ’s objective of “  by 

focusing on agricultural productivity 

                                                 
2 Source: Niger SCD – 2017. 

3 Draft: Informal trade and customs revenue losses in Niger, (2017). 



The focus on the extractive industry in Pillar 1 supports the PDES II’s objective of “

the linkages between the extractive industries with the 

rural economy. 

the PDES II’s objective of “ . Pillar 3, supports the PDES 

II’s objective of “Governance, Peace and Security”.    

 

 

III. Preliminary Description 
 

The program development objective (PDO) is to foster rural growth. This will be achieved 

through a series of cross-cutting reform measures grouped in two pillars. The first pillar is 

“Increasing rural productivity growth”. It aims to (i) 

strengthen the linkages between the extractive industries 

and the local economy “Supporting 

growth-enabling sectors”. It aims to (i) develop a framework favorable to ICT investment, mainly 

in rural areas; (ii) improve the financial and the technical performance of NIGELEC4; (iii) broaden 

the tax base by rationalizing tax expenditure and exemption regimes, and (iv) create the conditions 

for sustainable rural road maintenance financing framework.  

 

IV. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

Many of the actions supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive poverty 

reduction and welfare enhancement impacts. Improvements in the agricultural input supply chain 

(seeds and fertilizers) and on the extension service delivery will contribute to higher agricultural 

yields and therefore to improved food security while reducing economic vulnerability of rural 

households. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) is an important source for jobs for the rural 

population, and a way for many to complement agricultural incomes. In particular, the 

development of community projects financed by the extractive industry will impact positively the 

rural population. In addition, enforcement of existing regulation in the extractive industry will 

allow the development of a strategy to address the social, health and safety issues that are currently 

encountered in the artisanal mining areas: the child labor, the dangerous and unhealthy working 

conditions resulting in frequent accidents (collapsing tunnels and pits), the absence of adequate 

personal protective equipment. Greater access to rural finance will help producers access more 

economic opportunities.  

 

The development of the electricity and ICT sectors will create small business opportunities while 

complementing other initiatives to improve rural welfare. Potential negative impact on the poor of 

the tariff adjustment is mitigated. The majority of the poor does not have access and use electricity. 

In addition, there is already a tariff system that protects to the poor. Nonetheless, a PSIA will be 

conducted during calendar year 2018 by the NECALEP to assess the impact of the electricity 

measures and inform the government policy in the sector. Access to internet and mobile through 

the USF will allow for the expansion of e-voucher supporting social protection and subsidy 

programs targeting the poor.    

 

Some actions supported by the proposed series are expected to have a positive impact on gender 

                                                 
4 Societe Nigerienne d’Electricite (Niger electricity company). 



equality. The development of an action plan to better integrate Extractive Industries into the 

national economy envisages among other objectives the advancement of women in the sector. The 

formalization of the ASM will protect women and children for whom harsh working and living 

conditions are the norm The impact on gender of the prior actions on agriculture, rural finance, 

electricity and ICT will not be directly linked to the prior actions. However, their impact could 

benefit female-headed more proportionately given their more pronounced vulnerability if directed 

to hem. Increased access to electricity and broadband network is expected to benefit female-headed 

households who are more in need of new economic opportunities more proportionately. Similarly, 

the education and health reforms will allow the Government and public agencies to expand social 

services, which are critically important to women and female-headed households.  

 

Environment Aspects  

 

The proposed operation is likely to have positive effect on the Niger’s environment, forests, or 

other natural resources. Unregulated or poorly regulated artisanal mining activities in the extractive 

industries have resulted in significant environmental destruction. Such adverse impacts have been 

considered by the Government which has prepared a Strategic Environmental and Social 

Assessment (SESA) to identify and address negative (enhance positive) environmental and social 

impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA provides strategic guidance for enhancing 

environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a whole and specific 

recommendations to be incorporated into national policies and programs. The formalization of 

artisanal mining is likely to reduce such adverse impacts on the environment. Similarly, a stronger 

regulation and control of the quality of agricultural inputs will reduce potential environmental risks 

borne by unregulated seeds or fertilizers. The prior actions supporting the development of ICT, 

rural finance and the social sectors are not likely to have significant impacts on environment and 

forests 

 

Tentative financing 

 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 110.0 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 

Others (specifiy) 

 

 Total 110.0 

 
























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

September 25, 2017 

Report No.:  AB7900 

 

Operation Name 

 

Region AFRICA 

Country Niger 

Sector Agriculture (30%); Extractives Industry (25%); Banking 

Institutions (5%); Energy (15%); Telecom (15%); and 

Governance (10%) 

Operation ID P163318 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF PLANNING 

Date PID Prepared September 25, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal October 17, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board Approval December 5, 2017 

Corporate Review Decision Proceed to Appraisal/Negotiations 

 

 Country and Sector Background 
 

1. Niger’s economy is undiversified, heavily relying on agriculture and the extractive 
industries. Agriculture is main driver of growth and accounts for 40 percent of GDP. The vast 

majority of Niger’s population and the poor live in rural areas and earn their living from 

agriculture. However, agricultural productivity is low due to very low uptake of modern inputs 

and poor extension services.  Niger has significant mineral wealth, including uranium and gold, 

and has started exporting refined oil products. These three products account for approximately 70 

percent of total export values. The extractive industry accounts for 10-15 percent of government 

revenue.  

2. Growth is volatile owing to frequent external shocks of different nature. Shocks 
impacting on the economy include security challenges, the Nigerian crisis, unfavorable weather 

conditions and commodity prices. Security challenges disrupted economic activities with 

growing social and humanitarian pressures linked to the flow of hundreds of thousand refugees 

and internally-displaced people. The economic downturn in Nigeria impacted export 

performance. Unfavorable weather conditions impacted agriculture, and depressed commodity 

prices adversely affected growth and revenue in the extractive industries.       

3. Although declining, poverty remains high, and is more pronounced in rural areas. Poverty 
incidence declined from 53.7 percent in 2005 to 44.5 percent in 2014. Despite the decline in 

overall poverty incidence, the rural poor became poorer relative to their urban counterparts 

during the same period. Their per capita consumption relative to that of the urban poor declined 

from 60 percent to 43 percent. Lack of economic diversification, volatile agricultural growth, 

low access to physical and institutional infrastructure, and a weak human capital base limit 

economic opportunities, especially in rural area. 

 

 Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 

4. A key objective of the Government of Niger is to focus on supporting rural growth, given 
the concentration of the poor in rural areas. Agriculture would be the leading sector supported by 

the government’s 3N initiative with a special focus on agro-industry, public investment in 

infrastructure and the social sectors. Niger is predominantly a rural economy and the majority of 

the population earn their living from agriculture. Agriculture is the main contributor to GDP but 

agricultural productivity is low compared to the secondary and tertiary sectors, to other countries 

in the region.1 The sector is handicapped by inadequate extension services,2 limited use of 

equipment and modern inputs, limited control of water, a weak organization of producers, and 

declines in soil fertility. Extremely low access to rural finance is identified as one of the key 

impediments to modern inputs, marketing channels and logistics—including inadequate storage 

facilities and ability to process agricultural products which also account for low productivity in 

agriculture. Strengthening of the links between the extractive industry and the local economy is 

also considered a key factor to rural growth. The greatest potential for the extractive industry 

social and economic contribution is in job creation either through local subcontracting and/or 

through the development of the informal mining sector, such as gold panning and small-scale 

mining. A framework needs to be established to formalize the local content in the sector and the 

artisanal mining sector needs to be formalized and better organized. Community development 

aimed at providing social infrastructure (roads, schools, hospitals, and mining cities) also 

enhances the benefits for the rural population. They provide an alternative to rural employment.  

5. Counterfactual analyses show that significant gains could be made if inefficiencies in 
infrastructure were fixed. Niger could grow by as much as 4.5 percentage points per capita if it 

expands and improves its infrastructure. Power would contribute around 1.51 percentage points 

to per capita growth if generation capacity and national access rates—which as of today are 

among the lowest in the region—were increased. ICT would also make an important contribution 

to economic prospects (1.31 percentage points), provided the mobile phone and Internet markets 

continue expanding.3 Creating a favorable environment for the private sector to invest in these 

sectors, improving access of the rural population to electricity and mobile/internet, and making 

sure that the NIGELEC, the state-owned company in electricity, remains financially viable are 

the main objectives of the Government.    

6. Niger’s domestic revenue is low, and is among the lowest in the WAEMU. One of the 
key challenges facing Niger is the need for increasing its tax revenue. First it will help continue 

financing Niger’s development challenges and avoid painful fiscal consolidation through cuts in 

expenditures as has been the case in the past years. Second, the current vicious circle of 

increasing public debt and interest payments represents a risk that would only be mitigated in the 

medium term under the assumption of a tightening fiscal stance. Government data show that tax 

         

expenditures and exemptions from the investment code -only - increased from 0.5 percent to 0.9 

percent of GDP between 2014 and 2015. A World Bank study showed that for customs revenues 

only, over the five years from 2011 to 2016, exemptions represented 47 percent of customs 

revenue, on average, peaking at 54 percent in 2015.4  

7. Niger’s macroeconomic framework remains adequate for the proposed operation. Growth 
is expected to be moderate averaging 4.5-5 percent in 2017-19 driven by agriculture and mining. 

To contain the substantial fiscal deficit of 7.5 percent in 2017, explained partly by security-

related spending, the government has initiated a process of fiscal consolidation which aims to 

bring Niger in line with the WAEMU fiscal target by 2020. The tax revenue measures included 

in this programmatic series support this consolidation effort.  This risk of debt distress is 

moderate. The macro policy framework is underpinned by the continued implementation of the 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program and the 

macroeconomic anchor offered by Niger’s membership in the West African Economic and 

Monetary Union (WAEMU). Downside risks predominate and are mainly related to the 

vulnerability and exposure of the economy to weather, security, Nigeria’s economy and 

commodity prices. 

 

 Proposed Objective 
 

8. The proposed operation is the first of a series of two development policy operations to be 
disbursed over 2017-2018 under IDA 18. The operation will provide financial support to Niger 

as the authorities implement the (Plan de Développement Economique et Social) PDES II .   

9. The proposed series is fully aligned with the government’s development strategy and 
priorities as articulated in the PDES II.  It is designed to advance a number of key PDES II 

objectives. Pillar 1 supports the PDES II ’s objective of “Food security and sustainable 

agricultural development” by focusing on agricultural productivity and the dissemination of 

context-relevant farming practices. The focus on the extractive industry in Pillar 1 supports the 

PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and diversified economy” by strengthening the linkages 

between the extractive industries with the rural economy. The focus on rural finance under Pillar 

1 and infrastructure under Pillar 2 supports the PDES II’s objective of “A competitive and 

diversified economy”. Pillar 3, supports the PDES II’s objective of “Governance, Peace and 

Security”.    

 

 Preliminary Description 
 

10. The program development objective (PDO) is to foster rural growth. This will be 
achieved through a series of cross-cutting reform measures grouped in two pillars. The first pillar 

is “Increasing rural productivity growth”. It aims to (i) enhance the use of modern inputs and 

improve access to extension services systems; (ii) strengthen the linkages between the extractive 

industries and the local economy, and; (iii) deepen rural finance penetration. The second pillar is 

“Supporting growth-enabling sectors”. It aims to (i) develop a framework favorable to ICT 

                                                 
4
 Draft: Informal trade and customs revenue losses in Niger, (2017). 



investment, mainly in rural areas; (ii) improve the financial and the technical performance of 

NIGELEC5, and; (iii) broaden the tax base by rationalizing tax expenditure and exemption 

regimes  

 

 Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

11. Many of the actions supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive 
poverty reduction and welfare enhancement impacts. Improvements in the agricultural input 

supply chain (seeds and fertilizers) and on the extension service delivery will contribute to higher 

agricultural yields and therefore to improved food security while reducing economic 

vulnerability of rural households. Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) is an important source 

for jobs for the rural population, and a way for many to complement agricultural incomes. In 

particular, the development of community projects financed by the extractive industry will 

impact positively the rural population. In addition, enforcement of existing regulation in the 

extractive industry will allow the development of a strategy to address the social, health and 

safety issues that are currently encountered in the artisanal mining areas: the child labor, the 

dangerous and unhealthy working conditions resulting in frequent accidents (collapsing tunnels 

and pits), the absence of adequate personal protective equipment. Greater access to rural finance 

will help producers access more economic opportunities.  

12. The development of the electricity and ICT sectors will create small business 
opportunities while complementing other initiatives to improve rural welfare. Potential negative 

impact on the poor of the tariff adjustment is mitigated. The majority of the poor does not have 

access and use electricity. In addition, there is already a tariff system that protects to the poor. 

Nonetheless, a PSIA will be conducted during calendar year 2018 by the NECALEP to assess the 

impact of the electricity measures and inform the government policy in the sector. Access to 

internet and mobile through the USF will allow for the expansion of e-voucher supporting social 

protection and subsidy programs targeting the poor.    

13. Some actions supported by the proposed series are expected to have a positive impact on 
gender equality. The development of an action plan to better integrate Extractive Industries into 

the national economy envisages among other objectives the advancement of women in the sector. 

The formalization of the ASM will protect women and children for whom harsh working and 

living conditions are the norm The impact on gender of the prior actions on agriculture, rural 

finance, electricity and ICT will not be directly linked to the prior actions. However, their impact 

could benefit female-headed more proportionately given their more pronounced vulnerability if 

directed to hem. Increased access to electricity and broadband network is expected to benefit 

female-headed households who are more in need of new economic opportunities more 

proportionately. Similarly, the education and health reforms will allow the Government and 

public agencies to expand social services, which are critically important to women and female-

headed households.  

 
Environment Aspects  

 

14. The proposed operation is likely to have positive effect on the Niger’s environment, 
forests, or other natural resources. Unregulated or poorly regulated artisanal mining activities in 

the extractive industries have resulted in significant environmental destruction. Such adverse 

impacts have been considered by the Government which has prepared a Strategic Environmental 

and Social Assessment (SESA) to identify and address negative (enhance positive) 

environmental and social impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA provides 

strategic guidance for enhancing environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a 

whole and specific recommendations to be incorporated into national policies and programs. The 

formalization of artisanal mining is likely to reduce such adverse impacts on the environment. 

Similarly, a stronger regulation and control of the quality of agricultural inputs will reduce 

potential environmental risks borne by unregulated seeds or fertilizers. The prior actions 

supporting the development of ICT, rural finance and the social sectors are not likely to have 

significant impacts on environment and forests 

 

Tentative financing 

 

Source: ($m.) 

BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 

International Development Association (IDA) 120 

Borrower/Recipient  

IBRD 

Others (specify) 

 

 Total 120 

 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate-smart Irrigated Agriculture Project (P163742) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2018 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Sri Lanka P163742 Climate Smart Irrigated 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 28-Aug-2018 08-Nov-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture in 
selected hotspot areas. 

 
Components 

Agriculture Production and Marketing 
Water for Agriculture 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 140.00 

Total Financing 140.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 125.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 125.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 



     Counterpart Funding 15.00 

          Borrowing Agency 10.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 5.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Sri Lanka is a Lower Middle-Income country with a GDP per capita of USD 4,073 (2017) and a total population 
of 21.4 million people. Following 30 years of civil war that ended in 2009, Sri Lanka’s economy grew at an average 5.8 
percent during the period of 2010-2017, reflecting a peace dividend and a determined policy thrust towards 
reconstruction and growth; although there were some signs of a slowdown in the last few years. The economy is 
transitioning from a predominantly rural-based economy towards a more urbanized economy oriented around 
manufacturing and services.  Economic growth has contributed to the decline in the national poverty headcount ratio 
from 15.3 percent in 2006/07 to 4.1 percent in 2016. Extreme poverty is rare and concentrated in some geographical 
pockets. 
 
2. The Government that came to power in 2015 envisions promoting a globally competitive, export-led 
economy with an emphasis on inclusion. It has indicated keenness to undertake reforms in the areas of public finance, 
competitiveness, governance, and education sectors. In 2017, the Government presented Vision 2025, a policy 
document that both identified economic limitations due to the constrained fiscal space and presented structural 
reforms (including the promotion of private sector participation) to address key economic challenges and strengthen 
economic growth. Despite Sri Lanka’s remarkable economic achievements, many people continue to be at risk of falling 
back into poverty. 
 
3. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to climate-related natural disasters that have major economic impacts. Long-term, 
annual losses for housing, infrastructure, agriculture, and relief from natural disasters are estimated at LKR 50 billion 
(USD 327 million), with the highest annual expected losses from floods, cyclones or high winds, droughts and landslides. 
This is equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP or 2.1 percent of GoSL expenditures. Due to the increased sophistication of the 
economy the damage caused by the 2016 and 2017 floods and landslides was more than twice as high in US$ terms 
than the worst flood disasters between 1992 and 2011. 
 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of Sri Lanka’s culture and economy.  The agriculture sector 
contributes 7.7 percent to GDP and still employs approximately 27 percent of the population.  Of the country’s 
approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, around 80 percent is under smallholder production, with 
around 1.65 million smallholder farmers operating on average less than 2 hectares.  Sri Lanka has successfully attained 


self-sufficiency in rice through policy interventions including fertilizer subsidies. However, expenditures on vital public 
services, such as Research and Development (R&D) and extension services account for only three percent of total 
agriculture expenditure and much of this limited budget is spent on rice research. The focus on self-sufficiency in rice 
has limited farmer’s opportunities to diversify into higher value products and kept the sector concentrated in the low 
value food crops.  As a result, agriculture productivity, as measured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP), has only grown 
by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 1980 and Sri Lanka lags significantly behind other South and East Asian 
countries. Women contribute to over 38 percent of the farming operations in Sri Lanka. However, the unemployment 
rates of women are more than double that of men at all age levels, with more than 60 percent of women engaged in 
agriculture working as unpaid family labor. Furthermore, only 10 percent of female farmers receive extension services 
in comparison to 90 percent of male farmers.  
 
5. Irrigation is a key feature of the smallholder agriculture sector.  Sri Lanka has a long history of water 
management for agriculture production.  The expansion of crop cultivation into the dry zones of the north, east and 
south-east of the country was enabled through the construction of elaborate water management systems, dating back 
to the period between 500 BC and 300 AD. The systems are based on water capture in small reservoirs commonly 
known as “tanks” connected via canals into “cascades” which enabled crop cultivation throughout the country 
including those areas with long and variable dry seasons. Tank cascades remain the primary source of water for dry 
season cultivation of approximately 74,150 hectares, supporting the livelihoods of approximately 154,744 farmers.  
Recently, water scarcity has increased because of high inter-annual and inter-seasonal variability in rainfall, catchment 
area land-use changes which have reduced the proportion of rainfall available for capture in downstream tanks, and 
the growing demand for water to meet the needs of a growing population.  For example, drought in 2016 and 2017 
affected 1,927,069 people across 17 districts, according to the Disaster Management Centre. During the Maha season 
in 2016, 612,224 hectares of paddy were cultivated of which 50,615 hectares were damaged due to the drought, with 
total production of MT 2.383 million, 30 percent of the average in last ten years. 
 
6. Hotspot areas are the most vulnerable to climatic events .  Although much of the country has been subject 
to the increased frequency and severity of climate e vents, some areas have emerged as being particularly 
susceptible to either flood or drought events, or both.  These are areas which are predominantly agriculture based 
and therefore the livelihoods of smallholder farmers are at risk.  Hotspots have been identified through a rigorous, 
analysis of empirical evidence by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), 
the World Food Program (WFP) and the International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 
 
7. The management of irrigation water suffers from institutional fragmentation and lack of local accountability. 
The management of irrigation tanks has undergone a transformation in the post-independence period. Community 
institutions which originally managed these tanks were initially replaced with a new GoSL-led institutional system that 
ultimately became ineffective. To overcome the top-down management of tank systems, since 1978 there have been 
experiments in Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM), involving local communities in the management of irrigation 
schemes. PIM was approved as official policy in 1992 and Farmer Organizations (FOs) were created by the Agrarian 
Services Act of 1991 to manage minor tanks. Despite this policy direction, less capacity of FOs to manage limited 
remaining water and lack of strong oversight from GoSL have compounded the situation. Within GoSL, the responsibility 
for the management of these tanks currently lies with three different institutions: Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM); Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and, Provincial Councils (PCs). The responsibility 
for system maintenance budgeting and implementation is shared across these institutions and FOs often with unclear 
mandates. Water user fees were removed after the independence, and GoSL started to allocate maintenance budgets 
which are insufficient to meet maintenance needs. But, FOs collect contribution from farmers and they are 
maintaining their own Operation and Maintenance (O&M) funds. 




 
8. While many of these tanks are still functioning, some are in a completely dilapidated condition and the 
overall performance is low.  Past tank rehabilitation efforts have largely failed to produce the desired results for many 
reasons. Firstly, insufficient attention has been paid to water and land use management in the upstream catchment 
areas. The supply of water from upstream catchment areas is in most cases decreasing because of land use changes, 
including deforestation and infrastructure development, which has also increased the flow of silt into the supply canals 
and tanks resulting in declined water inflows into the tanks and reduced water storage capacity in the tanks. Secondly, 
previous rehabilitation efforts have not adequately accounted for the hydraulic inter-connectedness of tanks within 
cascades resulting in sub-optimal development of water resources and negative downstream impacts. Finally, past 
rehabilitation efforts have not sufficiently factored in either growing water demand in the tank command areas or the 
likely future impacts of climate change, such that rehabilitated tanks have failed to provide enough water supply to 
meet even current demand. 
 

9. Improved access to irrigation and better water management needs to be addressed in conjunction with 
improving productivity in the sector.  Agriculture productivity is low due to an inhibiting policy framework, weak public 
services and low levels of private investment.  With rice self-sufficiency secured, a consensus has recently emerged 
within the GoSL that the country should take a more strategic approach to addressing low productivity by (i) 
modernizing water resource infrastructure, minimizing flood damages and managing water allocation more efficiently 
and (ii) diversifying the agricultural sector away from relatively low value food crops towards high value and export-
oriented commodities. In the water sector, an integrated basin approach to water investment and management needs 
to be built on integrated basin plans developed through effective stakeholder participation. As a middle-income country 
in an economically strong region, farmers can capitalize on growing domestic consumer demand for diversified, 
nutritious, and higher-valued foods and take advantage of the country’s proximity to fast growing neighboring markets. 
The GoSL has recently implemented measures to improve the competitiveness of the agriculture sector, such as 
promoting commercial and export-oriented agriculture through attracting and leveraging investments from farmer 
producer organizations and agribusinesses for high value agriculture production and value addition under the Bank-
supported Agriculture Sector Modernization Project.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD) 
  
10. The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder 
agriculture in selected hotspot areas. 

 
Key Results 

11. The key results indicators to assess project outcomes are: 

• KPI 1: Increase in water productivity at farm level (Custom); 

• KPI 2: Increase in agriculture productivity of crops (Custom); 

• KPI 3: Crop diversification index (Custom); and 

• KPI 4: Direct project beneficiaries, segregated by gender (CRI). 
 

D. Project Description 
  
12. Theory of Change: The project will address the key problem of the vulnerability of agriculture systems in 



climatic hotspot areas of the country.  The drivers of this vulnerability are (i) lack of farmer access to reliable 
sources of irrigation water, (ii) insufficient protection of agriculture land from floods; (iii) low levels of 
diversification in agriculture production; and (iv) limited adoption of climate-smart technologies. Addressing 
these issues will involve an approach that (i) addresses expected long-term trends in climate change including 
the frequency and severity of climatic events (flood and drought); (ii) adopts a catchment scale approach to water 
management; and (iii) integrates agriculture and water by working with farmers and Farmer Organizations (FOs) 
to improve the sustainable management of water and soil resources, and promote the adoption of suitable on-
farm water management and crop production technologies. 
 
13. The proposed project interventions will introduce catchment level hydrological assessments that 
incorporate future climate change projections to assess water availability and identify appropriate investments 
for upper catchment area treatments, water harvesting, rehabilitation of irrigation systems and reduced flood 
damage. Once water availability is assessed in a river basin, watersheds, sub-watersheds, cascades and individual 
tanks, then technical designs will be carried out for the tank irrigation systems, which consist of watershed 
catchment area, tank headworks, canal system and agriculture production area. The water stored in rehabilitated 
tanks will be used to commence CSA activities. Management of irrigation schemes will be enhanced through 
improved capacity of FOs. The project would support the identification, demonstration and adoption of 
technologies to both improve water use efficiency and enable farmers to diversify their production and move 
into higher value crops. Finally, support would be provided to enable farmers to have improved market access. 
Through these interventions, as stated below, the core project objectives of improving climate resilience and 
increased productivity would be achieved. 
 

 
 
 
14. Project Beneficiaries: The primary project beneficiaries will be over 470,000 smallholder farmers in 
hotspot areas (375,000 ha) in eleven administrative districts (Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, 
Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Ampara, Hambantota and Moneragala) spread 
across six provinces (Northern, North Central, North Western, Eastern, Southern and Uva) in the dry zone of Sri 


Lanka (see Project Area in Annex 9). Smallholder farmers consist of small farmers (1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and 
marginal farmers (less than 1.0 ha).  They will gain knowledge and technology transfer and access to 
infrastructure assets to enhance climate resilience in farming resulting in increased revenue from crop 
diversification and participation in emerging value chains.  Many technical and managerial staff of the 
participating agencies will benefit through training and capacity building activities. The project will also promote 
participation of youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure that they would benefit from the 
project activities. 

 
15. Hot-Spot Area Development Model: Given the centrality of tanks in the agrarian livelihoods of the dry 
zone of Sri Lanka, their current levels of neglect and the increasing vulnerability of these areas to both droughts 
and floods in quick succession with consequent impacts on agricultural production and incomes, the 
rehabilitation of tank-based irrigated agricultural systems is key to improving the resilience of these areas and 
the agrarian communities that depend on them. Resilience being ‘the ability of a system to bounce back or return 
to normal functioning after adversity’,1 the Hot-Spot Area Development model aims to enhance the resilience of 
these areas and those who depend on them for their livelihoods. Climate shocks add to relatively low paddy 
productivity. Resilience will be built through stable and rising incomes of agrarian families living in these hotspot 
areas despite increasing climatic variability. The expected results of this novel model will be achieved by (1) 
flexible and adaptive management of existing and improved irrigation water storage and delivery structures to 
make irrigation more reliable in the face of rising climatic variability (including more frequent episodes of high 
intensity rainfall and flooding and/or drought); (2) better agricultural inputs, techniques and practices that will 
help farmers maximize water use efficiency given rising climatic variability – and reduce crop harvest losses; and 
(3) better access to new markets and higher prices, through marketing higher up the value chain, more 
competitive agri-enterprises and upgraded infrastructure for agricultural trade to stabilize and increase incomes 
from agricultural livelihoods. The project will prioritize nutrient-rich foods to improve year-round nutrition. 
 

16. Phasing: In view of the complexity and innovativeness of the project and to learn lessons, the project will 
be implemented in three overlapping stages. The first stage (2018–2021) will cover three Hot-Spot Areas 
(Anuradhapura, Kurunegala and Kilinochchi districts), whereas the second (2020–2023) and third (2021–2024) 
stages will cover the balance eight districts. Progress will be reviewed annually and prior to completion of every 
stage, to sanction the next stage of implementation. All project financed activities in a stage will be completed in 
3 years but the O&M activities will continue till end of the project.  

 

Project Components 

 
17. Component 1: Agriculture Production and Marketing (US$ 42 million). The objective of this component 
is to improve agriculture productivity and diversification through the adoption of CSA practices and improved 
on-farm water management. 
 
18. Component 2: Water for Agriculture (US$ 92 million). The objective of this component is to facilitate (a) 
planning for water and other infrastructure necessary to support climate-resilient irrigated agriculture, (b) 

 
construction of the planned infrastructure; and (c) co-management of this infrastructure by central/provincial 
governments and the local community. 
 
19. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million). The objective of this component is to ensure the 
quality of overall project management, while ensuring smooth coordination of activity implementation by various 
agencies and strategic partners at national and subnational levels. This component will finance (i) the consultancy 
and operating costs of the PMU and DPD Offices and of different project executing agencies, including for 
fiduciary and safeguard aspects; (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities at baseline, midterm and 
end of project, including geotagging of the assets created; and (iii) information, education and communication 
campaigns to make all stakeholders aware of the project. 

 
20. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0.0 million). This emergency response component 
will allow for rapid reallocation of project proceeds in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or crisis that 
has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact. 

 

21. Climate Co-Benefits: The project seeks to derive Climate Co-Benefits (about 95 percent) through: (i) 
enhanced water security at farm level through the rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and 
improvement in water efficiency; (ii) improved soil health through the adoption of good agricultural practices to 
improve soil fertility, soil nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and (iii) improved 
adaptation to climate risks through increased farm productivity and crop diversification. 

 

22. Project Cost and Financing: The project will be financed through a six-year Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) loan. The total project cost is US$140 million and will be funded by an IBRD loan of US$125 million, 
with the GoSL contribution of US$ 10 million to cover salary costs on parallel basis and the Beneficiaries 
contributing US$ 5 million in kind.  Retroactive financing up to an aggregate amount of US$ 5 million will be 
available for eligible expenditures incurred under all project components and all categories prior to the date of 
signed Loan Agreement, but on or after July 01, 2018. 
 
E. Implementation 
 
23. The key design features incorporated in the institutional and implementation model include: multi-
stakeholder approach - different stakeholders involved in the field of climate resilient irrigation and agriculture 
are expected to contribute to project implementation from national to sub-national levels; coordinated 
approach - stakeholders are expected to share knowledge and resources in a collaborative manner at each level; 
citizen engagement - local smallholder farmers, medium sized agribusiness owners, common interest groups, 
producer organizations, individual entrepreneurs and their customers will be involved in the planning & 
implementation of project activities, along with government counterparts, NGOs, academia and the private 
sector; consistency with the National Poverty Alleviation Programme – since the project will also work with the 
People’s Company of the Grama Shakthi Programme implemented at Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level; Use 
of existing government staff – except a few of the full-time key professionals to be recruited from the open 
market, the rest of the staff will be from existing government cadres and work on a part-time basis at both 
national and provincial levels; and gender equality - the project design and approach will take into account the 
gender dimension and ensure that the project provides equal opportunities for women to participate in the 
project cycle. 

 

24. Institutional arrangements:  The project is fully integrated in the GOSL administration, and the 
implementation is designed to capitalize on existing government agencies at national, provincial, district, 
divisional, and   Grama Niladhari Division levels. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established under 
the Ministry of Agriculture, whereas Deputy Project Director’s Offices (DPD Offices) will be established under 
the Ministries of Irrigation & Water Resources Management and of Provincial Councils and Local Government. 
At provincial level, there will be Provincial DPD Offices set up in each of the participating Provinces to implement 
the project. The Provincial DPD Offices will be set up under the Chief Secretaries in Kilinochchi, Kurunegala, 
Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts, and they will cover the district level 
activities of the respective districts. In addition, a District Unit of the DPD Office will be established under the 
District Secretary at the Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development in Puttalam, Batticaloa, 
Mullaitivu, Polonnaruwa and Ampara Districts to coordinate all agencies operating at district level.  
 

25. There will be a Project Appraisal Team (PAT) set up at district level, and it will be coordinated by the 
District Planning Director. The PAT is an independent body and will report to the DPD. In addition, at the district 
level, there will be an advisory committee headed by the District Secretary. The Divisional secretaries of the 
participating divisions and district and divisional level heads of the government agencies, representatives of 
chamber of commerce, Associations of Farmer/Producer Organizations and NGOs will participate in the Advisory 
Committee. The Advisory Committee will guide the project implementers at the district level to implement CSIAP 
effectively. 

 
26. At Divisional level, there will be a Divisional Unit of the Provincial DPD Office set up at the Agrarian 
Service Center (ASC), and it will be headed by the Divisional Officer of the ASC. The Divisional Unit will function 
as a supporting unit to the Provincial DPD office and work closely with the District Unit to implement the Project 
effectively. The community based organizations, such as Farmer Organizations (FOs), Producer Groups (PGs), and 
Grama Shakthi People’s Company (GSPCs) operating at the Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level are the 
institutions that will be actively involved in the project together with the beneficiary farmers at the community 
level. Given the transformative nature of the project, institutional coordination across the relevant sectors is 
emerging as a critical task for the PMU in developing an effective project implementation mechanism to achieve 
convergence with other programs. The institutional arrangement is further described in Annex 2 of the PAD. 
 
27. Implementation arrangements:  Overall project implementation is the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA). Since the institutional capacity of MOA is limited and special skills are required to implement 
the complex project activities, the project will draw expertise from the Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM), Department of Agriculture (DOA), Department of Agrarian Development 
(DAD) and Irrigation Department (ID), as well, and acquire outside expertise, including consulting services. The 
day-to-day management and operation of the project is the responsibility of the Project Management Unit 
(PMU), headed by a Project Director (PD) appointed by MOA and assisted by national level Deputy Project 
Director’s offices in MIWRDM and MSPCLG as well as provincial level Deputy Project Director’s offices. The 
project will give attention to institutional coordination across departments, agencies, and strategic partners 
involved in the implementation of project activities. Specifically, as the MoA has an existing PMU under the 
ASMP, core functions such procurement, FM and safeguards would maximize the use of existing capacity.  Overall 
project oversight is the responsibility of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), established in the 
Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs (MNPEA) and chaired by its Secretary. The main responsibility 
of the NPSC is to provide strategic guidance for the implementation of the project and to act as the interface 
between the central and provincial institutions. The NPSC also approves the annual work program and budget 
for the project, endorses the working arrangements with strategic partners, and is briefed by the Bank (and the 


PD) on the outcomes of implementation support and review missions carried out with the Bank team at least 
biannually. 

 
28. The PMU is responsible for ensuring that: (i) all project activities are planned, financed and 

implemented as per the project annual work program and budget, (ii) project implementation is in line with 
operational guidelines of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), (iii) project procurement and financial 
management activities are carried out in timely manner as per the World Bank’s Procurement for IPF Borrowers 
(2016), the project fiduciary manuals and the procurement plan, and (iv) social and environmental safeguards 
applicable to the project are fully complied with. The PMU is also responsible for monitoring project activities, 
preparing the quarterly and annual project progress reports, and ensuring that all reports (including financial 
reports) are submitted to the World Bank in timely manner.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed project will be implemented in 11 districts in the dry zone climate vulnerability hot spots, 
covering at least 5 major watersheds. The mean annual rainfall is under 900mm (much of it being received 
during the northeast monsoon season from November to January) and mean annual temperature ranges 
between 28°C to 32°C. Droughts that persist for more than three months are common. It has a climax 
vegetation of dry evergreen forest and moist deciduous forest, with forests giving way to a stunted, 
shrubby, drought-tolerant vegetation in its driest parts. The forests found in most parts are secondary 
vegetation, which developed after hundreds of years of repeated clearing and cultivation. The natural 
vegetation has adapted to the annual change from flood to drought. The forests have been largely cleared 
for agriculture, timber or grazing, and many of the dry evergreen forests have been significantly degraded. 
Several protected areas have been established to protect some of remaining natural forests. Agriculture, 
settlements and other development activities have fragmented most of the forests giving rise to human-
wildlife conflicts, particularly with elephants. Overall, about 30% of Sri Lanka’s labor force is engaged in 
agriculture, and in the dry zone that has been the frontier for irrigation based development, directly or 
indirectly connecting entire population to agriculture. However, most farm households have multiple 
livelihood strategies as income from one source is insufficient for living. The predominant form of 
settlement in the project area is ‘village’ organized around a tank that is part of a cascade system. Although 
many of these small tank based villages have been incorporated into large and medium scale irrigated 
agricultural development schemes managed by the government, a substantial number of tank-villages that 
are rain-fed, persists. Most settlers in the project area have been granted land ownership and smallholdings 
predominate, and sub-division and fragmentation is common in tandem with the occurrence of large 
operational holdings – all devoted to food crop cultivation. Irrigation communities in the dry zone are 
connected with the government system of administration and management, including for irrigation 
management. Additionally, highland agriculture and illegal slash and burn agriculture also can be observed 
alongside small-scale inland fishery activities which take place in man-made tanks. 


G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Darshani De Silva, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Bandita Sijapati, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

In order to mitigate potential environmental and 
social impacts that may be caused due to physical 
interventions and to ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided 
and/or mitigated, appropriate environmental and 
social management measures will be guided by the 
EAMF. The EAMF provides detailed analysis of the 
scale of due diligence required (such as 
environmental assessments, environmental 
management plans, etc.) for potential activities 
under the project. Additionally, a RPF has been 
prepared to identify and mitigate land-related social 
impacts under the Project. A ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. SESA will inform 
the mini-watershed planning process to ensure 
broader watershed-level impacts are integrated into 
the planning process. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
There will not be any financing of private sector 
entities under this project and therefore this policy is 
not applicable for this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP4.04 applies to all types of natural habitats 
including natural forests. There is the possibility of 
impacting catchment forests due to dam 
rehabilitation activities. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas. No activities on 
commercial forestry is supported by the project. 
However, dam improvement work may impact some 
of the catchment forests.  There will be watershed 
protection activities, which would have positive 
impact on forests. These impacts will be managed 



through the safeguard instruments that will be 
developed under OP 4.01 and OP 4.37. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Because of the standardization, intensification and 
diversification of agricultural activities under the 
project, changes in the application of pesticides for 
pest and disease control are foreseen. It is not clear 
at this point, if the project would finance the 
procurement of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) that has been prepared under the Agriculture 
Modernization Project building on Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) principles has been adopted by 
this project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

As of now, no project activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources (PCR), 
as defined by OP 4.11.  There are also no new 
construction of irrigation infrastructure planned. 
Mitigation measures if any activity takes place closer 
to PCRs and measures on PCR chance finds will be 
included as part of the mitigation measures defined 
in EAMF under the OP 4.01. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There is no conclusive evidence/information 
available that establishes the presence of indigenous 
people in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will support civil works and other 
activities associated with construction, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of small-scale market 
infrastructure, tank systems, water harvesting 
structures, irrigation schemes, etc. At present, these 
activities are envisaged to take place on existing 
canals and schemes or land belonging to individual 
farmers, and the need for taking private land under 
the project is not expected. However, there may be 
need for additional land, albeit minimal, for 
catchment area treatment, reestablishment of canal 
reservations, and rehabilitation/reconstruction of 
irrigation schemes. Further, there may be 
encroachers or others using the land necessary for 
the civil works thus requiring adequate mitigation 
measures to be put in place during project 
implementation.  Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared in accordance 
with OP/BP 4.12. Further, to support the mini-
watershed planning process, a ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project plans to improve and rehabilitate small 
dams and the EAMF will include the process to be 
adopted on safety of dams including required 
expertise under the OP/BP 4.01. irrigation schemes 
to be reconstructed/rehabilitated would entail 
minor works to improve existing capacity of the 
tanks to ensure the cascade system functions 
efficiently. The Dam Safety and Water Resources 
Management Project financed by the World Bank  
has already rehabilitated most of the larger tanks 
and their respective dams and has also set up dam 
safety panel to monitor the interventions and 
operations. They will continue to provide guidance 
to the decisions that will be taken on this project.  All 
the requirements applicable to the project will be 
identified early during the implementation stage so 
that all the necessary plans and organization set-up 
are completed on time. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project area covers hot spot areas spanning Ampara, Batticaloa, Trincomalee, Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, 
Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts in Eastern, Northern, 
North Central, North Western, and Uva Provinces. The first stage of the Project (2018-2021) will cover three Hot Spot 
Areas, whereas the second stage of the project (2020-2022) and third (2022-2024) will cover the balance eight 
districts. However, the exact locations for the specific interventions under the Project have not been identified, and 
the selection of activities will be determined only during implementation.  
 
The project is classified as an Environmental Category B.  It is expected to bring positive environmental and social 
benefits to the project areas through the scale-up of climate-resilient agricultural technologies and farming practices 
that help improve soil health, water-use efficiency and crop products, catchment area treatment to promote more 
efficient use of surface water and more sustainable use of groundwater for agriculture and development of waterbody 
capacity of climate hotspots, and overall improvement in the productivity of small-holder farmers. Components 1 and 
2 may involve physical activities that could have adverse environmental and social impacts if these aspects are not 

 

fully integrated into hot-spot area development plans and negative environmental and social risks are not identified 
and mitigated properly. Likewise, some activities supported under the project, such as small scale market 
infrastructure, construction and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, water storage facilities, etc.,  are likely to cause 
social risks and impacts, including land acquisition, impacts on livelihoods, loss of assets, etc. Although the project 
activities will be confined to rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and support to existing farmlands, some of the 
project districts consists of known physical cultural resources that can be impacted during works carried out under the 
Project. 
 
The promotion of climate smart agriculture systems and related value chains under the project could also lead to 
changes in the application of pesticides for pest and disease control. At present, project-supported climate-smart 
agricultural activities are envisaged to take place on existing farmland, and no expansion or creation of new 
agriculture systems into fragile habitats is foreseen. Likewise, the project will bring improvements to watershed 
protection and promote agricultural practices that are expected to reduce pressure on natural habitats and the 
likelihood of encroachment into sensitive ecosystems. However, some activities may negatively impact natural 
habitats because of the proximity of project activities, such as the construction or upgrading of rural infrastructure. 
The project plans to undertake catchment treatment as part of village-level watershed plans to make them more 
climate resilient and, which may bring positive impacts on natural forests in the upper catchment areas due to 
additional protection measures. Such areas that require additional protection related activities are expected to be 
identified through SESAs.  
 
Some negative impacts to forests are expected during tank rehabilitation work and while the project will primarily 
support the increase in the storage capacity of tanks through removal of excess sedimentation and establishment of 
mechanisms to reduce future sedimentation, some inundation of forests may still be possible, particularly in those 
areas where small tanks have been abandoned and natural forest regeneration has taken place on the tank bed.  
 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Based on the available information, no potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under 
the project.The project interventions will spread across 11 hotspot areas where the nature/scope of future activities is 
presently not known. Regardless, the SESA proposed to be carried out during implementation for each hotspot will 
help in identifying any indirect and/or long-term impacts of future activities and mitigating such impacts as part of 
project interventions. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts can be considered only during implementation once the 
project area and the specific activities are known. In principle however, the EAMF and the RPF include measures that 
need to be adopted in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. For instance, a 'negative list' has been prepared 
under the EAMF which among others indicates types of sub-projects that will not be financed under the project (e.g., 
activities that involve significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, activities that would increase 
human-wildlife conflict, construction of large new infrastructure within or directly adjacent (in buffer zones) to 
protected areas, etc). Likewise, to avoid impacts of land acquisition, the RPF indicates that to the extent possible, sub-
project activities will be carried out in the existing footprint of the infrastructure facility, utilize public land or land that 
is voluntarily donated, and only in exceptional basis will there be acquisition of private land under the Project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 


capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared to guide the screening of 
activities for physical investments, technical assistance, project supported-advisory, and policy support interventions 
and resulting implementation from an environmental perspective and mitigation actions to manage their 
environmental impacts. The EAMF defines the screening and decision-making process based on the screening, the 
content, procedures and responsibilities for the preparation and implementation of individual sub-project 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to address site-specific risks and 
impacts and subsequent monitoring and reporting requirements. The EAMF also includes sectoral environmental 
management guidelines for the subsectors of agricultural processing, which will be applicable under the matching 
grant program. To ensure impacts to natural habitats are mitigated, the EAMF prescribes proper due diligence 
mechanisms, including relevant preventive and mitigation measures to protect local ecosystems and habitats to be 
included in the respective sub-project EMPs with special attention given to ensure risks and impacts due to human-
elephant conflict are mitigated where such conflicts exist and using successful co-existence models that already have 
been demonstrated within the country. In order to ensure negative impacts to forests are minimized, the EAMF 
includes screening criteria and relevant mitigation measures. In addition, a separate Pest Management Plan (PMP) 
prepared under the Agriculture Modernization Project developed based on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
principles has been adopted by this project.  
 
Likewise, the RPF sets out principles and guidelines to identify and assess the potential social impacts and risks, 
prepare mitigation plans as part of sub-project preparation, institutional arrangements and processes to be followed 
for the Project. This includes: (i) principles and procedures for screening and assessing impacts; (ii) the criterion and 
due diligence processes based on risks, including the provisions for entitlements and eligibility criteria; (iii) guidelines 
for preparing time-bound action plans to ensure compliance with WB's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and 
national regulations relating to land acquisition; (iv) institutional arrangements for implementing resettlement action 
plans; (v) guidance for public consultation process and disclosure of safeguard documents; (vi) mechanisms for 
grievance redress, monitoring and evaluation of process and outcomes; and (vii) responsibilities of the GoSL and WB in 
relation to the preparation, implementation and progress review of social safeguards documents for the various CSIAP 
sub-projects.  
 
In addition to the EAMF and the RPF, as part of hot-spot area development, Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessments (SESAs) will be undertaken to be integrated into the village-level plans. All irrigation infrastructure 
related interventions require a screening to be included in the SESA to verify whether upstream medium to large scale 
dams are present and connected hydrologically and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed, outline follow-up 
actions. If the presence of upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been 
rehabilitated or strengthened and have dam safety implications, the project will undertake an inspection and 
evaluation of the safety of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history, and a review and evaluation of 
the mandated dam owner’s operation and maintenance procedures. A report will be provided on the review’s 
findings, including recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the 
existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary dam safety measures or remedial work will be financed 
under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken, including recruitment of a 
competent professional to design and supervise the work, and the Dam Safety Panels established under the 
Department of Irrigation and Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka will provide the guidance and continuous due diligence 
as necessary. As part of SESAs, physical cultural resources will be documented, and the EAMF includes screening 
criteria to ensure sub-projects will not produce any negative impacts to such resources. The EAMF also includes 
procedures to be adopted during a chance find.  
 


In terms of capacity, the Ministry of Agriculture has recently been exposed to world Bank-financed Project while the 
Irrigation Department has two ongoing operations supported by the Bank. In addition, some of the provincial councils 
(e.g., Northern and Eastern) have been involved in World Bank financed operations. However, a comprehensive 
capacity building program for implementation of safeguards instruments prepared under the Project as well as the 
social and environmental management within the sector, will be prepared during implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary key stakeholders are smallholder farmers, producer organizations, productive alliances, agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, implementing organizations, government departments/units, including technical and managerial staff 
of participating agencies. The project will actively promote youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure 
that they are fully engaged in and also benefit from all project activities.  
 
During the preparation of the safeguards instruments, consultations were held on 18 June 2018 in Anuradhapura and 
on 21 June 2018 in Colombo, and feedback received during these consultations have been included as part of project 
design and minutes of the consultations with details of the participants, have been included as part the RPF. 
Additionally, the EAMF and the RPF also include consultation strategy which among others emphasizes that all 
stakeholders will be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner while preparing site-specific safeguards instruments 
as well as during implementation. The process of consultation will be documented and account taken of the results of 
consultatoins, including any agreed actions resulting from the consultation. The RPF and the EAMF also requires that 
all the social and environmental assessment documentation and site specific safeguards action plans (e.g., EMP, SIMP, 
RAP) will be made available to the public by the PMU through the project website and notices through media (as 
relevant), prior to start of civil works, and or tending of works contract. The EAMF and the RPF have also been 
disclosed in-country as well as through World Bank's external website. 
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE 

April 11, 2018 
Report No.: 125612 

 

Operation Name BJ - Second Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF 

Region AFRICA 

Country Benin 

Sector Central government administration (30%); General energy sector 
(20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%); 
Primary Education (15%); Health (15%). 

Operation ID P166115 (DPF Loan) and P167278 (PBG) 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Lending and Policy Based Guarantee 

Borrower(s) Government of Benin 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Date PID Prepared March 30, 2018 

Estimated Date of Appraisal July 11, 2018 

Estimated Date of Board Approval August 28, 2018 

Corporate Review Decision Following the corporate review, the decision was taken to 
proceed with the preparation of the operation. 

 

I. Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement  
 
1. Benin is one of the world’s least-developed countries, with an annual per capita income of 
approximately US$830 in 2017. Poverty remains widespread, with a poverty rate estimated at about 48 
percent ($1.90 a day poverty line – 2011 PPP) in 2017.  With an average per capita GDP growth rate of 1.3 
percent (2005-2015) driven primarily by the services sector, poverty reduction has been limited, 
highlighting the need to ensure a broad-based and stronger growth. There are significant regional 
disparities in poverty rates and rural poverty rates are higher than those in urban areas. Fewer female-
headed households fall below the national poverty line than male-headed households.  
 
2. The country’s economic performance has been hampered by low competitiveness and high 
informality.  Following the temporary slowdown experienced in 2015, economy activity rebounded driven 
by the recovery of private consumption and supported by increased cotton production, strong activity at 
the Port of Cotonou, and rising telecommunications and transport sector activity. However, economic 
performance in Benin remains hampered by a weak business enabling environment. The high cost and 
unpredictable supply of electricity is a key constraint for private sector development. Agriculture’s export 
is concentrated in the cotton sector, and agriculture suffers from supply chain deficiencies, including in 
the provision and distribution of inputs as well as on the marketing side. Approximately 90 percent of the 
labor force is engaged in the informal sector – agriculture, informal commerce and other services 
activities. 
 
3. The first pillar of the Fiscal Reform and Growth series on fiscal consolidation is justified given the 
Government’s effort to create fiscal space and improve the efficiency of public spending. In the run-up 
to 2016 Presidential elections, increases in the wage bill and out-of-budget expenses led to significant 
increases in public debt (up by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (up from 2.1 percent of 
GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015). The Government contained expenditures in 2016 to face the drop of 

tax revenues and managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 8 percent of GDP in 2015 to 6 percent of GDP 
in 2016.  In 2017, several measures were implemented to boost domestic revenues and reduce primary 
current spending and the fiscal deficit remained stable despite a surge in public investment spending. The 
DPO series supports the authorities’ effort to create fiscal space by improving revenue collection and 
managing more efficiently public expenditure, with an emphasis on wages and transfers.  In addition to 
the DPOs, the Government program is supported by an ECF program with the IMF approved by the IMF 
Board on April 7, 2017, providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that will support the implementation 
of the reforms. The first review of the Program, carried out in September 2017, confirmed that the 
authorities are committed to responsible fiscal management. This was also confirmed (at the staff level) 
by the preliminary results of the second review of the Program, which is currently under way. 

 
4. The second pillar aims at promoting agricultural productivity and strengthening the power sector 
which is a Government’s priority to create productive formal jobs and support inclusive growth. 
Agriculture employs over 50 percent of the population and is the economy’s leading formal sector foreign 
exchange earner. The country has a large endowment of arable and fertile land and adequate water 
resources. However, Benin’s comparative advantage in agriculture remains largely unexploited as the 
governance structure and relatively low food-safety standards had a negative impact on the sector’s 
competitiveness. Also, the inconsistent supply of electricity is frequently noted as a leading constraint to 
private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing and agricultural processing sectors. 
Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector and promote private sector participation is 
essential to increase electricity production capacity in a sustainable way. Focusing on these important real 
sectors will help improve productivity, create higher paying jobs and livelihoods, and enhance the 
country’s effort to reach the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. 
 
5. The third pillar supports the Government’s efforts to improve the delivery of social services, 
both in terms of equity and quality.  Although Benin has recorded some progress in terms of access to 
education and health services over the past decade, significant variations persist depending on the income 
groups and locations. The reforms supported in this pillar will help addressing this issue. In addition, the 
recent SCD, and other studies, has identified that one major constraint in the delivery of better social 
services lies in the excessive concentration of responsibilities at the central level.  The Government has 
launched a series of initiatives aimed at increasing the role of local government and communities and at 
improving the allocation of public resources across regions. The proposed operation will support these 
initiatives. 
 

II. Proposed Objective(s) 
 
5. The overarching goal of the proposed FRGC series is to boost real economic growth, reduce poverty 
and increase opportunities for the poorest in the population. The program development objectives of 
this FRGC series are to: a) support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal management; b) 
promote economic growth by increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector 
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity; and c) improve social 
service delivery.  
 

III. Preliminary Description 
 
6. The first pillar of the DPO series will focus on supporting macroeconomic stability by strengthening 
fiscal management. Not only is adequacy of the macroeconomic and fiscal framework a prerequisite for 
sustainable economic growth but budgetary and debt sustainability is necessary to the delivery of 



effective public services that maximize the impact of available revenues on beneficiaries, including the 
poorest segments of the populations. In addition, increasing fiscal space will help relax fiscal constraints 
to accommodate the financing of needed infrastructure projects.  
 
7. The second pillar will seek to promote economic growth by increasing the productivity of the 
agricultural sector and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. This 
series focuses on measures aimed at increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector by supporting a 
policy, regulatory, and institutional framework that strengthens agriculture value chains and enhances 
diversification, promotes higher quality standards for agricultural products and supports greater access 
to credit in the primary sector. Moreover, the measures supported by the operation strengthen the 
financial viability of the power sector that is necessary to attract private sector participation and, thus, 
increase electricity production capacity, including in renewables, and access to electricity in a sustainable 
way. 
 
8. The third pillar contributes to addressing the key constraints to a more sustainable, efficient 
and equitable allocation of resources to build and maintain the human capital of Beninese adults and 
children. The measures supported under this pillar address two main issues: (i) the geographically uneven 
deployment of qualified primary teachers and health workers, and (ii) the limited and unpredictable 
resources allocated by the central government to communities to finance non-salary inputs and 
investments necessary to maintain quality service delivery. In particular, the proposed pillar supports the 
Government’s efforts to deploy teachers and health workers to underserved communities and ensure 
that local governments receive a sufficient and regular flow of funds to meet priority social sector needs, 
particularly those for the poorest members of communities served.  
 

 

IV. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 
 
9. The FRG series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction through different 
channels. This impact has been strengthened by the inclusion of the third pillar on human capital 
development that could have both a direct and indirect influence on the level and distribution of poverty.  
 
10.  Prior Actions 1 to 3 support measures to create fiscal space and are expected to facilitate the 
delivery of essential public services and to contribute to a macroeconomic environment conducive to 
economic growth and private sector employment creation. A stable and predictable macroeconomic 
environment is necessary to limit uncertainty, to attract and sustain both domestic and foreign 
investment, to grow the formal economy and to generate increasingly productive employment 
opportunities. Furthermore, the creation of fiscal space allows for an increased allocation of fiscal 
resources to the delivery of essential social services, a direct contribution to poverty reduction and 
improved quality of life. Increased fiscal space also allows for implementation of the Government’s public 
investment plans, which is conducive to the crowding-in of increased levels of private investment. As 
noted, the failure of growth to lead to poverty reduction in Benin largely reflects the highly informal 
nature of the economy and the lack of high productivity, high wage and secure employment opportunities. 
Fiscal and debt sustainability, and the macroeconomic certainty it engenders, along with better 
infrastructure and improved delivery of essential services will encourage and foster economic growth that 
is more formal in nature and thus more effective in reducing poverty.  
 



11. Prior Action 2 provides a potential exception, as the recommendations of the tax expenditure 
analysis have not been finalized yet and could entail removing exemptions that benefit the poor. 
Eighteen percent of taxes expenditure on VAT are related to basic foods; removing these exemptions 
could possibly have negative distributional impact on the poor. However, this scenario is unlikely given 
that tax exemptions on basic foods are regulated by a regional policy. In case some recommendations of 
the tax expenditure analysis suggest removing exemptions that potentially benefit the poor, a 
distributional impact analysis will be carried out to inform the Poverty and Social Impact Assessment 
(PSIA).  
 
12. Prior action 4, 5, and 6 focus on increasing agricultural productivity and competitiveness and 
contribute to the Government’s poverty reduction goals. In 2015, 60 percent of the rural population lived 
below the US$1.90 per day poverty line. As the rural population share is greater than the urban share, 65 
percent of the poor reside in rural areas. As noted previously, limited agricultural growth (around 3.5 
percent per year, which is approximately the rate of population growth in the country) has contributed to 
overall growth, but the impact on poverty reduction has been limited. Diversifying production into more 
valuable crops, and raising productivity should boost incomes among those involved in agriculture. 
 
13. Prior actions supported in the power sector pillar promote reliable access to electricity and a 
more cost-effective electricity provision and should have a direct and positive impact on the poor. As 
discussed above, only 29 percent of Benin’s households have access to electricity, and due to the 
significant disparities between urban and rural areas, only 6 percent of the rural population has access to 
electricity. The measures supported under this series will support the financial viability of the power 
sector which is a necessary condition to attract private investments, increase power production, improve 
power transmission and distribution, and ultimately improve access to electricity in Benin. Increased 
access to electricity is strongly correlated with improved education and health outcomes and associated 
increases in human capital and earning potential. Furthermore, access to electricity liberates non-paid 
family time demands, particularly for women and girls, and further increases quality of life and 
opportunities for investment in human capital, including in girls and women. Increased and more reliable 
access at affordable prices should also have a significant impact on firm creation, firm growth and 
resultant employment opportunities, particularly in the higher productivity formal sector. 
 
14. A full-fledged PSIA has been carried out to assess the potential impact of electricity pricing 
reforms in Benin. The PSIA concluded that improving the financial situation of the SBEE and thus reducing 
the gap between SBEE’s service unit cost and revenues per kWh are prerequisites for the expansion of 
SBEE operations throughout the country and greater access for poor households to electricity. The PSIA 
study also concluded that the current social policy of subsidizing the tariff for the poor is not effective and 
suggested some possible options to strengthen the policy including adopting a tariff policy based on usage 
and eliminating fixed costs for small customers. 

 
15. Prior action 9 provides measures to improve education service delivery is expected to have 
indirect positive effects on poverty reduction. Schools quality play a determinant role in education 
outcomes. The 2017 SCD concluded that low human capital contributes to income inequality, undermines 
long term economic growth and the prospects of the poor to realize shared prosperity. Improving school 
quality (through the pupil to teacher ratio) is likely to improve learning outcomes and increases grade 
attainment. As education outcomes improve for the poor, their will have better job opportunities that 
offer higher earnings and security.  

 



16. Prior action 10 supports the improvement of health services in rural areas through the 
recruitment of new health workers. Providing affordable health care service to the poor remains a 
challenge in Benin particularly in the rural areas.  Addressing health care needs of the poor requires a 
multidimensional strategy integrating availability of health services, their quality, geographic and financial 
accessibility. While the provision of new health workers will improve availability of health services in rural 
areas, we do not expect this measure alone to improve significantly health outcomes for the poor. 
 
17. Prior action 11 aims at strengthening social safety net programs through the promotion cash 
transfer which is expected to have substantial positive impact on poverty reduction in the short term. 
There is a body of evidence around the world that well-designed cash transfers program substantially 
improves lives of the poor including higher levels of asset holdings, consumption, food security, 
employment, income and saving. However recent studies show the impacts of conditional or 
unconditional cash transfers on living standard are transitory and fade away in the long run.   
 
Environment Aspects  
 
13. The policies supported by the proposed DPF are not likely to have negative impacts on the country’s 
natural assets. All the actions supported throughout the first operation are policy-oriented; they do not 
support environmentally impactful investments or involve policy actions with significant environmental 
consequences.  The measures supporting domestic resource mobilization and efficient management of 
public expenditure pose no risk to the environment. Measures designed to strengthen economic 
competitiveness are also largely environmentally neutral.  
 
14. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector will support increased access to electricity 
and is expected to have a positive environmental impact. Households in Benin, particularly rural 
households, are highly dependent on biomass for their daily energy requirements. The reform program 
supported under the energy sector is likely to have positive environmental impacts and would help in the 
reduction of greenhouse gases occasioned by the predominance of fuel biomass (fuelwood, charcoal and 
plant wastes). Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector is likely to produce climate change 
mitigation co-benefit, since strengthening the financial viability of the sector is likely to promote the 
development of new energy efficient production capacities.  In the agricultural sector, measures intended 
to diversify agriculture away from a reliance on cotton could have a potentially positive environmental 
effect as agriculture becomes less mono-culture based and increasingly diversified. 
 
15. Over the last 20 years, the Government has made significant strides in mainstreaming 
environmental sustainability in projects. EIA is a legal requirement and it is widely applied to all 
developmental projects.  Environmental assessment is a necessary condition to obtain the approval to 
implement any development project. It has been set up in the Law N° 98-30 relating to the environmental 
framework and in the Decree N° 2001-235 relating to the environmental assessment procedures. The 
national environmental protection agency (ABE) has the capacity to implement, monitor, and report on 
mitigating measures and/or environmental and social management plans; and have been working in 
direct collaborations with the environmental and social specialists of the Bank funded projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



V. Tentative financing 
 

Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 
Borrower/Recipient  
IBRD 
Others (specify) 

 

 Total 60.00 
 


























































World Bank Document


 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24200 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

India P166745 National Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(Additional Financing to 
the National Rural 
Livelihoods Project ) 

P104164 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

National Rural Livelihoods Project SOUTH ASIA 23-Feb-2018 20-Apr-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

DEA National Rural Livelihood 
Mission 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of theruralpoor that 
enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial andselected public services. 
 

 
Components 

Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support: 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 500.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 250.00 

     World Bank Lending 250.00 
 



Total Government Contribution 250.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
  
OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED 
 

  
Decision 

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 

Country Context 
 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies and has experienced a 

substantial decline in poverty. The Indian economy registered gradually rising growth from 5.5 
percent in 2012-13 to 8 percent in 2015-16. This was supported by robust private consumption, a 
resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. Since the 2000s, India has made 
remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between 2004 and 2011, poverty declined sharply 
from 38.9 to 21.6 percent at the international poverty line ($1.90 PPP/day). With over a 100 million 
people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing world 
as well as that of Middle Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, rapid rise in 
rural wages, greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, 
were the key drivers of poverty reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided 
further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the construction sector and rural wages suggest that 
the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Agriculture continues to be important for rural Indians and there are 68 percent of the rural 

population dependent on it for livelihoods and about 49 percent of the labor force works in the 
agricultural sector but paradoxically it contributes only around 10 to 11 % to National gross domestic 
product (GDP). The Government of India’s new agenda of “Doubling Farmer’s Income”, which not only 
emphasizes upon productivity enhancement, intensification and diversification but also on agri-
processing, Agri-logistics, resource use efficiency, agriculture marketing and sustainability could 
possibly transform the Indian Agriculture. The opportunities in the agribusiness sector and local level 
primary value addition are growing with the changing consumer basket and increasing urbanization 
and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. Small producers have the opportunity to directly 
participate in this value chain if they are organized and provided with appropriate infrastructure, 
technology and information support. 



3. Non-farm economy, in recent times, has emerged as an important livelihoods source in rural 
India. A shift away from agriculture toward nonagricultural wage employment and reduced reliance 
on agricultural income has become evident. Non- farm activities contributed 65% rural income in 
2016-17 (Chand, 2017). Diversification into non-farm interventions (both self-employment and 
wage employment) marks the shift from low-productivity jobs to high productivity and it is an 
important pathway for poverty reduction and employment generation. Non-farm rural jobs are 
predominantly in manufacturing, services (including public administration, education, health, 
community, other personal or household services) and trade and transport (including wholesale 
and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, transport, storage and warehousing and communication).  
 

4. The Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India launched the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission in 2011 as its flagship program to enhance rural livelihoods and reduce rural poverty in the 
country. The world bank supported National Rural Livelihoods Project provided intensive support 
to the launch and scale up of the NRLM over the last 7 years. The National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) has now been scaled up to o all 29 states of the country.  The intensive approach 
successfully demonstrated by NRLP in around 500 blocks is now being implemented across nearly 
2500 blocks across 29 states through the NRLM program. A total of 45 million rural women are 
currently part of Self-Help Groups and they have cumulatively leveraged nearly 25 billion USD of 
financing from commercial banks since the launch of the NRLM program in 2011.  

 
5. Ministry of Rural Development has subsequently launched two critical programs that aim to 

leverage the National Rural Livelihood Mission and scale up efforts to enhance agriculture incomes 
and on-farm incomes for the rural poor namely the Mahila Kisan Sashiktikaran Program (MKSP ) 
and the Startup Village Entrepreneurship program . The Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) is launched as a sub-component of the Deendayal Antodaya Yojana-NRLM to improve the 
status of women in agriculture, who constitute 33% of the total agricultural labour force, and 
enhance economic opportunities available to them. The program exclusively focus upon small and 
marginal farmers, sustainable agriculture practices and vulnerability reduction. Community 
Resource Persons (CRP) are identified as best practitioners (locally named as Pashu Sakhi, Krishi 
Sakhi etc.) and are instrumental in promoting farm sector livelihoods (agriculture, animal 
husbandry and NTFP), through community to community sharing and learning – as a “proof of 
concept”. The ‘Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme’ (SVEP) launched by Government of 
India in 2014-15 aims to promote and support existing rural entrepreneurs by providing bouquet 
of business development services including entrepreneur capacity building, seed & growth capital 
along with handholding support for business development. Currently, the programme is being 
implemented in 47 Blocks across 14 states with support of 5 technical support agencies. Results 
from SVEP and other world bank supported programs to promote SMEs will inform the scaling up 
of enterprise development initiatives to be taken up under NRETP ( NRLP-AF) 

 
6. The Government of India has recently launched Mission Antyodaya to improve the well-being of 10 

million households from 5000 economic clusters (covering around 50,000 Gram Panchayats) by 
addressing multiple dimensions of poverty through convergent actions under wide range of existing 
development schemes and following a saturation approach. The movement of Panchayats away 
from poverty will be tracked through a mobile based application i.e. “Panchayat Darpan” using a 
set of indicators having differential weightage scheme. In a list of 24 indicators, 30% weightage has 
been provided on GP level Infrastructure development; another 30% on Human Development 
outcomes and rest 40% weightage has been given to livelihoods promotion. Mission Antyodaya 
further accelerates economic transformation process building on the NRLP outcomes 



 
7. One of the central lessons learned during the last seven years of implementation of NRLM has been 

that while investments in building institutional platforms of rural poor households is a critical 
foundation for sustainable poverty reduction, it is not sufficient unless these institutions are 
engaged in higher level production systems and have better market interface. Integration of core 
social mobilization and leveraging of financial resources have been adequately demonstrated. The 
next level challenge is to leverage social capital into economic opportunities and crowd in private 
investments; and engage with more commercial partnerships to integrate rural households into 
higher-level income opportunities. Therefore, one of the main thrusts of the NRETP (NRLP- AF) will 
be to develop value chains using end-to-end investments in selected commodities and facilitating 
access to finance to support enterprises in agriculture and allied sectors, thus contributing to 
productivity and profitability. The proposed project will build on existing investments and 
institutional capital to bring further income increase and inclusive growth in rural areas.   

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Original PDO  
 

1. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Current PDO  
 

2. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Key Results:  

3. The PDO indicators for the additional financing are:  

• 60% of SHGs# federated into Village Organizations.  

• 40% of SHG members* report reduction in high cost debt 

• 50% of SHG members report 30% increase in asset. 

• 20 % increase in income of households that have accessed technical and financial services1 
 
D. Project Description  
        
Project Beneficiary:  

1. The proposed NRETP (NRLP AF) intends to support 100 districts from the existing 13 NRLP States 
towards high end technical assistance and investment support towards deepening and scaling up of 
the economic transformative initiatives that were introduced as part of dedicated funds under NRLP. 

 
1 Define technical and financial services that will be provided/considered  



Additionally, it would support to the Mission Antyodaya program that intends to further accelerate 
economic transformation in selected areas, building on the NRLP outcomes.  

 
2. While MoRD through their own increased budget allocation would continue to saturate and bring 

remaining rural poor into the fold of women SHGs,  the specific investments under additional financing  
will work with targeted households that are already part of SHGs and would focus on strengthening 
of existing network (higher level federations i.e. VO and above) of community organizations of women 
having potential to be mobilized into producer groups and producer organizations and transit to next 
generation economic initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise and 
skills development etc. MoRD will directly reach out to over a million households through these 
initiatives. The project will support around 50000 individual enterprises; and around 100,000 youth 
will be trained and placed with in formal job markets using the resources available under DDUJKY and 
other skilling & entrepreneurship program of the Government of India. 

Project Component 

3. Component 1: Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
This component will continue to finance technical assistance consultancies, human resources, 
training and development of training material/approaches. Financing under this component will 
endeavor to place skilled professionals to work with NRLM at the national, state and district levels. 
As mentioned in the section on rationale, the TA will be focused on helping the National and State 
teams transition to a new phase of the NRLM that involves greater focus on economic initiatives such 
as high value agriculture and value chain development, enterprise and skills development. Given that 
experiences from these initiatives are relatively nascent, the additional financing support will 
emphasize sourcing of technical support from agencies (Public, Private and NGOs) with the requisite 
technical expertise in rural enterprise development.  National, regional and international experiences 
and skills may be sourced for this objective.   

 
4. In addition, a new sub component focused on providing technical assistance for Mission Antyodaya 

will be introduced. Specifically, as part of this sub component:  
 

a. TA will be provided for Mission Antyodaya at the national, state and district level.    
b. Support under this sub-component will be for 13 NRLP states and nearly 100 districts in those 13 

states. The 100 districts with the highest intensity of the NRLM implementation will be selected 
for the project. These districts will be the districts with the highest amount of mobilization and 
capitalization (both the catalytic capital from NRLM and the finance from commercial banks) and 
the possibilities of having transformative economic potential. Additionally, and as far as possible, 
the project will strive for coordinated technical or investment support with the blocks and 
panchayats selected under Mission Antyodaya and those under NRLP.   
  

5. Component 2. State Livelihood Support  
The activities to be financed under this Component will remain essentially the same but with further 
refinements to focus on the next generation institutional and investment support as described above 
in the rationale. Sub component 2.1 (State Rural Livelihoods Support) will remain the same but 
district level support will be focused on 100 districts that will be selected for project coverage under 
this NRETP (NRLP AF). Under sub component 2.2 (Institution Building and Capacity Building) financing 
will be oriented towards the mobilization of the producer groups and producer organizations. Under 
sub component 2.3 (Community Investment Support) the focus would be on financing community 



organizations mainly towards enterprise and skill development initiatives. The quantum of financing 
under sub component 2.4 (Special Programs) will be significantly scaled up and most of this financing 
will be focused on scaling up initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise 
and skills development etc.  that were introduced under the dedicated funds under this sub-
component during the project restructuring undertaken in January 2016. 

 
6. Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed 

under this component. The component will continue to finance pilot initiatives and technical 
assistance consultancies that support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth 
employment, among others, for rural poor households.  Learning and documentation of experiences 
from these initiatives will be emphasized. 

 
7. Component 4. Project Implementation Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed under this 

component. This component will continue to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level, finance the Monitoring and Evaluation activities and ICT initiatives.  
Learning and documentation of experiences under the economic transformative investments and institutional 
strengthening programs will be emphasized. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
1. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:  The MoRD through National Rural Livelihoods Promotion 

Society (NRLPS)/National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will be responsible for overall technical 
assistance, guideline formulations, National level partnerships, coordination, monitoring, supervision and 
release of funds to thirteen participating States. At the State level, the project will be implemented by the 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) set up under NRLM as per the agreed framework detailed out in 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Each participating States will carry out a diagnostic study of pro-poor 
agriculture value chain and potential of cluster based enterprise development based on which they will 
prepare their Annual Action Plan (AAP) or multi-year State Perspective and Implementation Plan (SPIP). 

 
 
 
 . 

   
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The additional finance would cover about 100 districts in the current 13 states. The states are spread across 
different agro climatic zones with varied natural and geographical features ranging from wet and humid to 
dry and deciduous as well as include some coastal areas. All the states have previous experience in 
implementing NRETP (NRLP AF) supported livelihood activities in varied agro climatic zones. There is also 
prior experience of working in different geographies and with environmental and social setting of the rural 
areas, which are primarily agrarian. The expected locations influenced by additional financing are likely to 
be similar to those covered under the ongoing NRETP (NRLP AF), and therefore, poses no significant risks of 
potential cumulative and localized significant adverse environmental impacts. Livelihood activities would 
continue to centre around the sustainable use of natural resources, where these are available at project 
locations. NRETP (NRLP AF) NRETP (NRLP AF) The additional financing will be spread across 100 Districts in 
13 high poverty states. The states and project areas were identified based on their high incidence of rural 
poverty and socioeconomic backwardness as well as higher concentration of marginalized population 
groups such as scheduled tribes (indigenous peoples) and scheduled castes. States like Bihar and UP have 
substantial population of Scheduled Castes (SC) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) who are more vulnerable 
and marginalized compared to general population. On the other hand, states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and parts of Rajasthan, MP, and Maharashtra are dominated by tribals. Within these geographies, 
the NRETP (NRLP AF) will prioritize districts/blocks with higher levels of social mobilsation and financial 
capitalization, which will overlap with pockets of higher tribal and marginalized populations.  

 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project proposes to scale-up the existing livelihoods promoted through dedicated special funds. The livelihoods 
include varies use of natural resources and linked processes, such as, Agriculture, Dairy, Small ruminants, Fisheries, 
Non-Timber Forest Produce (lac culture, hill broom, tamarind etc.). The project will also support Non-farm enterprises 
including small processing units and value addition. The project has been consciously promoting special initiatives for 
environmental sustainability of livelihoods such as community managed sustainable agriculture, fodder cultivation and 
stall feeding of milch animals and goats etc. However as the project proposes to scale-up the same interventions 
through additional financing, improper management of any of these livelihood activities and unawareness among the 
SHG members may result in negative impacts, such as: (i) indiscriminate use of chemical inputs in agriculture leading 
to contamination of soil, water and surroundings; (ii) degradation of common grazing lands due to increased pressure 
of grazing and improper pasture management practices; (iii) decreased regeneration capacity of NTFP species in forest 
areas; and (iv) over use of water resources, particularly ground water etc. Most of these activities are small-scale 
interventions, spread over wide areas in several villages. Further, any potential adverse environmental impact and risk 
from these activities can be mitigated, contained and even reversed. Therefore, no potential large scale, significant 
and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies 
on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) have been triggered 
recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-
based livelihoods. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project funds are 
unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, embankments, etc. (Project funds would not 
support activities involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 is not 
triggered. The key social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the NRETP (NRLP AF) are: ensuring project 
interventions and implementation processes are aligned with the socio-cultural context in tribal areas and respond to 
their development priorities; inclusion of traditionally marginalized social groups such as scheduled castes, migrant 
labor, and other households identified under socioeconomic census survey (SECC); promoting strategies that reduce 
gender gaps and advance women’s economic empowerment; and mitigation of any localized, adverse impacts from 
small scale infrastructure that would be coming up in project areas. No adverse long terms impact on tribals and 
indigenous population are expected from this project. OP 4.10 is triggered as states and districts having substantial 
tribal population are included in Project areas. OP. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition is not envisaged. Small scale community level, infrastructure such as citizen service centres, training 
centres and custom hiring centres are expected to come up largely in pre-existing facilities. However, some of these 
may require small land parcels that are expected to be leased or donated by Panchayats or local government 


departments or individual donors with proper MoUs and due diligence. Given the size of small scale infrastructure, a 
large portion of which is expected to be rented/leased with no or minimal construction, the risks of labor influx are 
not going to be significant. Project interventions are not expected to cause any adverse livelihood impacts and 
restriction of access to land and resources as a result to land taking by the project.  
  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: No 
severe or long-term impacts are expected due to proposed livelihood activities, mainly implemented through the 
women Self Help Groups. Agriculture, livestock, fisheries, non-timber forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved and individual and household level investments in 
these sectors generally do not result in potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project areas. Further, as 
the experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up by the SHGs and 
federations under the ongoing project is likely to remain so during the additional financing. No adverse long term 
social impacts are envisaged from the AF interventions and investments. The potential long-term positive impacts are 
expected to be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the poorest households, especially of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women. The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, 
security and sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes. The project villages would most 
likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in 
claiming their rights and entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes. Gender 
relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and confidence to voice their needs and 
priorities in both the public and private spheres. Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are 
expected to be much more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Since this is an additional financing aiming to scale up successful interventions, no analysis of alternatives was 
undertaken. However, based on implementation experience during the ongoing project, the safeguards strategy will 
continue to mainstream the environmental best practices into the Package of Practices (PoP) of the livelihood 
activities (e.g.: stall feeding in goatary, non-chemical pest control measures in agriculture). In addition, Promotion of 
alternate green solutions like use of renewable energy, Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture are planned 
during the additional financing. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken during the ongoing project for addressing safeguard policies issues will continue throughout the 
implementation of the additional financing. EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would 
apply to all the clusters in the project and appropriate capacity building support for compliance with regulations and 
awareness building on better environmental practices in livelihood activities would be provided. Efforts will be made 
to develop and apply a sustainability index for funding potential activities through the dedicated fund. The index will 
be based on the principles of resource efficiency, minimal adverse impacts and post-investment support continuation 
of the livelihood. An assessment of the EMF in select states was undertaken during the ongoing project .There is mixed 
experience in terms of borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures required for addressing safeguards 
issues. Most of the states (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan) have had previous experience 
in implementing livelihood projects and other states have also implemented EMF and SMF under NRETP (NRLP AF). 
States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects as well as NRETP (NRLP AF) have a higher 



 

level of readiness and competency to implement the EMF. Some of these states (e.g. Bihar) have implemented the 
green solutions at a considerable scale. The above findings from these assessments are being incorporated into the 
updated EMF To streamline these capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will have the Livelihood Specialists as the anchor person for EMF to 
support and monitor the implementation in the participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit 
(SMMU) of the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level 
(Livelihood Managers), district levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to streamline the EMF 
requirements at all levels. The Technical Partners on different value chains will be taken on board for integration of 
the best practices and regulatory requirements into the Package of Practices and Capacity Building programs. The 
NRETP (NRLP AF) social management framework (SMF), including OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes), 
will continue to apply to the AF. The SMF comprises strategies for targeting and inclusion of scheduled castes and 
schedule tribe groups/areas, consultation and participation, gender & women’s economic empowerment, citizen’s 
engagement, grievance redress and safeguard screening/mitigation planning for community projects involving 
land/infrastructure. The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key requirements 
of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to free, prior and informed consultations and broad community support. The SMF 
includes specific provisions for informed consultations, participation and inclusion of the SC/ST and other excluded 
households, with a special focus on tribal people. The SMF also provides for institutional arrangements and capacity 
building activities of project staff, community institutions and partner agencies. Community projects involving 
productive infrastructure and land donation would follow consultative, transparent and voluntary procedures. MORD 
and the 13 SRLMs have implemented the SMF and its constituent strategies with varying levels of intensity and quality 
in the ongoing NRLP satisfactorily. Under the NRETP (NRLP AF), the capacities and performance of the social 
development staff and partners would be strengthened through a range of measures. NRETP (NRLP AF) aims to 
intensify interventions, financing & technical support for high value agriculture, rural value chains, skills and 
enterprises, producer organizations, innovative livelihood approaches, digital financial inclusion as well as productive 
infrastructure for post-production processes and value addition. Technical Assistance will also be provided to 
convergence (Mission Antoyodaya). Partnerships with technical resource agencies from private and non-profit and 
public sector will be strengthened. Increased investments in high value agriculture, enterprises, productive 
infrastructure and financing of producer organizations would need more explicit criteria for inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing as well as social safeguard screening to minimize elite capture and social exclusion. 
Dedicated HR and Capacity building program on socially inclusive and gendered value chains/enterprises, social 
safeguard screening and risk mitigation and social sustainability will be supported to ensure satisfactory social 
performance of project counterparts. To respond to these focus areas in the AF, MORD has updated the existing SMF 
especially with respect to social inclusion protocols, social safeguard screening mechanisms and inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing criteria for financing of producer organizations and productive infrastructure. Additional 
measures on staffing, capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge programs as well as citizen engagement and 
grievance redressal would be implemented. The results framework will continue to track and report on gender, 
inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. NRETP (NRLP AF) will significantly advance the 
gender mainstreaming and women’s economic empowerment agenda through strategies/specific interventions on 
women led producer organizations and enterprises, Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) and upgrading 
of skills in selected self-employment occupations for women SHG members and youth. Interventions on digital 
payments, financial inclusion/literacy, Business Correspondents (BC) and enterprise financing will lead to significant 
financial empowerment of rural women. Support to Mission Antoyodaya will strengthen women’s advocacy and 
agency in delivery of social safety net and entitlement services for the rural poor. Nutrition sensitive agriculture and 
interventions on food handling and hygiene will benefit the women disproportionately. The results framework will 
continue to track and report on gender, inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. Client 
has also been organizing regular reviews and lesson learning events on the gender, social inclusion and vulnerability 



reduction dimensions of the SMF. A discrete stocktaking review was undertaken at Midterm stage of the project. 
Overall the project has been performing satisfactorily on mobilsation, inclusion and financial and economic 
empowerment of women and marginalization communities particularly tribals and SC households. SMF 
implementation and reporting would need to improve further on safeguards, GRM and benefit sharing dimensions of 
productive infrastructure and economic clusters. As described above, these are the aspects that are being updated in 
the SMF  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the SHG members, groups and federations of rural poor in the 
project districts, technical partners, relevant government departments etc. The existing safeguards arrangements will 
continue to apply. If required, the existing EMF document will be updated based on a short field assessment and 
would be disclosed in English and the local language (Hindi) on the websites of the NMMU, State Departments of Rural 
Development and on the Bank’s InfoShop. The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and non-governmental 
organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder 
consultations to inform the design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following field consultations were also 
held.  
 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
Guangxi Poverty Reduction Project (P163138) 

 

 Project Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2018 | Report No: PIDA155787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

China P163138 Guangxi Poverty 
Reduction Program for 
Results 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC 23-Apr-2018 28-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
CHINA 

Guangxi Poverty Alleciation Office, Guangxi 
Agriculture Department 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The program development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty 
Reduction Program (CPRP) in the Targeted Counties. 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 5,129.00 

Total Operation Cost 400.00 

Total Program Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
      

 
B. Introduction and Context 

 


Country Context   
China’s success in reducing extreme poverty since the economic reform period is widely recognized as an 
event of global significance. Based on the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day (expressed in 2011 
purchasing power parity), the World Bank estimates that the incidence of poverty in China declined from 
877.8 million in 1981 to 87.4 million in 2012 (or from 88.3 percent to 6.5 percent of the total population).  
These World Bank estimates indicate that about 790 million Chinese escaped poverty during this period, 
representing about 72 percent of global poverty reduction. These estimates of declining poverty have 
been matched by broad-based improvements in nutritional status, educational attainment, longevity and 
other health outcomes, as well as other indicators of well-being. In fact, China was the first country to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the number of people living in poverty by 
2015, and it did it ahead of schedule. This highlights the country’s leading role in global poverty reduction. 
 
In its Thirteenth Five Year Plan (13th 5YP), Chinese government made an ambitious commitment to 
eliminating rural poverty by 2020, ten years before the WBG’s target of 2030. The Plan includes an explicit 
poverty eradication goal: “All rural residents falling below China’s current poverty line will be able to lift 
themselves out of poverty” and underlines the importance of focusing poverty efforts: “We will identify 
and register those living in poverty throughout the country …(and) will strengthen dynamic statistical 
monitoring of these populations….”. Poverty eradication in China refers not only to help people earn more 
than a minimum income threshold, but also have access to basic goods and services. Consequently, the 
plan includes a list of anti-poverty programs in eight fields: locally viable industries, labor services, finance, 
relocation from inhospitable areas, transportation, ecological conservation, education, health care and 
social security. 
 
The Chinese government has established a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to achieve the goals 
of the 13th 5YP. Central to this strategy are two institutional innovations which have the potential to 
provide important global lessons to other countries. The first is accurately targeting poverty households, 
villages and counties with the establishment of the National Poverty Registration System (NPRS).  The 
NPRS, established in 2013, is a census of all poor people and villages in China which timely tracks a wide 
range of detailed data about the characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The first is 
accurately targeting poverty households and villages through the establishment of the National Poverty 
Registration System in 2013.  The NPRS is a census of poor villages and people in China (about 70 million 
at its inception), which timely tracks characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The 
database is closely integrated into the reporting, prioritization, and accountability lines running upward 
from the village, county, region, and national levels. It provides critical information from the annual 
assessments of which households or villages have exited poverty, are at risk of falling back into poverty, 
or face challenges exiting from poverty. It thus plays a key role in both the identification of the remaining 
poor and the monitoring of programs to eradicate poverty.  
 
Secondly, since 2016, China has introduced the concept of decentralization of poverty reduction efforts 
with the aim to empower county governments to achieve their poverty targets. It consolidates large 
number of earmarked poverty reduction funds into a program-based budgeting system tailored to local 
context. and hold local governments accountable for achieving their poverty reduction targets. It works 
through consolidation of dozens of rural and agricultural earmarked funds which county governments are 
now authorized to use to develop a poverty reduction program tailored to local context.  The designated 
poverty counties have now been put fully in the driver’s seat for achieving poverty reduction goals. 



 

Nevertheless, the program development and implementation remains to be a great challenge for the 
county governments, as little technical guidance and support is provided to them from higher authorities.   
 
The proposed Program for Results operation (PforR) enhances these institutional advancements through 
connecting planned activities more closely to poor households and villages in the NPRS database, and 
aligns fiscal inputs with results by introducing improved planning, budgeting and monitoring systems for 
poverty programs in Guangxi. It also aims to help to improve the monitoring of poverty reduction 
programs in one of the most impoverished regions of the country. The lessons from adopting these 
innovations in Guangxi can serve as learning experience to similar complex settings in the rest of the world 
and will help the WBG in supporting other countries eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context  

Guangxi poverty reduction program is a continuing success, which is supported by strong government 
leadership, substantial and increasing funding, and broad assistance from society. In the areas of more 
intense poverty, it has brought about 18 percent annual reduction in rural poverty from 4.68 million poor 
in 2013 to 2.61 million poor in 2016.  However, Guangxi is still one of the 10 provinces in China with rural 
poverty rates above the 7 percent and, given its population size, is one of the six provinces with more than 
3 million rural poor (as of 2016), partly due to low soil fertility in the karst mountain areas and low levels 
of infrastructure and connectivity to other regions in China.   Moreover, as of 2013, the poor in Guangxi 
represented approximately 0.8 percent of the global poor. In this regard, helping the region to achieve its 
poverty eradication goal, would have a noticeable contribution to global poverty eradication. 
 
The Guangxi 5YP aims at achieving poverty eradication not only through households having a regular 
source of income above the minimum poverty threshold, but also in terms of access to housing, basic 
health care, compulsory education, appropriate roads to villages, safe drinking water, access to electricity 
and access to telecommunications. This is akin to a multi-dimensional definition of poverty, and is defined 
in Guangxi as the 8+1 “haves”. Despite of rapid poverty reduction in recent years, projections indicate 
that, to achieve poverty eradication, poverty reduction rates for the period 2016-2020 will have to be 
faster than the ones experienced in 2013-2016. Analysis of data indicates that poverty reduction is closely 
linked to rural net incomes, and that agricultural activity is the main driver of growing rural incomes. 
Moreover, data from the NPRS shows that when asked about the main cause poverty, lack of income was 
the cause mentioned more often by interviewees. Nevertheless, in some counties, other gaps such as lack 
of access to roads or safe drinking water can be the significant cause of poverty. 
 
Mountainous areas of Guangxi are exposed to extreme events, such as heavy rains and floods and to a 
lesser extent longer dry spells on a seasonal basis, as well as climate variability. In addition, Guangxi is also 
classified with high river flood risks and with medium water scarcity risk, especially in karst mountain areas 
where majority of the rural poor are located.  Areas with medium water scarcity could potentially 
transition to more adverse condition with climate-induced drought, affecting crops and/or resulting in 
agriculture competing with drinking water requirements. Mountainous conditions combined with average 
annual rainfall of 1,500-2,000 mm could result in floods and landslides, which could cause damages to 
rural roads.  Guangxi’s present hazard level may increase in the future due to the effects of potential 
climate change. For example, rainfall intensity (which is already above the national average) is expected 
to increase across a range of climate scenarios (Ying et al, 2014 and Wang et al 2015, respectively).  
Knowledge about, and adoption of, climate resilient and climate smart agronomic practices and 



technologies among Guangxi farmers and farmer cooperatives needs to be strengthened to address these 
climate change vulnerability issues in rural areas.   
 

PforR Program Scope  
Guangxi 13th 5-Year Plan (5YP), sets a target of lifting all rural people out of poverty by 2020. Specifically, 
the 5YP sets its main goals to lift: (i) all 4.52 million registered rural poor people out of poverty (end-2015 
figure); (ii) some 5,000 remaining poor villages out of poverty status; and (iii) 54 poverty counties out of 
poverty status. Guangxi Rural Poverty Reduction Program (GRPRP) is summarized in the document: 
“Guangxi Tackling Poverty Thirteen Five Year Plan”, issued in December 2016. It defines the poverty 
reduction strategy for the region to achieve the poverty eradication objectives of the National 13th 5YP. 
 
Within the GRPRP lies the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program (CPRP). The CPRP represents 
a sub-set of the GRPRP in the following ways: (i) it covers 54 designated national and provincial level 
poverty counties; (ii) over 40 earmarked funds from national, regional, municipality and county sources 
are pooled together to constitute the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF); (iii) expenditures are 
prioritized by the counties in conformance with the 13th 5YP Poverty Reduction Plan priorities; and (iv) 
program activities are targeted at poverty households and villages identified in the national poverty 
registration system. At the heart of the CPRP’s more integrated and locally-driven approach is an annual 
mechanism of bottom-up budgeting in the designated poor counties for meeting their poverty reduction 
targets, coupled with transparent and accountable financing, monitoring and evaluation support from 
higher levels of government. 
 
The proposed PforR will support a sub-set of the activities, funded under CPRF with some exclusions and 
in a circumscribed geographic area. Moreover, the proposed PforR will also support enhanced 
expenditure monitoring efforts that the region will be able to report on budget allocation and execution 
by its major subprograms.  
 
The timeline of the proposed PforR is 2018 – 2021, which are the remaining years of the 13th 5YP, and 
one additional year for verifying results.  
 
The geographic boundary of the proposed PforR is circumscribed to 28 selected counties out of 54 poverty 
designated counties. The subset of 28 counties have high poverty rates (above 11 percent) or large 
poverty headcounts (above 60,000) and is representative of the rural poor in Guangxi. As of 2016, the 
selected 28 counties account for 12.6 million rural population (some 30 percent of rural population); and 
for 1.8 million rural poor, approximately 52.5 percent of the rural poor in the region. Moreover, the 
selected counties are diverse in several dimensions. Most of them are located in mountain areas -usually 
associated with high poverty rates- and a few in the river plains at the center of the region. Among the 28 
counties, there are 20 so called “deep poverty” counties, with poverty incidence rate of about 18 percent 
in 2016. There are also 9 autonomous counties (which sit specific ethnic minorities) and the proportion of 
ethnic minorities among the poor is 67.6 percent, slightly higher than in non-selected counties, 63.9 
percent. The age and gender distribution is like in the rest of the poverty-stricken counties in the region 
(i.e., lower share of adult females and higher share of elderly than the region’s average). 
To ensure the sharper focus on achieving the Government 2020 poverty reduction targets, the Result 
Areas (RAs) of the proposed PforR cover a key subset of the Government program activities, which are to 
the extent feasible, aligned with the government’s own targets. The RAs were selected considering that 
they: (i) make a strong contribution to achieving the government’s 2020 poverty alleviation targets; (ii) 

must be linked to specific measurable results; (iii) provide “value added” in terms of interventions that 
are innovative, scalable or expand upon on-going and planned piloted initiatives; and (iv) incentivize 
behavioral changes.  
 
Results Area 1: Improved Income Generation for Rural Poor. The goal is to increase the direct impact of 
the CPRP on the incomes of the targeted poor households through enabling rural poor to engage in 
agriculture-related economic activities and skills development. The proposed PforR would encourage: (i) 
increased allocation of the CPRF funding towards development of farmers cooperatives and poverty 
reduction leading enterprises; (ii) enhance institutional mechanisms associated with these two programs 
for improved poverty targeting and fund-use efficiency through introducing poverty reduction 
accreditation mechanisms for the enterprises and improved operational and governance standards and 
poverty targeting of farmer cooperatives; and (iii) significantly scale selected vocational skill training 
activities, and improving poverty and gender targeting of these programs.  
 
Results Area 2: Improved Infrastructure for Rural Poor. This results area supports the delivery of basic 
rural infrastructure for the designated poor villages in the targeted poverty counties under the CPRP 
funding arrangements. The goal is to ensure that the registered poor households have access to adequate 
rural drinking water supply and rural roads, which are required to meet Guangxi eight plus one "haves", 
multi-dimensional poverty eradication criteria needed to graduate households from poverty. The types of 
measures to be supported under the PforR include drinking water supply and rural roads. In addition, the 
proposed PforR would strengthen Guangxi infrastructure project management capacity with an aim to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CPRF expenditures, and thus their poverty reduction impact 
through developing and adopting an IT-based pipeline project management system.   
 
Results Area 3: Cross-cutting Issues for Enhanced Program Implementation.  This Result Area supports 
the improvement of institutional arrangements and capacity through the introduction of poverty 
reduction program budgeting and enhanced monitoring and evaluation systems, with an aim to enable 
the governments to better align budget allocation with the expected output/outcomes and timely 
monitor the progress, efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation. The key activities are 
clustered around two themes: (i) enhancement of the CPRF program-based budgeting systems; and (ii) 
strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of poverty reduction activities. 

 
C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  

 
Program Development Objective(s)  

The proposed PforR development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi 
Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the targeted counties.   

 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) finds that, in general, the existing legal and 
regulatory framework of environmental, health and safety, and social in China, and in Guangxi are 
consistent with the World Bank’s PforR Policy and Directive. During the PforR preparation, initial 
environmental and social screening was conducted based on the whole 13th 5YP in order to provide 
insights for the definition of the PforR boundary. Activities with potential significant adverse 



environmental and social impacts were excluded from the PforR boundary. These include ecological 
resettlement, major infrastructure construction projects (i.e. class 4 and higher roads), extractive 
activities, disaster relief and preparedness, and returning farmlands to forests. In addition, there are some 
activities subject to limitations, such as rural tourism development, which is limited to guest rooms, 
catering and agri-tourism, without involving physical cultural resources. In addition, the PforR excludes 
any activity subject to EIA Report, especially those located in natural forests; in or near physical cultural 
resources at/above county level; or in or near significant natural habitats. 
 
Some activities supported under the PforR may have potential negative impacts or risks. Pest 
management and livestock waste management are considered the main issues from an environment, 
health and safety perspective. Guangxi is promoting livestock farms to be established and run by farmers’ 
cooperatives under the context of poverty reduction. Livestock waste management is handled by 
individual farmers, who often have inadequate capacity of livestock raising. The ESSA thus recommends 
enhancing the technical capacity of staff in county livestock bureau and enhance technical training and 
support to farmers (PAP action). The current pest management system is aligned with the international 
good practices. The key aspects in the pest management system, such as mandatory system for 
production and sales permits for pesticides, pest disease monitoring and forecasting, and trainings for 
farmers, are satisfactorily performed by relevant institutions. 
 
The assessment of social risks of the activities to be supported under the PforR, concluded that there 
would not be significant social conflicts caused by its activities. However, the PforR would have limited 
social risks in terms of land acquisition or voluntary land donations and land transfers, effective 
participation and consultation, and grievance redress mechanism. The ESSA recommends developing a 
community participation and consultation manual, which will be the PAP action. 
 
OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities could potentially involve water 
extraction for rural water supply systems and irrigation from the Pearl River Basin, which is regarded as 
an international waterway, as certain tributaries of the basin originate or flow through Vietnam.  
 
Consultations and information disclosure. Between November 2017 and January 2018, meetings were 
held with representatives from Guangxi region, and three counties government institutions to discuss 
policies and procedures on land acquisition and resettlement, land use right transfer, ethnic minority 
development, among others. Formal public consultation meetings were held during April 14-15, 2018, in 
Nanning and in Du’An county. An electronic copy of the draft ESSA report was uploaded on Guangxi 
government official website and hardcopies were made available together with the consultation 
announcement to key stakeholders prior to formal consultations. 
 

E. Financing 
 

Program Financing 
 

Source 
Amount 

(US$ Million) 
% of Total 

Government 
5.13 93 




IBRD 
0.40 7 

Total 
5.53 100 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 
 

 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uzbekistan P164226 Additional Financing - 
Horticulture Development 
Project 

P133703 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Horticulture Development Project EUROPE AND CENTRAL 
ASIA 

28-Nov-2017 25-Jan-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

Republic of Uzbekistan Rural Restructuring 
Agency 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
 
Components 

Agricultural Support Services 
Access to Credit 
Project Management 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 

 

FIN_SRC_TBL 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower 17.98  

Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 25.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 500.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 98.14  

Total Project Cost  641.12  
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Uzbekistan is gradually moving away from a state driven development model towards a more diversified and 
private sector led economy. This structural change – which has accelerated significantly in the past year – is 
also taking place within the context of significant macroeconomic policy shifts, the most prominent of which 
has been the recent move towards greater currency convertibility and a significant devaluation in September 
2017. These developments play a strong role in shaping the country’s development agenda going forward. 
 
Agriculture continues to play an important part in Uzbekistan’s economy and in 2016 accounted for 17 percent 
of GDP, 15 percent of export revenues, and over one-third of employment. As noted in the May 2016 
Systematic Country Diagnostic, the agriculture sector can produce significant results in terms of economic 
growth and employment in the medium-term and diversification of outputs and exports have considerable 
space to expand.  
 
Horticulture plays an important role promoting a gradual shift away from the traditional crops (cotton and 
wheat) and public intervention towards a more liberal and diversified agricultural sector. Agriculture value 
added has grown at an average annual rate of 6.5 percent since 2003 and the strongest growth has come from 
crops other than wheat and cotton. With a growing domestic and export market, the area devoted to 
horticulture has increased steadily, primarily by displacing land used to grow cotton. The economic impact of 
the fruit and vegetables subsector is also large, accounting for 50 percent of the value of crop output and over 
35 percent of agriculture export value. Despite delayed returns and higher investment costs, horticultural 
crops generate revenues to farmers significantly higher than wheat and cotton.  The horticulture sector 
provides an important source of all-season jobs in rural areas and is a significant employer of women.   
 
The proposed Additional Financing will also contribute to Uzbekistan’s accelerating reform agenda, which is 
creating rapid structural change. Structural reforms will create both opportunities and risks – exchange rate 
depreciation has created a clear opportunity to expand exports. Price liberalization is also expected to 
contribute to the development of more competitive industries and a diversified economy. At the same time, 
the negative impacts of reform could include job losses in inefficient industries and lower overall growth while 
the economy adjusts. Significant fiscal resources may also be required to maintain currency reserves and 
address financial risks in state-owned enterprises and the banking sector. In this context, additional 
investment to increase private sector participation in the economy and finance sectors with the potential for 
growth and job creation can be an important element to mitigate the costs of structural transition. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The Horticulture Development Project (HDP) is part of a portfolio of agricultural investments aimed at 
diversifying agriculture into higher value crops, intensifying agricultural yields and productivity, and fostering 



greater and better rural jobs. Approved in June 2014, HDP focused on addressing several constraints facing the 
horticulture sector: (i) improving access to technologies, knowledge and markets; (ii) strengthening technical 
and managerial capacity in the farming and agri-business sectors; and (iii) introducing new financial products. 
The design of HDP drew on the implementation experience of the Rural Enterprise Support Program (RESP), 
which established a successful model for long term agricultural finance through private and state owned 
banks.  
HDP’s primary project beneficiaries are farmers, farmer groups, private enterprises, agro-firms, and agro-
processing enterprises, involved in the country’s horticultural sub-sector. Secondary beneficiaries are the 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) through improved skills and acquisition of a more diverse menu of 
suitably adapted financial products; and the national network of private growers through training and 
technical assistance. At the same time, the project was designed to support the growth and development of 
small and medium enterprises in the rural areas, creating more and better paying jobs in the agro-processing, 
trading and export sectors, and increasing the value added of the agricultural sector. 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the productivity and profitability of the horticulture 
sector in the project area. The project has three components: Component 1 (Agricultural Support Services); 
Component 2 (Access to Credit); and Component 3 (Project Management). The original Project IBRD Loan in 
the amount of US$150 million was approved by the Board of Directors on June 12, 2014 and became effective 
on October 5, 2015.  The project was restructured in 2016 to accommodate new co-financing for HDP through 
a technical assistance program by the European Union (EU). This grant will total Euro $21.0 million and replace 
IBRD financing for Component 1.   
 
To date, 92 percent of the loan (US$137.9 million) has been disbursed primarily under Component 2. Thus, 
during the first two years of implementation 97 percent of funding for the second component was disbursed 
to finance 223 sub-loans.  
 
The rapid rate of disbursement of the project’s Access to Credit Component demonstrates the significant 
demand for credit in the horticulture sector. This was anticipated, given the RESP experience, the sector 
analysis, and expressions of interest by potential PFIs. The PFIs have a pipeline of sub-project beneficiaries 
that meet the criteria in the HDP Credit Guidelines. In view of rapid credit line disbursement and significant 
unmet demand for investment in the agribusiness sector, the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan has 
submitted a request to the World Bank for an additional loan to scale-up the investment and working capital 
sub-loans and lease financing activities. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Original PDO  
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
Current PDO  

 



 

No change is proposed to the PDO, which will remain “to enhance the productivity and profitability of 

horticulture sector in the project area”.  The project area, however, will be expanded to all thirteen regions 

(full coverage of the country) and the closing date is proposed to be extended a further two years to 2023.  

 
Key Results 
 

PDO level results will continue to measure changes in productivity and agribusiness performance levels and 

have been adjusted to accommodate the scale up within the project. Some intermediate results indicators 

have been adjusted to reflect the increase in the volume of credit and scale out to additional beneficiaries. 

Adjustments have also been made to Component 1 indicators and technical assistance related activities.  

 
Project performance has demonstrated solid achievements and the additional financing will build on positive 
results. A preliminary beneficiary survey was carried out in July and August 2017 among fifty-five randomly 
sampled HDP beneficiaries. The survey found:  

 

 Strong job creation, with the number of permanent jobs within HDP financed enterprises increasing 
on average 78 percent after the enterprise received sub-project financing. Of these new jobs, more 
women were hired than men, with sub-loan beneficiaries reporting a doubling in permanent jobs 
held by women.  

 Enterprise sales increased on average 281 percent and enterprise profits 250 percent.  

 Increased exports with a 10 percentage point (from five to 15 percent) increase in exports after 
receiving HDP support. Several beneficiaries reported entry into entirely new export markets 
(Turkey, Ukraine, India, Great Britain, Malaysia, Turkmenistan) 

 Adoption of new crops, varieties or agronomic practices, with 15 percent of HDP loan recipients 
introducing new crops or new crop production systems.  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

 
The project design will maintain the same three components with the additional financing supporting the 
scaling-up of the original project’s credit line for loans and leases under Component 2 - Access to Credit. This 
component will continue to focus on improving access to financial services for farmers and agribusinesses and 
will support additional financing for the purchase of new cultivars, seeds/seedlings, water-saving irrigation 
facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities, and value added 
handling/processing equipment and facilities.  
 
The institutional arrangements will remain the same. The environmental safeguards category will remain “B.” 
The results monitoring framework has been revised to reflect the additional credit, introduce new sector 
indicators, and revise some target values given changes in circumstances both within and outside of the 
project. 

 
E. Implementation 
 


Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

Overall responsibility for implementation continues to rest with the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA). The 
RRA is a specialized organization that was created for implementing investment projects in the agriculture and 
rural sector. The additional financing will use the same on-lending modality to channel resources through PFIs 
on the same lending terms and conditions used under the parent HDP. Under the original HDP, nine banks 
have been qualified as PFIs and it expected that additional banks will apply under the proposed additional 
financing. The same due diligence process will be followed new PFIs as were used in the parent HDP. Terms 
and conditions of the credit line and the associated credit line guidelines will remain largely the same with 
minor adjustments. 

 

 
  

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project activities under the first component will take place as planned under the original project within the 
fields and laboratories of participating research institutes and on farm demonstrations among participating 
producers. Under the second component, the sub-projects to be supported by the Credit Line will be based 
on demand for proposed activities. Project activities will now be implemented in all 13 provinces of the 
country, expanding the project area from the original eight provinces. The main physical characteristics of 
the new provinces are as follows: (1) Bukhara province is primarily desert plain. Water resources are limited 
and agricultural production is reliant on the Zarafshan and the Amudarya rivers. The Amu-Bukhara and 
Amu-Karakul machine canals draw water from the Amudarya for the irrigated oasis located in the south 
(Gijduvan, Bukhara and Karakul). Horticulture activities are primarily located in these irrigated oasis. (2) 
Karakalpakstan includes the southern half of the Aral Sea, where significant ecological change is occurring. A 
new salt marsh desert Aralkum is being formed due to the drying out of the Aral Sea and the lower reaches 
of the Amudarya River are drying up. The desert occupies more than 13.67 million hectares (more than 80 
percent of the territory). Horticulture production is limited but does occur in irrigated areas. (3) Navoi 
province is occupied by the Kyzylkum plateau in the northwestern part of the region, the Nurata mountain 
ranges in the east, and the Zerafshan River in the south. The climate is continental, deserted, and arid. 
Horticulture production is widespread within the region with a number of processors and exporters located 
in the region. (4) Syrdarya province is located in the center on the west side of the Syr Darya river and 
immediately west of Tashkent province. The steppe occupies part of the region and the south-eastern part 
of the region is vulnerable to crop damaging dry winds and dust storms in the summer. Horticulture 
production is widespread within the province, although concentrated in higher rainfall areas. (5) 
Surkhandarya province is located in the extreme south east with flat areas in the central and southern parts 
of the region and mountains in the north, west and north-west. The climate ranges from the dry desert in 
the south, to the sub-tropical in the north (Uzun). Horticulture production is widespread in the river valley 
and the central zones of the region. 

 
 

G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nina Kolybashkina, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The OP is triggered as the proposed project activities 
and subproject that would be supported under 
credit line, could generate a series of adverse 
impacts. Category A-type subprojects are excluded 
by the project. To address other activities the client 
has updated the parent Environment and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF) which will guide the 
EA process during the project implementation. The 
updated ESMF takes into consideration the new 
geographic locations and, in particular, the scaling-
up credit line resources and the needs for further EA 
institutional capacity building. In this regard under 
the Project AF, the RRA will hire additional 
Environmental Specialists in all participating oblasts, 
where regional RRA PIUs will be established. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria to be applied 
to exclude any projects that could have an impact on 
natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on forests, 
rights of forest communities or traditional uses of 
forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

As in the case of agricultural production or agro-
processing sub-projects, there might be needed pest 
management activities if this OP is triggered. The 
ESMF has a special section specifying provisions for 
preparation of simple pest/pesticide management 
plans as part of the application process and 
supporting IPM. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on physical 
cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No This OP is not applied in the country 



 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project will support construction of new 
buildings and processing, and cold storage facilities 
only in the case when land acquisition is not 
necessary and when people have not been displaced 
prior to the application for purposes of the proposed 
subproject and there are no resettlement issues. For 
such cases the investor should have the 
landownership title as well as proof that the land at 
the moment of subprojects application is not 
occupied or used illegally. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not support activities which are 
dependent on an existing dam (e.g. irrigation works). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

Any credit investments would be limited to 
rehabilitation or modification of existing minor 
schemes in ways which would not increase the 
amount of water abstracted or have any other 
impact on the water source or local hydrological 
regime (e.g. replacing conventional irrigation with 
drip irrigation in an existing irrigation scheme would 
be still eligible). Creating a new scheme which will 
lead to increasing water abstraction from the rivers 
will not be financed under the project. This 
determination would be made in the screening 
process. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project will not support any activities in disputed 
areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will maintain its category B classification and will not trigger any new safeguards policies. The scope and 
scale of the project’s activities will continue to be limited as they will occur through the project’s existing sub-project 
mechanism. As a result, the project’s safeguards issues can be addressed by application of the rules and procedures 
established under the HDP Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as by any implementing 
mitigation and monitoring measures stipulated in any site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs).  
 
Potential environmental impacts. The project will continue supporting various types of horticulture related production 
and processing sub-projects. Subprojects will remain limited in terms of spatial scale and take place through sub-
projects of limited duration and size. HDP’s credit line guidelines prohibit financing to category A sub-projects and as a 
result, no significant environmental impacts that fall under the Category A classification and for which a full 



 

 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) would be required are expected. Credit guidelines also prohibit selection of 
sub-projects located in protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas.  
 
A portion of sub-projects are expected, however, to show the potential for limited adverse environmental impacts 
that would fall under the Category B under Bank OP/BP 4.01. This is primarily due to activities related to small-scale 
agro-industries; small-scale rehabilitation, maintenance, and upgrading of various premises or storage facilities; and 
plantation of new orchards and/or vineyards.  The potential adverse environmental impacts of proposed types of sub-
projects can be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil 
compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: 
contribution to surface-water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation of 
the existing premises: soil and air pollution; acoustic, construction wastes, and potential asbestos issues, etc. All these 
impacts are expected to be easily mitigated through good project designs and best implementation practices. 
 
The sub-projects to be implemented under the Credit Line are also expected to generate a number of both direct and 
indirect positive impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased production, products and goods which 
would result in creation of new jobs and respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive 
impacts will relate to overall improving of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural technologies 
and techniques, contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.  
 
Potential social impacts. Issues related to the risks of child and forced labor in the cotton harvest have been a 
challenge in the agricultural sector in Uzbekistan and efforts to eliminate these practices have received high level 
support within Government. Production in the horticultural sector is significantly more labor intense than in cotton 
and wheat, the peaks of seasonal labor demands are more dispersed across various crops, and the profits are higher. 
To mitigate any residual risks of child and forced labor, and to ensure that the project contributes to improved labor 
relations and practices in the agricultural sector of the country, the project envisions continued close collaboration 
with the International Labor Organization (ILO). Starting from 2018, research activities to monitor labor relations in 
the horticultural sector and to provide recommendation for creating decent working conditions would be 
implemented jointly with the ILO.  The project will also participate in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of 
child and forced  adult labor. The TPM/GRM will be funded by a separate TF.  
  
Acquisition of land. As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and 
settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus, 
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical cultural 
resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources" is not triggered.  
    
 Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they have not acquired 
and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the project proceeds, through a process 
which involved and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support 
any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or 
economic users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of, or damage to, assets including 
standing crops, kiosks, fences and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be filled 
by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task 
team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement". 
 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
 
The cumulative negative impact of expanded horticultural production and processing is expected to be limited, 
particularly as expansion of the horticulture sector and successful implementation of sub-project activities are 
expected to lead to more efficient use of land and water resources compared to Uzbekistan’s current dominant 
commercial crop sector (cotton and wheat). The expected cumulative impacts are expected to be mostly positive and 
includes improved knowledge on best agricultural and manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the 
status of the environment in the country. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Project design includes a prohibition on category A sub-projects which is expected to prevent larger scale negative 
impacts.  A "no project" scenario was considered but would result in continuation to the the current structure of 
agricultural prodution, which is dominated by cotton and wheat, which also have specific negative evnrionmental and 
social impacts. 
 
To boost employment of women, and encourage access of female entrepreneurs to loans, the project will closely 
collaborate with the Women’s Committee of Uzbekistan and the Association of Business Women of Uzbekistan for 
policy level activities for mainstreaming gender in the sector, publicizing information about female role models, as 
well as providing targeted capacity building to female entrepreneurs to enable them to access funding through the 
project. 
 
The project will have explicit focus on targeting more vulnerable farmers, both directly and indirectly. To achieve 
indirect effects, eligibility criteria for sub-loans would also consider the social impact of the project, including direct 
job creation, the multiplier effects of supporting suppliers down the value chain, as well as contributions towards 
improving community infrastructure. Trainings for the PFIs on social responsibility of business and labor rights would 
be conducted, to ensure better screening. Through Additional Financing, a share of the project resources would also 
be ring-fenced to target smaller farmers and entrepreneurs directly. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguards instruments. The primary instrument for managing safeguards policy issues is the ESMF prepared for the 
initial HDP project and which remains valid for the additional financing to the project. The document has been 
updated for the AF to address the new geographic locations and any other relevant changes from the parent project, 
including in terms of Environmental Assessment  (EA) capacity building activities (see below). The ESMF document 
outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for first component’s activities and the 
sub-projects which is supported by the second component’s Credit Line and, it provides details on procedures, criteria 
and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring. The document also 
includes Environmental Guidelines and Best Practices for different types of proposed sub-projects providing analysis of 
potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
processing and storage and cooling manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, through the 
design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results.  Furthermore, the ESMF provides a 
monitoring plan format which considers monitoring indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all 
phases of the project's implementation.  
 
The project's original social assessment, prepared in 2014, was updated to cover the new regions, as well as provide a 



summary of more up to date analysis of the key issues. Issues related to labor rights and working conditions in 
horticulture sector, as well as access of women entrepreneurs to credit were flagged up. To address these, additional 
capacity building measures to be implemented in collaboration with the ILO, the Farmers Council and the Association 
of Business Women were designed for implementation under the additional financing. The project also participates in 
the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the 
agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of child and forced  adult labor. To date RRA has been found in 
compliance and the GRM is actively receiving and responding to inquiries, however no complaints issued thus far.  
 
Institutional capacity. The project will continue be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency 
(RRA), an institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF Climate Change 
and Land Degradation Project, and other donors' projects. The RRA's capacity for implementation of the ESMF and of 
the participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) are adequate, based on the Bank supervision missions in 2016-2017. 
All sub-projects have been subject to screening and assessment and for those classified as Category B separate 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) have been prepared. Supervision has confirmed these are being 
implemented in a satisfactory manner and no outstanding issues have been identified.   
 
Further capacity building is anticipated with respect to several technical asepcts of horticulture production, as 
identified during the initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management (IPM), soil and 
water conservation, including field demonstrations. New training on EA is also required for Participating Financial 
Intermediaries (PFIs) which should strengthen the ability of their representatives to identify potential environmental 
and social impacts as well as their knowledge on the EA rules and procedures. The revised ESMF proposes necessary 
activities in this regard.  
 
To accommodate the scaling up of activities for the project, it was agreed the RRA will hire additional Environmental 
Specialists in all participating oblasts, where regional PIUs will be established for all WB and other IFIs RRA projects will 
be implementing (including for Livestock Development Project which was recently approved by the Board). While the 
RRA ES will have the major coordinating role on EA, the PIU ESs will be responsible for assisting the PFIs in 
implementation of the Credit Component of the project, including reviewing environmental EIA studies and/or 
environmental management plans, monitoring their implementation, advising and guiding PFIs on specific 
environmental issues and management options and ensuring that potential cumulative impacts are addressed. One of 
the major area of their responsibility will be inspection of environmental compliance at worksites, ensuring the ESMP 
provisions are fully implemented. The PIUs ESs will advise PFIs in terms of integrating environmental requirements 
into bidding documents, and analyzing contracts and their implementation in terms of environmental management 
and mitigation issues. ESs will be responsible also for analyzing the environmental conditions of the subprojects’ area 
and identify main environmental parameters. On a quarterly basis PIUs ESs will prepare short reports on implementing 
ESMF and site specific ESMPs for supported sub-projects. They will also identify the status of environmental 
compliance of sub-projects implementation, and, when needed will undertake relevant measures and agree with the 
sub-project beneficiaries on corrective measures and/or proposing to the PFIs and RRA canceling sub-project 
financing. 
 
The project will also support a series of activities on human capacity building. This would include: (a) capacity building 
in collaboration with the ILO to increase compliance with national legislation and ILO conventions on child and forced 
labor, and broader labor issues, ratified by Uzbekistan; (b) training on strengthening project environmental 
management capacity for sub-projects environmental assessment; (c) training and information dissemination for sub-
project beneficiaries and farmers on several important horticulture sector development issues, identified during the 
initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management, soil and water conservation, 


including field demonstrations; and (d) training EA practitioners in the country that are working on preparing EA 
documents as well as familiarizing representatives from State Ecological Expertise on WB EA rules and procedures and 
proposing relevant recommendations on harmonizing the National EA requirements with the WB ones. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the initial project preparation RRA disclosed and consulted the ESMF with all interested stakeholders. This 
process involved submission of the draft summary of the ESMF to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources 
and other relevant ministries for their review and comments. The Executive Summary of the original document in 
Russian was posted on websites of MAWR for its access to the public on January 17th, 2014. On February 13, 2014, 
the RRA organized a consultation on the draft document. After the consultation, the draft ESMF was revised to 
consider inputs from consulted parties. The final version for the parent project was posted on the website of the 
Ministry of Agriculture on February 14, 2014 and submitted to the World Bank's external website on March 10, 2014. 
For the HDP AF the updated ESMF was posted by RRA on its website for further virtual public consultation in the 
provinces which have been already included in the parent project. Face to face public consultations with the 
participation of main stakeholders and farmers were organized in the new project provinces by RRA in October 2017. 
For that purpose RRA has provided to key stakeholders (oblast agriculture, environmental and sanitary authorities and 
environmental NGOs) hard copies of the draft ESMF.  During the consultations overall the draft ESMF was supported 
by the participants, the few received comments were related to clarifying the EA roles and responsibilities and  
simplifying the EA rules and procedures and providing awareness activities for the potential subprojects beneficiaries 
in this regard. The minutes of consultations have been shared with the Bank. 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 



























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BRAZIL 

 

 

 

PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND 
FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 

(BR-L1496) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BRAZIL 
PROGRAM TO MODERNIZE AND STRENGTHEN  

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY SERVICES (PRODEFESA) 
(BR-L1496) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Federative Republic of Brazil 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Federative Republic of Brazil, through the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (MAPA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital)(e) 195,000,000 97.5 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 5,000,000 2.5 Weighted average life (WAL): 15.25 years(d) 

Total 200,000,000 100.0 Approval currency: United States Dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objectives/description: The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and improve 
access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the country’s agricultural health services. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results (Components 1 and 2): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); 
(ii) creation of the program coordinating unit (PCU) and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) contracting of the 
consulting services responsible for external results verification, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed beforehand with 
the Bank (paragraph 3.6). 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): 
(i) approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.9); and 
(ii) creation of the PCU and appointment of its members (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual condition for execution of the technical cooperation loan (Component 3): signing and entry into force of 
the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) to conduct research activities and award postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(f) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(g) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule as well 

as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) The total Bank loan proceeds will be used to finance program implementation through the two investment loan instruments, namely: (i) results based 
(Components 1 and 2); and (ii) technical cooperation loan (Component 3), in accordance with this document. Component 4 will be funded by the local 
counterpart. Funding will be formalized through a single loan contract to be entered into between the borrower and the IDB, in accordance with the 
financial terms and conditions and the special contractual conditions envisaged in the project summary. 

(f) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(g) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and rationale 

1.1 The Government of Brazil has asked for support to finance a program to strengthen 
the Agricultural Health Services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and 
Supply (MAPA) combining a loan based on results (LBR) and a technical 
cooperation loan.  

1.2 Sector context. Brazil’s agricultural sector is extremely important to its economy, 
representing 22% of gross domestic product (Ribeiro et al., 2015),1 44% of exports, 
and 37% of employment. According to the 2006 Agricultural Census, agricultural 
activities take place on 5 million farms covering 850 million hectares. The sector has 
grown significantly in recent decades. From 1976 to 2011 the area under cultivation, 
output, and yield of cereals and oilseeds grew by 32%, 240%, and 257%, 
respectively (Pereira et al., 2012). Output also rose in the case of sugar (369%), 
chicken (from 1 million to 13 million tons), pork (from 1 million to 2.1 million tons), 
and beef (2.1 million to 9.1 million tons). This growth has continued in recent years, 
with an annual increase in value of output of 3.8% in 2001-2014 (USDA, 2018), and 
has been associated with significant improvements in productivity. Between 1986 
and 2016, the area devoted to cereal production shrank by 10%, while output rose 
by 95% (FAOStat, 2018). Beef farming productivity reached 49 kg per hectare, 
compared with 40 kg in Uruguay, 34 kg in Argentina, and 28 kg in Paraguay. The 
Brazilian agricultural sector’s total factor productivity growth is one of the highest in 
Latin America (Nin-Pratt, A. et al., 2015). 

1.3 Trade in agricultural products has benefited from the sector’s growth. Brazil went 
from importing 30% of food consumed in the 1960s to being the world’s third largest 
exporter of agricultural produce. It is the top producer of soy, coffee, sugar, orange 
juice, chicken, and ethanol, and the second largest producer of beef, maize, 
soybean oil and soybean flour, third largest producer of cotton, and fourth largest of 
pork. Agricultural exports in 2017 came to a value of US$96 billion. Meat exports 
between 2015 and 2017 were worth US$5.9 billion a year (Brazilian Association of 
Meat Exporters (ABIEC), 2018). 

1.4 Agricultural health. Protecting animal health is a public good and is one of the main 
functions of the public bodies concerned with agriculture (OVE, 2015). Their main 
functions are: epidemiological and plant health oversight; health barrier and 
quarantine controls; and control and eradication of diseases and pests. 

1.5 Empirical evidence shows that agricultural health has significant effects on 
agricultural productivity and market access, and in the case of zoonoses, can affect 
consumers’ health (IDB, 2016). Agricultural health system failures cause enormous 
economic losses through reduced productivity caused by pests and diseases, as 
well as restrictions on market access. For example, outbreaks of foot-and-mouth 
disease (FMD) in 2001 in the United Kingdom and Uruguay caused losses of over 
US$10 billion (Bates, 2016) and US$80 million (FAO, 2002), respectively; an 
outbreak of classical swine fever (CSF) in the Netherlands in 1997 caused losses of 
US$2.3 billion (Terpstra and de Smit, 2000); the epidemic of highly pathogenic avian 
influenza (HPAI) in the United States caused losses of US$500 million in 2013 

                                                
1  See Technical References. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-27


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
(USDA, 2016). The detection of the Mediterranean fruit fly in New Zealand led to a 
two-year stop on exports of kiwifruit to China (Kiwifruitvine, 2014). The United States 
has imposed restrictions on the import of agricultural produce from countries in which 
certain pests are present (such as a ban on citrus fruit and peppers from Guyana to 
avoid introducing the carambola fruit fly (Aphis 2015 and 2018)). 

1.6 Faced with these risks, there are two main reasons for investments in agricultural 
health services: (i) maintaining and raising productivity, respectively, by avoiding 
losses caused by new diseases and pests, and reducing the impact of existing ones; 
and (ii) facilitating foreign trade by complying with health and safety standards that 
enable access to external markets, which often offer higher prices than domestic 
markets.  

1.7 Although investments in agricultural health services do not entirely eliminate the risk 
of impacts on output from disease and pests, they are highly cost-effective. An 
evaluation by OVE (2015) of six agricultural health projects shows that disease 
control and eradication campaigns by agricultural health organizations were 
successful at reducing the impacts of disease and pests on output. Peru’s fruit-fly 
eradication program increased fruit production by 65% (Salazar et al., 2016). In 
1995, the USDA estimated the net benefit of controlling the carambola fruit fly in 
South America at US$800 million. 

1.8 International evidence also shows benefits for trade. In Uruguay, obtaining FMD-free 
status without vaccination in 1996 increased the value of meat exports to the 
United States by more than 50% and saved US$8 million a year in vaccines (Knight-
Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). On losing this status in 2001, exports 
fell by 40% from 2000 levels (Ilundain et al., 2004). The price of beef exports from 
FMD-free countries is 93% higher than those from countries affected by the disease 
(ICA and CID, 2008). 

1.9 Agricultural health in Brazil. The agricultural health situation in Brazil has made 
significant progress over the last decade, opening up access to new international 
markets, particularly for meat and fruit. For example, the World Organisation for 
Animal Health (OIE) declared Brazil FMD-free (with and without vaccination) in 
2018. However, the size of the country, its diversity of ecosystems, and the length 
of its land borders (17,000 kilometers) with ten countries, and the scale of its 
agricultural trade, result in major health risks and challenges. The emergence of 
outbreaks of diseases such as FMD or the spread of pests such as fruit flies to other 
regions could have immediate impacts on costs, exports, and jobs. For example, the 
appearance of FMD in the State of Mato Grosso do Sul in 2005 resulted in the death 
of 78,000 head of cattle, a 15% drop in meat prices, closure of access to markets in 
over 30 countries, and a 40% reduction in exports. Between 2012 and 2013 the 
appearance in Mato Grosso and Bahía of Helicoverpa armigera, a pest affecting 
cotton and soy, raised spending on pesticides by 10% and resulted in losses of 
US$800 million in 2013 alone (Pomari-Fernandes et al., 2015). 

1.10 Agricultural health services in Brazil. The country has a long history of agricultural 
health, with an old and fragmented legal framework, including 12 laws and over 
150 regulations. The decrees enacting the agricultural health services date back to 
1934. More recently, the Unified Agricultural Health System (SUASA) was created2 

                                                
2  Law 8,171 of 17 January 1991, regulated by Decree 5,741 of 30 March 2006. 



 - 3 - 
 
 

 
as a mechanism for involving the Federal government (MAPA), State governments 
(Agriculture Secretariats) and Municípios (Agriculture Secretariats). 

1.11 Within the MAPA, the Secretariat for Agricultural Protection (SDA) is responsible for 
agricultural health and food (and beverage) safety measures and for the quality of 
agricultural inputs. Its main responsibilities are: (i) agricultural oversight at airports 
and borders; (ii) issuing regulations on the control and eradication of pests and 
diseases; (iii) approval of diagnostic methods; (iv) drafting health regulations for the 
import and export of animals and plants, and their products and byproducts; 
(v) registration of plants and products; (vi) inspection of products of animal and plant 
origin and agricultural inputs; and (vii) auditing, supervision, evaluation, and 
coordination of state and municipio agricultural health activities. 

1.12 In 2016 the government drafted the Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) (MAPA, 
2016) defining the priorities for agricultural health policies. It has a ten-year horizon 
and six strategic pillars: (i) modernization and cutting red-tape, (ii) regulatory 
framework; (iii) knowledge and strategic intelligence; (iv) technical programs and 
projects; (v) sustainability of agricultural protection; and (vi) monitoring and 
evaluation. This operation aims to support implementation of the PDA over the next 
five years, focusing on the challenges in five of the six strategic pillars. 

1.13 “Modernization and cutting red tape” and “strengthening and modernizing the 
regulatory framework” strategic pillars. Their objective is to turn the Secretariat 
for Agricultural Protection (SDA) into an effective, efficient results-oriented 
organization by strengthening its main services. The program will support the 
following services:  

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). This comprises a network 
of six laboratories performing the diagnostic tests necessary to monitor 
compliance with health standards, verify product quality, and identify disease 
outbreaks. Assessments of the Lanagro show that they face various problems, 
operate in an uncoordinated way, lack standardization of processes and 
procedures for important tasks such as receiving samples or purchasing 
supplies, lack planning of demand for laboratory tests, and have little or no 
process automation. Thirty percent of diagnostic tests take longer than 
standard times and the sample rejection rate is high. For example, 17% of 
physical-chemical tests and products of animal origin and 11% of wastes and 
food contaminants are rejected (optional link 7).  

b. International health monitoring. The International Agricultural Monitoring 
System (Vigiagro) is responsible for controlling and monitoring imports, 
exports, and international transit of persons and goods through ports, airports, 
and border crossings. It is of strategic importance for the country: in 2017, 
1.5 million import and export cargo inspections were carried out. Inspections 
are characterized by a low level of computerization, automation, or process 
standardization, and the failure to apply risk analysis. This results in 
shortcomings in inspections (Furlan, 2013), and long wait times for cargo at 
ports and airports, generating costs for importers and exporters. Cargo release 
takes an average of 4.5 days, against a target of 3 days (European Union 
average) (optional link 8).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-34


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
c. Inspection, registration, and authorization. Health inspection and the 

issuance of authorizations for the import of live animals and animal products, 
inspection and authorization of beverage exports, and the registration of 
products of animal origin, are all performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner and in the presence of the interested parties. This results in processes 
that are slow and costly for the Agricultural Protection Secretariat (SDA) and 
for users. For example, registration of products of animal origin takes an 
average of 120 days, and inspection and authorization of beverage exports 
45 days (optional link 9). 

d. Regulatory good practices. The SDA is responsible for drafting and 
publishing regulatory acts concerning the management of agricultural health 
and the regulation of agricultural inputs and services, as well as products of 
animal and plant origin. Many of the regulations are out of date, do not conform 
to current technologies, and do not set clear limits of action and competencies 
(optional link 10). As a first step towards improving the management of 
standards, in 2015 the Manual of Regulatory Good Practices was approved, 
with a view to harmonizing regulatory activities. 

1.14 “Implementation and strengthening of priority technical programs and 
projects” strategic pillar. This includes 18 projects and programs, prioritizing six: 
(i) fruit fly control; (ii) border monitoring and protection; (iii) FMD eradication and 
prevention; (iv) eradication and control of brucellosis and tuberculosis; 
(v) eradication of classical swine fever (CSF); and (vi) modernization of laboratories. 
This operation will support three of these programs (FMD, CSF and carambola fruit 
fly) considering that: (i) FMD and CSF are the most critical livestock diseases for 
exports, as their mere presence prevents access to overseas markets, and their 
spread to other areas could have serious impacts on producers’ costs; (ii) there are 
synergies in the implementation of FMD and CSF control, as they are carried out by 
the same veterinary services; (iii) the carambola fruit fly may significantly reduce fruit 
exports if it spreads to fruit producing areas; and (iv) tuberculosis and brucellosis do 
not affect exports and are not considered endemic in Brazil, such that their 
eradication is not envisaged in the medium term. 

a. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). In May 2018, the OIE declared Brazil 
FMD-free with vaccination (the state of Santa Catarina is free without 
vaccination). Brazil currently has a Strategic Plan under the National FMD 
Eradication Program (PNEFA), covering the period 2017-2026, which 
envisages the entire country being free of the disease without vaccination as 
of 2023 (optional link 11). This change would allow the country to access new 
export markets and command better prices (Alves and Martins, 2014). Brazil 
has not had access to the highest paying meat markets for several decades 
(Japan, South Korea, Canada, and the United States) as they do not import 
from countries with FMD (Miranda, 2001). FMD is one of the most frequent 
causes of non-tariff barriers to exports of beef and pork (Junqueira et al., 2007). 
It has a direct negative impact on production and results in high control and 
eradication costs (US$220 million a year). Over the past ten years, FMD 
outbreaks caused losses of animals and falling prices (paragraph 1.9). 
Vaccination also results in lower productivity: 70% of livestock develops 
abscesses with an average of loss of 1.3 kg of meat in the affected area (Moura 
and Junqueira, 1999). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
b. Classical swine fever (CSF). In 2016, the OIE declared approximately half of 

the country by area, 84% of livestock, and almost the entire industry to be free 
of CSF. The CSF program aims to obtain a declaration of CSF-free status for 
the entire country (optional link 11). The presence of the disease is limited to 
the states in the north and north-east regions, where output is low and 
subsistence-oriented. Nevertheless, it affects the reliability of disease-free 
areas, and consequently their market access, as well as representing a risk of 
spread to states from which it has been eradicated (Freitas et al., 2007). It also 
affects productivity through a reduction in the number of piglets born and higher 
mortality rates (Zuge, 2018; ADAPEC, 2018). During an outbreak in 
Rio Grande do Sul in 1987 a mortality rate of 20% of live births was recorded, 
and mortality was also higher at other stages of production (Barcellos, 1992). 

c. Carambola fruit fly. The Carambola fruit fly (Bactrocera carambolae) was 
reported in Suriname in 1975 (Sauers-Muller, 1991), subsequently spreading 
to Guyana, French Guiana, and Brazil. It is currently present in three states in 
the north of Brazil (Amapá, Roraima, and Pará). The Carambola fruit fly can 
attack 75 species of plant, including mango, avocado, papaya, citrus fruit, 
guava, and carambola (star fruit). In Brazil it has been detected in a smaller 
number of species (Lemos et al., 2014) and it is the only fruit fly not currently 
affecting export production zones. The risk of spread by movements of people 
and goods is high, with potential losses estimated at $150 million a year due 
to export restrictions on the affected areas (optional link 12). The country is 
implementing an oversight and control program, with 7,774 fruit fly detection 
traps across the country, concentrated in the three states affected (7,284). In 
recent years the fly capture index in these three states has been brought down 
from 0.18 in 2013 to 0.02 in 2017.3 

1.15 Knowledge strengthening and strategic support strategic pillar. The 
Agricultural Protection Plan (PDA) and MAPA studies (optional link 13) show that 
the effectiveness of agricultural health services is affected by shortcomings in 
employee competencies, lack of intelligence tools to support decision-making, and 
inadequate research and knowledge generation. The PDA therefore proposes: 
(i) skills development; (ii) application of strategic intelligence; (iii) support for 
research and development; (iv) building and strengthening of the network of partner 
entities; (v) implementing an international exchange program; (vi) building a 
technology park; and (vii) harmonization and standardization of how risk analysis is 
used. The program will support six (items (i) to (vi)) of these seven lines of action. 

1.16 Monitoring and evaluation strategic pillar. This addresses the lack of automation 
in the monitoring and evaluation of agricultural health services and managing for 
results. According to MAPA reports (optional link 14), the use of inappropriate tools 
and the failure to set targets undermines activities focused on results and processes 
that need improvement. 

1.17 Climate change. There is a link between climate change and agricultural health, 
and interventions in this area are an important adaptation (Forman et al., 2008) and 
mitigation strategy (Stoot et al., 2010). Increases in temperature and changes in 
relative humidity cause changes in habitat that influence the emergence and spread 

                                                
3  The flies per trap per day (FTD) index measures the density of captured flies and is revised twice monthly. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-41


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
of plant and animal pathogens, requiring control strategies under changing 
environmental conditions (INIA, 2018). The main concern is the spread of pests and 
diseases to new areas (Cifuentes and Meza, 2008), with possible effects on access 
to international markets and increased inspection and treatment costs. The 
greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions reduction achievable through reduced and more 
efficient use of pesticides stands out, given that those used to tackle the carambola 
fruit fly are particularly carbon intensive (Lal, 2004). Moreover, evidence shows that 
improved animal health raises productivity and reduces livestock’s carbon footprint 
(Kenyon et al., 2013; Stott et al., 2010). The expansion of agricultural activities into 
forest areas has been the main source of GHG emissions in Brazil (FAO, 2016; 
Gouvello, 2010, Rivero et al., 2009). Increased productivity associated with lower 
rates of diseases such as FMD and CSF therefore helps reduce GHG emissions 
and ease the pressure on forest areas (MAPA, 2010; Embrapa, 2018, Arias et al., 
2017). 

1.18 In short, the operation is aligned with the MAPA’s strategic priorities, as formulated 
in its PDA. It will contribute via its five strategic pillars, which seek to modernize the 
SDA, cut red tape, strengthen the regulatory framework, generate knowledge and 
strategic intelligence, and implement priority technical projects, ensuring agricultural 
health services are sustainable by means of strong monitoring and evaluation 
systems. The aim of focusing on these priorities is to strengthen agricultural health 
to increase access to international markets and raise agricultural productivity 
(paragraph 1.12). 

1.19 Theory of change. The program’s theory of change is based on the same 
challenges identified by the MAPA, including restrictions on access to external 
markets and the potential loss of productivity caused by the existence of high 
economic impact diseases and pests (which also give rise to high control and 
eradication costs) and the low efficiency of the services monitoring and controlling 
the health of imports and exports. Institutional shortcomings in these services, such 
as low professional specialization and high turnover of technical staff, scant 
investment in research, and failure to use risk analysis in its operations, makes the 
MAPA unable to perform its agricultural health responsibilities effectively. 

1.20 Against this backdrop, Components 1 and 2 support the expansion of existing animal 
and plant health programs and initiatives to improve the efficiency of the main 
agricultural health services. For Component 1, the automation of agricultural health 
service processes (laboratories, Vigiagro, inspection, records and authorizations, 
good practices) will reduce processing times and increase service efficiency. For 
Component 2, priority disease and pest (carambola fruit fly, FMD, and CSF) control 
and eradication measures will enable current health status to be maintained and 
expanded. Component 3 will support institutional changes in the management of 
agricultural health, strengthening human resource capacities, and funding research 
into agricultural health. By means of studies and research, training in priority 
competencies, and studies to evaluate a technology park as a means of scientific 
integration between various institutions, it is anticipated that the availability and 
dissemination of relevant information and competencies for more efficient 
agricultural health services will be enhanced. Lastly, Component 4 supports the 
continuous monitoring of activities and managing for results. Over the long term, 
these improvements aim to raise the quality, reliability, and efficiency of international 
trade in Brazilian agricultural produce.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-26


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
1.21 The Bank’s experience. Between 2002 and 2014 the IDB approved 17 investment 

loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015). 
Drawing on these operations, those recently approved (Peru 4457/OC-PE, Uruguay 
3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 3864/OC-ME, 
totaling US$292 million), and the conclusions and recommendations of OVE (2015), 
the main lessons learned and how they have been incorporated into the design of 
the proposed operation are included in Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Incorporation of lessons learned 

Lesson learned Reflected in program design 

1. The decisions of the health services should be 
independent and based on purely scientific 
grounds, due to the nature of the threats they 
have to respond to and the need for credibility, 
locally and internationally. 

The program aims to enhance the scientific 
basis of the SDA to improve its management 

and decision-making capacity. 

2. Health control institutions require ongoing 
programs to update and train their officials. 

Measures are envisaged to improve the 
technical competencies of SDA staff. 

3. The private sector’s participation is essential to 
bolster the success of health programs. 

The private sector will be involved in the design 
of automation processes, disease control, and 
research and development. No private goods 
will be financed.  

4. Use of results indicators more readily 
attributable to projects.  

The results matrix incorporates this lesson, 
particularly for the indicators linked to 
disbursements. 

5. It is important to focus efforts to avoid diluting 
resources.  

The program: (i) focuses on results and 
(ii) supports specific activities within a broad 
government program (the PDA). 

 

1.22 Strategic alignment. The operation is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework 2016-2019 (CRF) (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, contributing to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery; and (ii) economic 
integration, through the indicator of instruments contributing to regional and extra-
regional trade. It is also aligned with the following crosscutting themes: (i) climate 
change and environmental sustainability through the development, transfer, and 
adoption of innovative technologies and approaches to implement adaptation 
measures; and (ii) institutional capacity and the rule of law through the strengthening 
of public agricultural health services. Approximately 17.44% of the operation’s 
resources are invested in climate change adaptation activities, according to the 
multilateral development banks’ joint methodology for tracking climate finance. 
These resources contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing the financing of 
climate-change-related projects to 30% of all operational approvals by the end of 
2020. 

1.23 The operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy with Brazil (2016-2018) 
(document GN-2850), in the dialogue on policies and sustainable development of 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
agriculture and contributes to the implementation approach to reducing regional 
socioeconomic inequalities, given that the poorest regions (Northeast and North) are 
those hardest hit by the diseases and pests this program will address. The operation 
is included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational Program Report for 
Brazil (document GN-2915-2). It is also consistent with: the Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), 
which gives priority to increasing the region’s agricultural productivity and 
strengthening the provision of public goods; the Food Security Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2825-8), which aims to promote food security by 
increasing production and productivity; the Integration and Trade Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2715-6), which gives priority to integration and foreign 
trade through improvements to security and dispatch times, and reducing the cost 
of foreign trade; and with the Integrated Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable Energy (document GN-2609-1) and the 
Climate Change Sector Framework Document (document GN-2835-3) by promoting 
increased agricultural productivity by adopting climate change adaptation practices. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.24 The overall objective of the operation is to help increase agricultural productivity and 
improve access to domestic and international markets by strengthening the 
country’s agricultural health services. To this end the operation plans to contribute 
to the implementation of the Government of Brazil’s PDA through the components 
detailed below. The first and second of these components will be financed by the 
LBR, the third by the technical cooperation loan, and the fourth by the local 
counterpart. The main beneficiaries are the approximately 14 million agricultural 
producers and other participants in the production chains supported, together with 
the country’s 210 million consumers. 

1.25 Component 1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health services 
(IDB: US$23 million). The outcome of this component will be improvements in the 
performance of the SDA’s services, as detailed in its subcomponents: 

a. National Agricultural Laboratories (LANAGRO). The outcome will be a 
reduction in: (i) laboratory test times; and (ii) rejection of samples on receipt at 
the LANAGRO laboratories. Automation of the following key processes will be 
financed: (i) receipt of samples, laboratory analyses, and delivery of results; 
(ii) procurement and contracts; (iii) laboratory accreditation; (iv) demand 
management; and (v) inventory control. The initial focus will be on processes 
relating to antiparasitic and salmonella tests. In addition, demand for laboratory 
tests will be organized and prioritized, and the technical/administrative 
management will be modernized using harmonized quality management 
systems. 

b. International Agricultural Oversight System (Vigiagro). The outcome will 
be to shorten average export and import cargo release times at ports. The 
implementation of a harmonized management system for the international 
transit of agricultural products (termed the “SIGVIG”) will be financed. In 
particular, work will focus on exports of soybeans and frozen and chilled meat, 
and imports of fruits (apples) and agricultural inputs (mineral fertilizer and 
pesticides). 



 - 9 - 
 
 

 
c. Improvements to inspection, registration, and authorization services. 

This will aim to reduce the average time taken by product inspection, 
registration, and authorization services by financing the design and automation 
of services that are currently performed manually or in a semiautomated 
manner in person. It includes systems for: (i) beverage exports; (ii) imports of 
animal genetic material and live animals; and (iii) registration of products of 
animal origin. 

d. Implementation of regulatory good practices. The outcome will be a 
reduction in the average time taken by the SDA to draft and publish regulations 
and ordinances. The cost of developing and implementing a system for the 
real-time monitoring of the entire process of drafting, analysis, publication, and 
implementation of regulatory instruments will be financed. 

1.26 Component 2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases (IDB: 
US$137 million). The objective is to improve the control of high economic impact 
diseases and pests subject to quarantine, focusing on controlling FMD, CSF, and 
the carambola fruit fly. A description of the subcomponents and their outcomes is 
provided below. 

a. Carambola fruit fly. The outcome will be to keep the 24 states in which this 
pest is not currently present free of the carambola fruit fly.4 It will finance the 
costs associated with continuing implementation of the SDA program to control 
and eradicate the carambola fruit fly and expanding it to strengthen control 
stations on the border and inside the state of Amapá (the state most affected 
by the fly). It includes monitoring of traps throughout the country and measures 
to control and eradicate the fly in areas where it is detected. This 
subcomponent also includes training technical staff of the institutions involved, 
and health education campaigns for producers. 

b. Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). The outcome will be to maintain the 
27 states of the country free of FMD, with or without vaccination, funding the 
implementation of the PNEFA, which has a scaled strategy, dividing the 
country into five groups of states in which achieving FMD-free status without 
vaccination will be pursued by group. The PNEFA includes: regulation, 
capacity building at federal and state levels, audits of state veterinary services, 
and development of action plans for states. These actions are defined by an 
Action Plan, which is monitored semiannually by the MAPA. 

c. Classical swine fever (CSF). The outcome will be an increase in the number 
of states recognized by the MAPA as CSF-free from 16 at present to 23 in 
2023. State-level actions will be financed (incorporated in the action plans 
indicated in the preceding paragraph), including: (i) activities reports on the 
state action plans; (ii) approved Quali-SV audit reports on state veterinary 
services in areas that are both CSF-free and not CSF-free; (iii) approved 
epidemiological study proposal; (iv) reports on epidemiological studies 
conducted in states with areas that are not CSF-free; (v) declaration of new 

                                                
4   Eradication in the states of Amapá, Roraima, and Pará is not feasible within the program execution period, 

particularly as it would require actions in neighboring countries (Guyana and Suriname). 



 - 10 - 
 
 

 
CSF-free areas; (vi) stepping up controls on pig movements; (vii) training of 
official state veterinary services; and (viii) health education for rural producers. 

1.27 Component 3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural health of the 
future (IDB: US$35 million). The objective of this component is to support the 
implementation of the PDA’s Knowledge and Intelligence pillar (paragraph 1.15). 
The component’s strategic and innovation actions will support and complement the 
activities of Components 1 and 2, including development of technical assistance, 
capabilities, knowledge and innovation in the agricultural health system, and 
definition of strategies for agricultural health services to address the future 
challenges, including the impacts of climate change. Accordingly, the component 
includes the following subcomponents: 

a. Modernization of federal agricultural protection. This will support the 
process of modernizing the SDA by financing studies to support the following 
strategic actions: (i) implement a new model of institutional management, with 
a redefinition of procedure manuals, adjustment or redesign of computerized 
systems, and training and consulting; (ii) strengthen coordinated joint action by 
federal, state, and municipal agencies and between these agencies and the 
sector; and (iii) update and adapt legal and regulatory instruments, matching 
procedures and teams. 

b. Competency building. This will finance: (i) short courses developed with 
Brazilian and foreign universities; (ii) the “Excellentia” program, with grants for 
practitioners to undertake specific work at universities, research centers or 
agricultural heath institutions in Brazil or abroad; and (iii) a strictly postgraduate 
grant program for studies on critical issues for agricultural heath. 

c. Knowledge and intelligence. This has the aim of aggregating information and 
knowledge on an ongoing basis by financing the implementation of an 
integrated plant-health monitoring and information system (Strategic 
Agricultural Defense Intelligence System (IEDA)) that will manage strategic 
information to support decision-making, centralizing all the data existing in 
other automated systems. 

d. Agricultural health research. The objective of this subcomponent is to close 
research gaps related to agricultural health, supporting the development of at 
least 10 research projects selected on a competitive basis in line with the 
thematic priorities defined by the SDA. It also includes the financing of grants 
for strategic agricultural health projects.  

e. Technology park. As part of its modernization strategy, the SDA is seeking to 
promote a model of technology research and development that facilitates an 
exchange of experience between different sectors (public, private, and 
academic) and scientific integration to promote innovation in agricultural 
health. This subcomponent will finance studies to evaluate the viability of 
promoting the creation of a technology park on the Lanagro campus in Minas 
Gerais. 

1.28 Component 4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning (Local: US$5 million). This 
component will generate a monitoring and evaluation system for the program and 
will build the MAPA’s capacity to monitor and evaluate its agricultural health 
services, contributing to managing for results. 



 - 11 - 
 
 

 
C. Key results indicators 

1.29 The program’s impact will be measured using the following indicators: (i) increase in 
the number of health agreements with importer countries; and (ii) increased value of 
meat at the farm. 

1.30 The outcome indicators to be used for disbursements are: Component 1: 
(i) processing speed of Lanagro laboratories (in days); (ii) decrease in average 
import and export cargo release times in ports (in days); (iii) promptness of 
inspection, registration, and authorization services, which will include: average 
processing time for beverage exports (in days); and (iv) average time to draft and 
publish regulatory instructions and ordinances (in days). Component 2: (i) number 
of states kept without occurrence of Carambola fruit fly; (ii) number of states 
recognized as being FMD-free with or without vaccination; and (iii) number of states 
recognized as being CSF-free. The indicators and amounts associated with each 
are specified in the disbursement matrix (optional link 5). Additional indicators not 
associated with disbursements in the Results Matrix (see Annex II) are: (i) average 
sample rejection by Lanagro; (ii) recognition of states as FMD-free without 
vaccination; (iii) average processing time for imports of animal genetic material and 
live animals (in days); (iv) average time to register products of animal origin (in days); 
(v) improved agricultural protection competencies (level of training in priority 
competencies), (vi) legal establishment of a Technology Park; (vii) the number of 
accesses to the intelligence system; and (viii) number of technical studies with 
results of research projects published or available online.  

1.31 Economic analysis. An ex ante economic analysis was performed to evaluate the 
economic viability of the program. The benefits stem from more efficient agricultural 
health service processes and pest and disease control and are estimated to be: 
(i) avoided losses in exports of beef and pork products by preserving the country’s 
status as free of high impact diseases such as FMD and CSF; (ii) avoided losses in 
fruit exports by preventing the expansion of the Carambola fruit fly; and (iii) more 
efficient agricultural health services. The analysis considered a horizon of 20 years 
and a discount rate of 12%. The program is considered economically viable with an 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 32.37% and net present value of 
US$223 million. Based on the worst-case scenarios for the subcomponents 
analyzed, the sensitivity analysis yielded an EIRR of 21%. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Rationale for the use of the financing instruments. This operation will be 
financed by two investment loan instruments: an LBR and reimbursable technical 
cooperation funding. The operation meets the requirements for an LBR 
(document GN-2869-1) as Components 1 and 2: (i) support state programs 
delivering results through the financing of their expenditure framework (paragraph 
1.26); (ii) support changes to government practices incorporating good practices 
(paragraph 1.25); (iii) promote improved performance of existing government 
programs by emphasizing their achievement of results (paragraph 1.25); and 
(iv) promote the use of the executing agency’s fiduciary systems (paragraphs 2.7 
and 3.10). Moreover, the institutional capacity assessment showed that the MAPA 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=%09EZSHARE-1211145217-30
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-28


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
has appropriate legal powers, governance, and institutional environment, and the 
necessary institutional, management, technical, and fiduciary (procurement and 
financial) capacity to ensure the delivery of the results and execute and monitor an 
LBR (see Annex III). Integrity risk is medium/low, and program actions reduce it by 
adopting transparent procedures and automating health permit issuance and other 
agricultural health services. 

2.2 Component 3 fulfills the requirements for the use of the reimbursable technical 
cooperation instrument (document GN-2470-2), as it will be focused on supporting 
institutional changes in the management of agricultural health in Brazil, building the 
MAPA’s institutional capacities and financing research studies into agricultural 
health. These technical assistance activities are essential to achieving the 
envisaged outcomes of the LBR in the framework of Components 1 and 2. The LBR 
instrument is not suited to these investments as they are not related to the 
simultaneous completion of an outcome but require a substantial flow of finance from 
the early stages of execution. The proposed financing structure enables the 
comprehensive financing of the interventions, permitting the achievement of the 
program objectives. 

2.3 Cost. The total cost of the operation is US$200 million, of which $195 million will be 
financed from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital and US$5 million by the local counterpart. 
The planned disbursement period is five years. Table 2 itemizes the cost per 
component. 

 

Table 2. Program costs and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB Local Total % 

C1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural health 
services 

23.00 0.00 23.00 11.50 

C2. Control and eradication of pests and diseases 137.00 0.00 137.00 68.50 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for the agricultural 
health of the future 

35.00 0.00 35.00 17.50 

C4. Monitoring, evaluation, and learning 0.00 5.00 5.00 2.50 

Total 195.00 5.00 200.00 100.00 

 

2.4 Table 3 presents the disbursement schedule for the Bank financing. 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (as %) 

Component Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

C1. Improving the efficiency of 
agricultural health services 3.0 2.8 2.1 2.0 1.9 11.8 

C2. Control and eradication of 
pests and diseases 13.5 14.1 14.2 14.2 14.2 70.3 

C3. Knowledge and innovation for 
the agricultural health of the future 1.2 4.6 4.9 4.0 3.3 17.9 

Total 17.7 21.5 21.2 20.2 19.4 100.0 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 Pursuant to Directive B.13 of the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703) this operation does not require classification, as it is 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
a loan based on results and its impacts cannot be subject to “ex ante” evaluation. 
However, no negative environmental or social impacts are envisaged from the 
implementation of Components 1 and 2, or Component 3, and no physical 
infrastructure or physical changes to the environment are involved. Lanagro 
laboratories have an environmental and social management system based on best 
practices and standards, accredited under ISO standard 17025, which establishes 
guidelines for documented operating procedures (SOPs) for the management of 
laboratory and environmental waste. Moreover, depending on its level of 
biosecurity (BSL3AG), each laboratory has more specific manuals, covering the 
management of materials, wastes, and rules for hygiene, safety, and employees’ 
working conditions. The pest and disease eradication and control programs will 
apply internationally recognized good practices, including the use of integrated 
control techniques. 

2.6 In addition, the independent consulting services contracted to verify the results will 
review the ISO-17025 accreditation, make visits to laboratories to verify that the 
biosecurity manuals are being applied, and that good practices are being followed 
in the disease and pest control programs. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The results of the ICAP and Program Risk Management (PRM) analysis 
demonstrated that the executing agency has a low level of fiduciary risk for the 
execution of the results-driven components (Annex III). The evaluations indicate 
that the MAPA’s fiduciary systems are backed by a legal framework providing the 
foundations for sound management of administrative, financial, control, and 
procurement procedures, in accordance with the principles of transparency, 
economy, and efficiency.  

2.8 The medium-level risks identified are: (i) limited experience of the executing 
agency with IDB policies; and (ii) possible delay in purchase of the software 
needed for activities in Components 1 and 3. To mitigate the first of these risks, 
the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) will be contracted 
directly as a specialized executing agency to manage part of the consulting 
services under Component 3. The IICA offers technical advantages on account of 
its experience and effective capacity to select and hire consultants familiar with 
Bank policies and with topics linked to the agrifood sector. This has been 
demonstrated in the execution of a number of MAPA initiatives and in loans with 
external resources, including those of the IDB (paragraph 3.11). To mitigate the 
second risk, the results-based disbursement mechanism will create an incentive 
to speed up processes, and the IDB will support preparation of the terms of 
reference.  



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
D. Other project risks and key issues 

Table 4. Other identified risks 

Taxonomy Risk Level Mitigation 

1.  Public 
management and 
governance 

Changes in authorities 
and technical areas in the 
MAPA and changes in 
staff could result in delays 
in execution of actions, 
outcomes, and 
disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Inclusion in the loan contract 
of the condition precedent to 
the first disbursement 
(creation of the program 
coordinating unit (PCU) and 
appointment of its 
members). 

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program. 

Training of new authorities 
and technical staff. 

2. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

Continuity of the fiscal 
situation of the Federal 
Government and the 
states, and limitations on 
the use of the allocated 
budget may reduce the 
resources available for 
agricultural health 
services, delay execution, 
achievement of outcomes, 
and disbursements.  

Medium 
High 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

3. Macroeconomic 
and fiscal 
sustainability 

The Brazilian economy is 
recovering slowly and 
strong growth is not 
expected. A drop in 
economic activity would 
reduce tax revenues and 
the budget allocated to 
agricultural health 
services.  

Medium 
Low 

Audit of expenses linked to 
outcomes and return of 
amounts not applied to 
outcomes constitute an 
incentive to avoid budgetary 
limitations.  

Dialogue with authorities on 
key aspects of the program 
and functioning of the LBR. 

4. Development Failures in border checks 
or an increase in the 
epidemiological risk from 
neighboring countries 
could result in the 
reintroduction of FMD, 
delaying achievement of 
the outcomes.  

Medium 
Low 

Component 1 includes 
measures to strengthen 
health checks at the 
borders. 

Subcomponent 2.2 includes 
measures to strengthen 
controls and barriers.  

5. Reputation, 
monitoring, and 
accountability 

Private sector pressures 
may affect health 
monitoring and the 
credibility of health 
services and the program, 
resulting in temporary 
closure of export markets, 
and delays in achieving 
outcomes, and in 
disbursements. 

Medium 
Low 

The program includes 
measures to automate and 
standardize processes and 
move formalities online, 
reducing face-to-face 
interactions and the scope 
for discretionary decisions. 
Studies will support 
institutional changes in 
agricultural health services 
to reduce these problems. 

 



 - 15 - 
 
 

 
2.9 Sustainability. The Government of Brazil has been financing its pest and disease 

control programs for many years. Even in times of deep recession and public 
spending constraints, these programs have not been affected. Moreover, one of 
the aims of the institutional reforms being undertaken by the MAPA and of various 
program activities is to increase efficiency and reduce costs. In addition, the salary 
costs of technical staff, who are important for the sustainability of all the 
components, given that they are knowledge intensive, are fixed costs that cannot 
be subject to budget cuts.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower for the operation will be the Federative Republic of Brazil. The 
program executing agency will be the MAPA through its Agricultural Protection 
Secretariat (SDA). A PCU will be created within the SDA’s structure, which will be 
the MAPA’s point of contact for the IDB. It will also be responsible for coordinating 
with all the MAPA areas executing program activities, giving them guidance on the 
program’s operational, administrative, and financial standards and procedures, 
preparing the reports envisaged under the contract, and proposing measures for 
improving execution and achievement of the outcomes, etc. The actions in 
Components 1 and 2 will be the responsibility of six SDA divisions or general 
coordination units, while the CGOP will be responsible for Components 3 and 4. 
The program Operating Regulations set out the details of the roles of the PCU and 
the various SDA areas. 

3.2 For execution of Component 3, the PCU will be supported by the services of the 
IICA, as a specialized agency, for the contracting of consulting services, and it will 
have the technical cooperation of the CNPq for the funding of strategic research 
projects and postgraduate grants (paragraph 3.12). The eligibility criteria for the 
research projects and grants will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. 
The remainder of the component, which includes improving the SDA’s information 
systems, will be executed directly by the MAPA. 

3.3 The SDA’s Executive Management Committee, comprising its departmental heads, 
will act as the program’s Steering Committee, providing strategic guidance, 
facilitating coordination between the PCU and the various MAPA units, approving 
the annual work plan (AWP), monitoring progress of execution and achievement of 
program targets, and proposing measures to streamline execution. 

3.4 The PCU will have a core team comprising a coordinator and an executive manager, 
together with the technical and administrative staff necessary for execution 
coordination tasks. It will be supported by other MAPA units on administrative, 
financial, accounting, procurement, and auditing matters. Setting up the PCU and 
appointing its members will be a special contractual condition precedent to 
the first disbursement of the proceeds of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and to the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). This condition is considered essential for 
guaranteeing to the Bank that the executing agency will be ready with an appropriate 
team to start execution. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1211145217-31


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
3.5 External results verification. The loan based on results envisages verification 

independent of the IDB and the MAPA/SDA to evaluate fulfillment of the outcomes 
as a requirement for processing disbursements. 

3.6 The MAPA will contract individual consulting services for this purpose. Optional 
link 5 presents the protocol for verification of each disbursement indicator. The 
consultant’s report should: (i) provide an opinion on the accuracy, reliability, validity, 
and consistency of the information on the outcomes; (ii) determine the value of the 
outcome indicators; (iii) make recommendations to enhance program execution and 
address deviations from achievement of results in advance. Under the terms of 
reference agreed in advance with the Bank, the contracting of consulting 
services for external results verification will be a special condition precedent 
to the first disbursement of loan proceeds for Components 1 and 2, as is 
envisaged in the policy on loans based on results (document GN-2869-1). 

3.7 Disbursement mechanism. For Components 1 and 2, the MAPA will prepare a 
progress report on program execution and achievement of the results indicators 
used for annual disbursements (paragraph 1.30), and this report will be sent for 
external results verification. The independent external evaluator will verify that the 
results have been achieved in accordance with the objectives mentioned 
(paragraph 3.6) and by the deadlines set in the terms of reference. Once 
achievement of the disbursement results has been verified, the MAPA will send the 
disbursement request to the IDB, which will make the corresponding disbursement 
when the results of the external verification show that the value of the indicator in 
question is equal to or greater than the established target. If below the target, the 
disbursement will be proportional to the extent to which the target has been met. 
Unused balances may be rescheduled for subsequent disbursements. 

3.8 For Component 3, disbursements will take the form of advances of funds based on 
semiannual financing plans. For the disbursement of advances subsequent to the 
first, the IDB will require justification of at least 80% of the cumulative balance 
pending justification. 

3.9 Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations will 
describe the execution arrangements for the operation, including: (i) the program’s 
organizational structure; (ii) technical and operational arrangements for program 
execution; (iii) arrangements for scheduling, monitoring, and evaluation of results; 
(iv) operating procedures; and (v) a detailed description of the results indicators, 
particularly those relating to disbursements and verification protocols. The 
approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under 
the terms agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual condition 
precedent to the first disbursement of the loan based on results 
(Components 1 and 2) and the first disbursement of the technical 
cooperation loan (Component 3). The Bank’s experience in the region has 
shown that approval of the program Operating Regulations before the first 
disbursement contributes to the internal organization of the executing agency for 
program execution. 

3.10 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services, and consulting 
services. The execution of Components 1 and 2 envisages the use of executing 
agency systems for procurement, in accordance with requirements for loans based 
on results (document GN-2869-1). For Component 3, procurement financed with 


 
IDB funds will comply with the “Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods 
Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2349-9) and “Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB” (document GN-2350-9). The 
Procurement Plan contains details of procurement during program execution in 
relation to Component 3 and the procedures applied by the IDB for its review. The 
independent verification entity will be selected in accordance with the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (document 
GN-2350-9). 

3.11 Direct contracting. The IICA will be contracted directly as a specialized agency 
to manage procurement and contracting of approximately US$20 million under 
Component 3. The main functions of the IICA will be: (i) supporting consultant 
selection; and (ii) contract management. This contracting is justified under 
paragraph 3.10(d) of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
(document GN-2350-9), which provides for direct contracting “when only one firm 
is qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment” (see 
Annex III, paragraph 5.4). 

3.12 Funding of grants and research projects. Component 3 envisages the funding of 
strategic research projects and postgraduate grants (US$6 million). These activities 
will be carried out through the CNPq, an agency with its own legal status that is 
linked to the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation, and Communication 
(MCTIC). The CNPq’s main duties are to promote scientific and technology research 
and promote the training of Brazilian researchers (see Annex III). The MAPA and 
the CNPq will sign a cooperation agreement to establish the institutions’ roles and 
responsibilities. The eligibility and selection criteria for research projects and grants 
will be set out in the program’s Operating Regulations. To formalize the roles of both 
parties and minimize risks in financial and technical management, the signing and 
entry into force of the technical cooperation agreement between the MAPA and the 
CNPq for the execution of research activities and the award of postgraduate grants 
will be a special contractual condition for execution of the financing under 
Component 3. 

3.13 Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures. The Bank may 
retroactively finance, as a charge against the loan proceeds, eligible expenses 
incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date, for the procurement of 
consulting services and studies directly related to Component 3 up to the amount of 
US$7 million (20%), provided that requirements substantially analogous to those set 
forth in the loan contract have been fulfilled. Similarly, under Component 4, the Bank 
may recognize expenses against the local contribution up to US$500,000 (10%) for 
consultants and the purchase of software. These expenses must have been incurred 
no earlier than 6 June 2018 (project profile approval date), and under no 
circumstances may expenses incurred more than 18 months before the date of loan 
approval by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors be included. 

3.14 Audited financial statements (AFSs). During program execution, AFSs will be 
submitted annually no later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal period, or the 
date of the last disbursement in the case of final AFSs. The program’s external audit 
will be carried out by the Office of the Comptroller General (CGU), as the body 
responsible for the external oversight of federal government projects executed with 



 - 18 - 
 
 

 
external financing. For Components 1 and 2, the final AFSs will include an analysis 
of possible differences between the actual program costs and the sums disbursed. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.15 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The Results Matrix indicators will be used for 
monitoring, with the following instruments: AWP, multiyear execution plan, 
procurement plan, semiannual progress reports, and supervision visits. The MAPA 
will prepare and send monitoring reports to the Bank no later than 60 days after 
the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus on the fulfillment of 
results and output indicators, identify issues encountered, and describe corrective 
measures adopted. Additionally, for Component 3 the MAPA will submit, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, the AWP for the following year, no later than the fourth quarter 
of each year. 

3.16 The executing agency will submit the following evaluations to the Bank, in 
accordance with the scope agreed with the Bank: (i) midterm evaluation, once 50% 
of the loan proceeds are disbursed and justified or after 30 months of execution, 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) final evaluation, no later than 90 days after the date 
of the last disbursement. 

3.17 The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan includes the description of the impact evaluation 
methodology, together with the indicators to be evaluated, the parties responsible 
for gathering the information, the schedule, and budget. The plan proposes a 
quasiexperimental evaluation utilizing the gradual expansion of PNEFA activities 
funded by the program, in order to measure increases in the value of annual 
agricultural output at farm level. The methodology that will be used for this purpose 
is a combination of statistical pairing and differences in differences. 




























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 




 


 
 


























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 




























































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  



PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  



























































 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 
 

 
 

 

SUDAN  

 

 AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  

(AVCDP)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/AHAI/PGCL DEPARTMENTS 

 

May 2018 

 

 

 

  

Grant Information  

Client’s information 

 
GRANT RECIPIENT: REPUBLIC OF SUDAN  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTS 

 

 

 

Financing plan 

Source Amount 

(Million UA) 

% Instrument 

 

TSF (Pillar 1) 

 

24.95 

 

76.2 

 

Grant 

 

ADF (PBA)  

 

4.00 

 

12.2 

 

Grant 

 

FAPA 

 

0.69 

 

2.1 

 

Grant 

 

Government   

 

3.10 

 

9.5 

 

NA 

 

TOTAL COST 

 

32.74 

 

100 

 

 
Important Financial Information  

 

Grant Currency                                                               
UA 

Commitment Charge/Fee NA 

Service Charge NA 

Tenor NA 

Grace Period NA 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 28%, NPV (15%): US$ 20.3 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 26%, NPV (15%): US$ 19.4 million 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval  February, 2018 

Project Approval May, 2018 

Effectiveness July, 2018 

Completion June, 2023 

Closing Date December, 2023 

 

  



 

iii 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

1. Project Overview: The overall goal of the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVCDP) 

is to contribute to the attainment of Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SNAIP) goals in 

achieving a comprehensive national socio-economic development driven by a dynamic agricultural 

sector. The specific objective of the project is to improve household incomes, food security, and climate 

resilience through infrastructure development, market access and trade facilitation as well as enhancing 

production and productivity. The project will be implemented in three states, namely, North Kordofan, 

West Kordofan, and Khartoum and will focus on four commodity value chains: Groundnuts, Sesame, 

Potato, and Gum Arabic. The project cost is estimated at UA 32.74 million, of which AfDB is financing 

UA 29.64 million or 90.5% and the Government of Sudan will contribute UA 3.10 million or 9.5%. 

The project is expected to start in July/August 2018 with a duration of five years. 

 

2. The proposed project will directly benefit farmers in at least 236,457 households (50% females) in 

13 localities in the Kordofan Region of the country. Additionally potato farmers of over 50,000 hectares 

of land currently under potato cultivation in Khartoum State and surroundings will directly benefit from 

the project. The target beneficiaries also include the 200 Gum Arabic Producers Associations (GAPAs) 

in West and North Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The indirect beneficiaries of 

the project include over two million residents in the target localities in the country. With the expected 

increased production and productivity associated with the project and the value chain approach, more 

areas and population outside the target states will benefit from the project. Additionally, processors, 

marketers, agro-dealers in and around the target states will benefit from this project 

 

3. Needs Assessment: The AVCDP was identified as part of SNAIP and is addressing three out its 

seven Investment Program Areas (IPAs), namely: Increasing Agricultural Production and Productivity 

through Development and Modernization of Agricultural Systems and Improved Agricultural Inputs; 

Development of Agricultural Value Chains and Markets Access; and Development of Agricultural 

Support Services and Establishment of Information Network. In achieving the objectives of SNAIP, 

the Government commissioned a comprehensive study on the establishment of a modern Commodity 

Exchange in the country and requested the Bank to assist the development of key market-access 

infrastructures, which are the focus of this project. Therefore, the project is a direct response to GoS’ 

desire to revive the agriculture sector as the key driver for economic growth by promoting the value-

chain development approach.   

 

4. Bank’s Added Value: The Bank’s intervention through AVCDP is merited by the project’s 

consistency with the principles of key Bank Group policies and strategies. These include the Bank’s 

Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly in its operational focus areas (private sector development) 

and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security); the Bank’s High 5s, the Bank’s Feed 

Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and its flagship programs such as TAAT and ENABLE Youth; the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality; and the Bank’s Strategy for 

“Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019). 

 

5. Knowledge Management: Given its innovative nature of supporting the establishment of a modern 

electronic commodity exchange and piloting the Farm Consolidation concept, the Sudan AVCDP will 

generate considerable knowledge that will add value to the overall design and management of 

agricultural value-chain development operations across the continent. The Bank will share this 

knowledge with other development partners and stakeholders engaged in similar operations 



 

iv 

 

                                                 
1 Prices in SDG are based on the March 2018 exchange rate. On project completion, comparisons will be done at the prevailing exchange rate.  

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK(RBLF) 

Country and Project Name:    Sudan:  Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVCDP) 

Purpose of the Project:   Improve household incomes, food security, and climate resilience through infrastructure development, market access and 

trade facilitation. 

 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS /MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target  

IM
P

A
C

T
  

Improved livelihoods and food 

security. 

 

1. Economic growth (GDP, %) driven by 

agriculture 

2. Poverty level in project area (%) 

2017 

1. (3.5) 

 

2. (58)  

 

By 2031 

1. (7.0) 

 

2. decreased at 

least by 50 

Household survey. 

Annual reports 

Bureau of 

Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

1. Increased access to modern 
agricultural inputs  

 

2. Reduced high cost of 
imported potato seed  

 

3. Increased market access, 
value addition and 

commercialization  

 

1.1 Average crop yield (kg/feddan) in project area 
 

 

2.1 Avg. price (SDG/kg) of certified potato seeds 
2.2 Foreign currency resources (USD/year) saved  
3.1 % of target farmers with access to  real-time 

market information 

3.2 Increased  earning (SDG) per  feddan 

2017 

1.1 groundnut: 

210; sesame: 57.5  
 

1.2 (30) 

2.2   - 

 

2.1 (0) 

 

2.2  - 

By 2022 

1.1 groundnut: 

450; sesame: 200 

 

1.2 (12 to 16) 

2.2 4.34 million 

 

2.1 at least 80  

 

2.2 increased by 

100% 

 

Project reports 

 

M&E reports  

Risk 1: Macroeconomic 

instability negatively affecting 

productivity and project impact 

 

Mitigation 1: (i) Improved 

diversification of GDP resulting 

from the project intervention 

economic diversification through 

revival of agriculture sector 

remains government priority; (ii)  
Sustained implementation of 

sound macroeconomic policies 

 

 

COMPONENT 1:  ENHANCING PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTIVITY  
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

 

 

Output 1.1. Improved access 
to clean and certified potato 

seeds.  

 

 

 

Output 1.2.  Enhanced access 
to modern farm inputs through 

farm consolidation. 

 

1.1.1Seed multiplication centre equipped with 

certification lab and cold storage facilities of 

10,000 tons capacity established 

1.1.2 Volume (tons) of certified potato seed 

produced locally and available to farmers. 

 

1.2.1Area (feddans) of farms in the project area 

under fully mechanized agriculture as a pilot 

1.2.2 # cooperatives established (30% women only) 

under the farm consolidation scheme 

1.2.3Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) with its manual, 
policies and procedures established  

2016 

1.1 .1.  – 
 

 

1.2 (5,000) 
 

 

1.2.1. – (0) 

 

1.2.2  

 

 1.2.3  - 

By 2022 

1.1 .1  by 2019 
 

 

1.2  (15,000) 
 

 

1.2.1 20,000  

 

1.2.2 (7) 

 

1.2.3 by June 2019 

 

 

Project Progress 

Reports 

Midterm reports 

 

Risk 2: Farmers may not fully 

understand farm consolidation 

concept and could resist it  

 

Mitigation 2:   

(i) Sensitization, awareness 

raising and training of farmers on 

the farm consolidation concept  

(ii) Support is provided in 

mobilizing and grouping farmers 

into cooperatives  

 

COMPONENT 2. INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR MARKET ACCESS AND TRADE FACILITATION  
 



 

v 

 

 

Output 2.1. Key rural market 

access roads upgraded to all 

weather standard 

 

Output 2.2 Rural and regional 

markets with  postharvest handling 
facilities and services developed 

 

Output 2.3 Modern Commodity 

Exchange facility established  

 

 

2.1.1 Length (km) of rural access roads upgraded  

 

2.2.1 No. of rural markets constructed/upgraded 

and equipped 

2.2.2 No. of  regional market centers  constructed/ 
upgraded and equipped  

2.2.3 Warehouse receipting system established 

 

2.3.1 Electronic commodity market in El-Obied 

constructed and equipped. 

2.3.2 Market information systems to support 

market operations established 

 

 

2.1.1 (0) 

 

 

2.2.1 (0) 

 

2.2.2 (0) 

2.2.3 - 

 

2.2.4 -  

 

2.2.6 - 

 

2.1.1 (266) 

 

 

2.2.1 (10) 

 

2.2.2 (3) 

2.2.3 by 2020 

 

2.2.5 by 2020 

 

2.2.3 by 2019 

 

 

Project Progress 

Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports  

 

Risk 3: Climate change impacts 

could hinder project benefits  

 

Mitigation 3:   

Project infrastructures upgraded 

to climate resilient standard 

 

COMPONENT 3.  STRENGTHENING GUM ARABIC VALUE CHAIN 
 

Output 3.1   The Gum Arabic 
value chain is strengthened through 

capacity building, and improved 

access to finance of  Gum Arabic 
Producers Associations (GAPAs) 

3.1  No. of GAPAs trained in value addition and 

commercialization of gums (at least 30 % women 

only owned) 

3.2 % increase of target Gum Arabic farmers with 

improved access to credit  

3.3 No. of farmers supported with improved gum 

harvesting tools 

3.1 - 

 

- 

 

- 

 

 

 

3.1 (200) 

 

3.2 (40)  

 

3.3 (200) 

Annual Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports 

Technical reports 

(procurement, 

Audits, etc.) 

  

 

 

COMPONENT 4. PROJECT  COORDINATION  AND MANAGEMENT  

 

 

Output 4. Work plan, activities 

monitored and regularly evaluated 

as due 

4.1 Gender action plan developed 

4.2 M&E system established 
4.3 ESMP operational  

4.4 Project  implemented and delivered on time & 
within budget 

 

 

 

4.1 (0) 

- 

- 

 

- 

4.1 (1) 

4.2 by 2019  

4.3 by year 1 

4.4 completion by 

Dec. 2023 

 

 

Annual Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports 

Technical reports 

(procurement, 

Audits, etc.) 

Risk 4 :  Weak implementation 
capacity that affects progress of 

the project 

Mitigation 4:  (i) Competitive 
selection of PIU team with 

adequate experience; (ii) 

Continuous training of PIU 

personnel by the Bank (project 

management clinics) 

 COMPONENTS  
 

Inputs 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  Component 1:   Enhancing Production and Productivity: 1.1   Potato seeds development; 1.2 Farm consolidation for 
improved production and productivity  

 

Component 2:   Infrastructure Development for Market Access and Trade Facilitation: 2.1 Construction/rehabilitation of 
rural market access roads; 2.2 Upgrading and equipping main and rural markets with warehousing receiving system and services 

 

Component 3:   Strengthening Gum Arabic Value Chain.  
 

Component 4:  Project Management and Coordination. 

Project Cost in million UA:  UA 32.74 million 
Sources : TSF Grant: 24.95 million; ADF (PBA) 

Grant : UA 4.00 million 

 

FAPA Grant :  UA 0.69 million 
GoS:  UA 3.10 million 



 

vi 

 

PROJECT TIME FRAME/IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE2 
 

 

                                                 
2 This is a general project implementation schedule. Detailed annual work schedule will be developed before the beginning of each Project Year. 

 

Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Quarter 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 

INITIAL ACTIVITIES  

Grant negotiations and  approval                      

Signature of Grants Agreements                       

Publication of  the GPN                      

Finalization of PIU recruitment (advance contracting)                      

Fulfilment of first disbursement condition                      

Project launching                      

ENHANCING PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTIVITY 

Establishement of seed multiplication centre equipped with certification 
lab and cold storage facilities 

               
    

  

Sensitization, awareness raising and training of farmers on the farm 

consolidation concept 
               

    
  

Mobilizing and grouping farmers in the target area into cooperatives for 
better access to modern agricultural inputs and financing                

    
  

Establishement of the Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) with its manual, 

policies and procedures 
               

    
  

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR MARKET ACCESS AND TRADE FACILITATION 
Upgrading/rehabilitation of rural market access roads                      

Construction/upgrading rural and regional markets                      

Establishement of warehouse receipting system                       

Construction and equipping of an Electronic commodity market in El-

Obied, North Kordofan 
               

    
  

Establishement of market information systems to support market 
operations 

               
    

  

STRENGTHENING GUM ARABIC VALUE CHAIN 

Training of target GAPAs in value addition and commercialization of 

Gums 
               

    
  

Supporting target GAPAs with improved gum harvesting tools                      

Supporting target GAPAs with improved access to credit                      

PROJECT MANGEMENT AND COORDINATION 

Development of an M&E system                      

Quarterly Progress Reports                       

Annual workplans and budgets                       

Annual financial audits                       

Mid-term review                      

Completion Report                      



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS OF 

DIRECTORS ON PROPOSED GRANTS FOR THE AGRCULTURAL VALUE CHAIN 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed Transition Support 

Facility (TSF-Pillar 1) grant of UA 24.95 million and an ADF (PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million to finance 

the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project in Sudan. 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 
 

1.1.  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

 

1.1.1 The AVCDP is well in line with Government of Sudan (GoS)’s long term development goals 

which are expressed in its Twenty Five Year National Strategy (2007-2031). Among the objectives and 

goals of the strategy related to agriculture sector, include developing natural resources and optimizing 

their use, realizing balanced agricultural and rural growth, food security, increased job opportunities, 

and revival of agriculture sector through infrastructure development and financing. The Project is also 

in line with the country’s second Five-Year Strategic Plan (2012-16), which aims to diversify the 

economy away from oil to agriculture and other sectors. 

 

1.1.2 The project is also consistent with the Economic Reform Program (ERP) 2015-2019. The ERP is 

the country’s most recent national planning framework and seeks to achieve robust, sustainable and 

inclusive economic growth supportive of employment creation through expansion of the production 

base of the economy, the optimum utilization of resources and its direction towards priorities and 

strengthening the role of the private sector. Its pillars include: (i) Macroeconomic Stability, (ii) Public 

Finance Management, (iii) Value Chain Development in the Productive Sectors, and (iv) Human Capital 

Development. The proposed AVCDP directly contributes to Pillar III of the ERP. The project is also 

aligned with Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SNAIP, 2016-2020), which maps the 

investments needed to achieve the Sudan Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 

(CAADP) target of six percent annual growth in Agriculture GDP.  
 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 
 

1.2.1 Sudan has long been regarded as having the potential to be one of the major surplus food producers 

in the world. About 63 percent of its land area of 1.886 million km² is classified as agricultural land. 

Before 1960s, the agriculture sector provided the bulk of the export products of the country and 

accounted for the bulk of the foreign exchange earnings. However, the sector’s contribution to the GDP 

had been in decline until the secession of South Sudan in 2011. In the 2000s, the agricultural sector was 

essentially catering only to the domestic market. Following the secession of South Sudan and loss of oil 

revenue, the government has undertaken a number of important initiatives to diversify the economy 

away from oil and revive the agriculture sector. In 2013, Sudan became the 12th member state in the 

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) region to sign the CAADP Compact. In 

doing so, the government had adopted agriculture as the key driver for economic growth within the 

framework of the CAADP, and subsequently developed the Sudan National Agricultural Investment 

Plan. The plan is a five-year investment blueprint that maps investments and activities needed to achieve 

6% annual growth for the agricultural sector by 2020. The plan is to also help Sudan achieve the 10% 

percent of total expenditure on agriculture in compliance with the Maputo Declaration.  
 

1.2.2 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Project was identified as part of SNAIP and is 

addressing three out its seven Investment Program Areas, namely: Increasing Agricultural Production 

and Productivity through Development and Modernization of Agricultural Systems and Improved 

Agricultural Inputs; Development of Agricultural Value Chains and Markets Access; and Development 

of Agricultural Support Services and Establishment of Information Network. Given the importance of 

AVCDP in achieving the objectives of SNAIP, the Government and Bank agreed to formulate the 

operation as a program and designate the current intervention as the first Project, which will focus on 



 

2 

 

edible oil seeds (Groundnuts, and Sesame), Potato and Gum Arabic value chains. The proposed project 

is also included in the pipeline program of the Bank’s current Country Brief (2017-2019) for Sudan and 

directly contributes to its second Pillar: Agricultural Value Chains for Inclusive Growth. 
 

1.2.3 The Bank’s intervention through ACDVP is also merited by the project’s consistency with the 

principles of key regional and national initiatives as well as Bank Group policies and strategies. These 

include the CAADP Compact; Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly in its operational focus 

areas (private sector development) and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security); the 

Bank’s High 5s, the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and its flagship programs such as TAAT 

and ENABLE Youth; Jobs for Youth in Africa (2016-2025); the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18) for 

the promotion of gender equality; Bank’s Strategy for “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 

Africa (2014-2019); and with the Bank’s Private Sector-led-Economic Diversification and Development 

in Sudan flagship publication, which identified Agriculture as one of the sectors for economic 

diversification. 
 

1.3. Donor Coordination 
 

1.3.1 Generally, donor assistance to Sudan is coordinated by three ministries, namely, (i) Ministry of 

International Cooperation - Grants from bilateral and multilateral partners, (ii) Ministry of Finance 

and Economic Planning - multilateral financial institutions (AfDB, World Bank and IMF and others), 

and (iii) Ministry of Humanitarian Aid Commission that deals with the humanitarian assistance. The 

USAID and EU are the largest donors in Sudan, which are mainly funding on-going and post-conflict 

humanitarian interventions in the form of food aid and disaster assistance in Darfur, Blue Nile and 

South Kordofan. Concerning development aid, the AfDB’s growing technical assistance and targeted 

operations have enabled it to emerge as a preferred partner and first port of call for Sudan. Other 

leading development partners in Sudan are the EU, WB, IFAD, DFID and IsDB, which are also 

playing active roles in the country’s development. The bilateral support from China and Gulf 

countries (Qatar and Saudi Arabia) and Arab Funds also constitute a significant support, which is 

mainly in the form of grants and FDIs. Arab states have also pledged USD 10 billion towards food 

security in the region with a focus on Sudan, while Qatar has a USD 188 million development 

program in Darfur.  
 

1.3.2 Besides its role to finance important development interventions, the Bank also hosts key policy 

dialogue meetings such as the PRSP Working Group (WG), which is co-chaired by State Minister of 

Finance and AfDB through the guidance and support of COSD. The Bank continues to provide 

leadership in the PRSP process, which has rallied donors’ support for poverty, and poverty related 

issues. The PRSP WG eventually culminated in the establishment of the Development Partners Group 

(DPG). One of its main objectives is to contribute to strengthening coherence among Development 

Partners (DPs) in Sudan by consulting and sharing information on program and project interventions.  

 

 Table: 1.1  Donor Support to Agriculture  
              

   

   
Sector  

Size (%)  
 GDP  Exports  Labour Force  

    Agriculture   31.7  14.9  35.2  

   Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average) : 2017 Budget  

    Government  Donors  AfDB  9.4  FAO  0.25  

UA m  
 % 

  

 630  87.5  WB  0.3  Qatar Govt         5.6  
 88  12 Arab Funds  21.9         UNDP                      12.85  
     IsDB  18.6  IFAD  9.0  
                                                                                   EU                    0.3          Other bilateral            9.3              

      Level of Donor Coordination  

Existence of Thematic Working Groups (this sector/sub-sector)  
Existence of SWAps or Integrated Sector Approaches  

AfDB's Involvement in Donors Coordination  

[N]    
[N]  

[M]    
Key:    L: Leader.    M: member but not leader.     None: no involvement.      Y: Yes.      N: No   



 

3 

 

1.3.3 Development partners’ interventions are coordinated based on their comparative advantages. 

While the Arab Funds and IsDB focus on large infrastructure investments (especially dams), IFAD 

focuses on small scale agricultural operations with focus on traditional rain-fed agriculture and rural 

development, whereas AfDB focuses on value chain development and productivity increase. During 

the preparation and appraisal missions, consultations were made with all relevant DPs including FAO, 

IFAD, JICA, IsDB, WB, USAID, UNDP and EU to explore potential for co-financing and to ensure 

that the Agriculture Value Chain Development in Sudan is implemented in a harmonized and aligned 

manner with other DPs.   

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1.  Project Objectives and Components  

2.1.1 The overall goal of the AVCDP project is to contribute to the attainment of SNAIP goals in 

achieving a comprehensive national socio-economic development driven by a dynamic agricultural 

sector. The specific objective of the AVCDP is to improve household incomes, food security, and 

climate resilience through infrastructure development, market access and trade facilitation as well as 

enhancing production and productivity.  

 

2.1.2 The design of the project components and main activities are mainly informed by the outcome of 

a needs assessment study on the establishment of a modern Commodity Exchange or Borsa (as known 

in Sudan) in North Kodofan. The study was conducted to assess the current agricultural marketing eco-

system in the state and identify key challenges and gaps for establishing a modern commodity exchange. 

Infrastructure development for rural access roads, postharvest handling and storage, and processing 

facilities are some of the key gaps identified by the study. These infrastructures are the focus of this 

project. The project components are described in Table 2.1 below, with details provided in Annex C1 

(Technical Annexes).  
 

Table 2.1: Description of Project Components 

 
No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

1 Enhancing Production 

and Productivity 

7.8 

(23.8) 

Sub-component 1: Potato seeds development – This sub-

component will focus on the establishment a potato seed-

multiplication center in Khartoum State, the main area of potato 

production in Sudan. The center is expected to produce locally 

the 10,000 tons of certified potato seed currently imported to 

Sudan. This will be done through the implementation of the 

following activities: 

 Land development for potato seed production  

 Establishment of small irrigation system for plots 

 Establishment of cold storage facilities.  

 Procurement of farm machinery and lab equipment  

 Certification labs and seed packaging facilities  

 Administration facilities and equipment 

 Procurement of foundation seeds 

 Feeder Road (7km) 
 

Sub - Component 2: Farm consolidation for improved 

production and productivity – This sub-component deals with 

piloting the process of joining small plots of land together 

through a participatory approach to form larger areas that are 

more viable production units with better access to 

mechanization, improved agricultural inputs, and financing. 



 

4 

 

No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

20,000 feddans (8,400 ha) in seven locations ranging from 2000 

(840 ha) to 4000 feddans (1,680 ha) in North and West 

Kordofan States are already identified for this pilot activity.  

As Sudan is a country with a long tradition in the use of 

agricultural cooperatives, the project will build upon past and 

on-going similar initiatives and lessons learnt. This sub-

component will have following key areas of focus: 

 

 Sensitization, awareness raising and training of farmers 
on the farm consolidation concept. 

 Mobilizing and grouping farmers in the target area into 
cooperatives for better access to modern agricultural 

inputs and financing. 

 Establishment of a Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF), its 
guidelines, organizational structure, and 

implementation. 

 Farm Consolidation financing agreement to be signed 
among participating Financial Institutions (FI), private 

sector (agricultural inputs service providers), and 

farmer cooperatives. 

2 Infrastructure 

Development for Market 

Access and Trade 

Facilitation 

21.2  

(64.8)   

This component addresses the development of key market-

access infrastructures for the proposed Commodity Exchange. 
These include the need to establish a modern Borsa building in 

El Obeid, North Kodofan with a network of access roads and 

warehousing receipt facilities across North and West Kordofan 

States. Activities under this component will be implemented 

under two main categories: (i) Civil Works for 

upgrading/construction of main Borsa building, rural markets, 

feeder roads and one bridge (ii) Consultancy services for design 

review, pre-construction services, construction supervision, and 

technical audits to ensure works carried out meet the 

requirements of the design specifications. The Component has 

two sub-components: 

 

Sub-component 1: construction/rehabilitation of rural market 

access roads and bridge: This sub-component addresses 

upgrading priority rural access roads to all weather gravel 

standards for a total of 266 km and construction of one bridge.  

 

Sub-component 2: upgrading and equipping main and rural 

markets with warehousing receiving system and services:  

Under this sub-component, the construction/rehabilitation of 

the following key infrastructure will be undertaken:  

 El Obeid Main Borsa Building and warehousing 
facilities;  

 12 regional/rural warehousing facilities in 12 localities 

in North and West Kordofan States. Details of these 
facilities and their capacities are described in Annex 

C1 of the Technical Annexes. These warehouses will 

be used for storing not only the sesame and 

groundnuts, but also Gum Arabic, Hibiscus, and 

Sorghum. 



 

5 

 

No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

3 Strengthening Gum 

Arabic Value Chain 

0.7 

(2.1) 

This component of the project will be mainly financed with 

USD 1.00 million grant from FAPA. The direct beneficiaries 

of the activities under this component are the Gum Arabic 

Producers Associations (GAPAs) in West and North 

Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The 

component will focus on building the capacities of GAPAs 

through training in value addition and commercialization of 

gums, provision of improved gum harvesting tools, and 

support with improved access to credit. 

4 Project coordination and 

management  

3.0 

(9.2) 
 Recruitment of PIU staff and launching 

 Development of a M&E system  

 Conduct project monitoring and reporting; annual and mid-
term reviews, coordination and supervision of project 

activities;  

 Project procurement, disbursement, financial management, 
and audit. 

Total 32.7  

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored  
 

2.2.1 The technical solutions retained are based on criteria that will ensure project success and sustainability. 

Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their weaknesses in generating the expected 

impact on a sustainable basis (Table 2.2). 

 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

No Alternative Name Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

1.  Project to directly 
finance farmer 

cooperatives under 

the Farm 

Consolidation 

scheme  

 

Beneficiaries are supported 

with grants to defray the cost 

of accessing full 

mechanization and improved 

agricultural inputs for better 

production and productivity.  

The option has often not worked 

effectively as it creates a culture of 

dependency and entitlement, which does 

not foster sustainable agricultural growth. 

Therefore, project resources are used only 

as a guarantee fund to leverage financing 

from agricultural lending banks 

2.  Bituminous surface 
treatment for feeder 

roads 

Flexible road with 

bituminous surfacing using 

chip seals. 

The surface treatment was not selected 

because of less traffic and high cost which 

make the investment not economically  

viable 

3.  To ensure equitable 
distribution, consider 

project to cover more 

disadvantaged states 

in the country 

In this scenario, project sites 

would be identified in more 

regions of the country where 

target crops have production 

advantage 

The coordination and supervision of the 

intervention would be cumbersome, and 

the spread of resources to too many 

intervention sites would result in less 

impactful project outcomes. 



 

6 

 

2.3.  Project Type  

 

2.3.1 The Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (AVCDP) is an investment project financed 

by ADF XIV (TSF/PBA) Grants and project activities are in line with TSF Guidelines3 

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 Total project costs to be incurred during the five-year implementation period, including price 

and physical contingencies, but excluding duties and taxes, are estimated at UA 32.74 million (US$ 47.5 

million). The project will be financed by the Government of the Republic of Sudan, African 

Development Fund (ADF) and FAPA. The ADF and FAPA will provide UA 28.95 million (US$ 42 

million) and UA 0.69 million (US$ 1.0 million) respectively on grant terms. The Government will 

finance selected project activities, including design of infrastructure; and parts of training, consultancies, 

and recurrent costs to the tune of UA 3.1 million (USD 4.5) million. In conformity with the principle 

that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the ADF and FAPA financing, any 

future changes in the rates and/or structures of taxes and duties would apply to the project. A summary 

of project cost estimates by components, expenditure categories, and schedule are presented in Tables 

2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes B2 Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 

Table 2.3: Summary Project Cost by Components 

Sn. Components  

In USD (millions) In UA (millions) 

FC LC Total FC LC Total 

1 Enhancing Production and Productivity 6,626 3,396 10,021 4,569 2,342 6,911 

2 Infrastructure Development for Markets and Enhanced Access 17,131 9,307 26,438 11,815 6,418 18,233 

3 Strengthening Gum-arabic Value Chain 799 198 998 551 137 688 

4 Project Coordination and Management 730 3,000 3,731 503 2,069 2,573 

  Total Baseline Cost 25,286 15,901 41,188 17,439 10,966 28,405 

  Physical Contingencies 1,295 669 1,963 893 461 1,354 

  Price Contingencies 1,691 2,658 4,349 1,166 1,833 2,999 

  Total Project Cost 28,272 19,228 47,500 19,498 13,261 32,759 

 

Table 2.4a: Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (UA '000') 

No Categories 

In USD (‘000) In UA (‘000) 

LC FC Total LC FC Total  

1 Civil Works 10,109 16,033 26,141 6,972 11,057 18,029 

2 Goods 243 4,571 4,814 168 3,153 3,320 

3 Services 250 999 1,249 172 689 861 

4 Miscellaneous  1,907 2,551 4,458 1,315 1,759 3,074 

5 Recurrent Costs 3,393 1,132 4,526 2,340 781 3,121 

  Total Base Cost 15,901 25,286 41,188 10,966 17,439 28,405 

  Physical Contingencies 669 1,295 1,963 461 893 1,354 

  Price Contingencies 2,658 1,691 4,349 1,833 1,166 2,999 

  Total Project Cost 19,228 28,272 47,500 13,261 19,498 32,759 

       

                                                 
3ADB/BD/WP/2014/46/Rev.3/Approval - ADF/BD/WP/2014/30/Rev.3/Approval entitled “Operational Guidelines for the 

Implementation of the Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa and for the Transition Support Facility. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.4b: Project Categories of expenditure by source of financing 

 Expenditure Category 
UA (‘000) 

TSF ADF FAPA GoS Total Foreign Local 

Civil Works 15,191 3200 - 1,714 20,106 12,503 7,603 

Goods 3,672 800 - 76 4,548 3,536 1,012 

Services 377 - - 96 473 206  267 

Miscellaneous, incl. RSF 3,074 - 690 182 3,946 3,248 698 

Recurrent 2,636 - - 1,035 3,671 781 2,890 

Total 24,950 4,000.00 690 3,103 32,742.83 19,483 13,260 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA '000') 

Components Year1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement: 2,695 3,274 590 210 142 6,911 

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 1,472 9,093 7,017 349 302 18,233 

Component 3:  Strengthening Gum-arabic Value Chain 210 113 133 133 99 688 

Component 4: Project management and capacity building 681 482 485 461 463 2,573 

Total Base Cost 5,059 12,962 8,225 1,154 1,005 28,405 

Physical Contingency 200 714 438 2 - 1,354 

Price Contingency 193.00 1,172.26 1,103.50 247.69 283.04 2,999 

Total Project Cost 5,452 14,848 9,767 1,404 1,288 32,759 

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement: ADF grant will finance the production and productivity 

enhancement component, agricultural infrastructure development component, production and 

productivity component and of market development and trade facilitation, and part of project 

management activities. The Government will mainly finance capacity building activities, design of 

works and allowances for the support staff. The Government of Republic of Sudan will also finance 

some recurrent costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in terms of staff salaries, office spaces 

and operating costs.  The breakdown of financing for the project is presented in the Table 2.6.   

 

Table 2.6: Financing plan of the project (UA ‘000) 

Source 

USD ‘000 UA ‘000 

Percentage 

FC LC Total FC LC Total 

ADF Grant 25,983 16,017 42,000 17,919 11,046 28,966 88.4% 

FAPA Grant 789 211 1,000 544 146 690 2.1% 

Government of Sudan 1,500 3,000 4,500 
1,034 2,069 

3,103 9.5% 

Total Project Cost 28,271.9 19,228.1 47,500 18,463 12,841 32,759 100% 

 

2.4.3 Counterpart Funds: The Government of the Republic of Sudan counterpart contribution to the 

project will be 9.5% of the total project cost (equivalent to UA 3.145 million); in addition to VAT 

contribution on all works, goods and services. 

 

Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF): The project will dedicate up to $ 2.0 million to act as a risk guarantee 

fund, which will provide backstopping support to financial institutions that will provide financing to the 

project’s Farm Consolidation scheme. The RGF is expected to be hosted and managed within the 

ENABLE Youth Sudan Project’s Risk Sharing Facility currently being established. Under this RGF 

framework, the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) are expected to finance full mechanization 

(from land preparation to harvesting) services to 20,000 feddans allocated under this pilot activity 



 

8 

 

through a financing agreement to be signed with private sector (agricultural inputs service providers) 

and farmer cooperatives. The total cost for providing full mechanization services for 20,000 feddans is 

estimated at USD 4 million ($200/feddan) as confirmed by the major agricultural inputs service 

providers in Sudan. Therefore, a USD 2 million for the RGF is considered adequate for giving 

backstopping support to financial institutions who will finance the Farm Consolidation scheme. 

 

2.4.4 Discussions were held with major agricultural inputs service providers and agricultural lending 

Banks and they all indicated their enthusiasm and willingness to participate in the project.  As a next 

step, Terms of Reference will be developed for a consultant to structure RGF, its guidelines, 

organizational structure, and implementation including the development of a manual, policies and 

procedures to facilitate the Flow and Processing of Claims (Receipt, Recording, Screening, Evaluation 

and Determination) with a view of determining eligibility and settlement. 

 

2.5.  Project Target Area and Population 

2.5.1 The project will be implemented in three states, namely, North Kordofan, West Kordofan, and 

Khartoum and it will focus on four commodity value chains: Groundnuts, Sesame, Potato, and Gum 

Arabic. In North and West Kordofan States, the target beneficiaries are the small farmers of groundnuts, 

sesame, and Gum Arabic value chains for which AVCDP will develop critical infrastructures for market 

development and trade facilitation, while also enhancing production and productivity. For potato value 

chain, the project will address one of the major constraints - the high cost of imported potato seed. 

Currently, farmers in Khartoum State spend about a third of the total production cost on acquiring 

certified seed. Moreover, the imported seed typically arrives late in the planting season due to congestion 

at Port Sudan resulting in late planting that causes substantial losses in yield. The project will establish 

a potato seed-multiplication center in the northern Khartoum State, which is the main area of potato 

production in Sudan. The center is expected to produce locally 10,000 tons of certified potato seed 

currently imported to Sudan at cost of about USD 4.3 million. 

 

2.5.2 The project will directly benefit farmers in 158, 756 households (50% females) in seven localities 

in North Kordofan (Sheikan, El Rahad, Um Rawaba, Brieka, Um Dumm, Um Sumeima, Um Kiredim), 

77,701 households six localities in West Kordofan (Gibaish, Al udaya, Alikry, Lagawa, Khammas, and 

Nyama). Additionally potato farmers of over 50,000 hectares of land currently under potato cultivation 

in Sudan will directly benefit from the project. The target beneficiaries also include the 200 GAPAs in 

West and North Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The indirect beneficiaries of the 

project include over two million residents in the 13 target localities in North and West Kordofan States. 

With the expected increased production and productivity associated with the project and the value chain 

approach, more areas and population outside the target states will benefit from the project. Additionally, 

processors, marketers, agro-dealers in and around the target states will benefit from this project. 

 

2.5.3 The selection of states was made based on their (i) potential and high comparative advantage in 

the production of these value chains; (ii) the existence of well-established markets that serve the majority 

of states in Sudan, neighboring countries as well as international markets; and (iii) the importance of 

these crops for the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholder farmers, rural women and youth in the 

area.   

 

2.6. Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

 

2.6.1 The request for this project came from the Government of Sudan and project components and 

activities were identified as part of a broad consultation undertaken during the identification, 

preparation, and appraisal missions. Extensive consultations were conducted with senior government 

officials of the Ministry of Finance & Economic Planning, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, 

Ministry of Industry, State Ministries of Agriculture for Khartoum, North Kordofan and West Kordofan 

States, Forests National Corporation, and financial institutions engaged in agricultural lending. The 



 

9 

 

Bank missions also consulted with technical staff of line ministries and other stakeholders including 

international development partners (USAID, World Bank, IFAD, UNDP, FAO, JICA, IsDB, and 

UNOPS), the private sector (CTC Group, DAL group, Mahgoub Sons Group, agricultural lending 

banks), business associations and NGOs. The participatory process will continue throughout project 

implementation to ensure ownership and sustainability.  

 

2.6.2 These various consultative processes offered an opportunity to discuss with stakeholders of the 

targeted value chains about their constraints, prospects and expectations of the project. The outcomes 

of these consultations can be summarized as follows: (i) the need to advance smallholder farmers’ access 

to improved agricultural inputs for better crop production and productivity; (ii) increased crop 

production and productivity should be complemented with enhanced post-harvest storage, processing 

and market access; and (iii) the need to strengthen value addition and market linkages of small farmers.  

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

2.7.1 The Bank has currently 10 operations in Sudan valued at UA 171 million. The sectoral composition 

includes Social 39%, Agriculture 30%, Water and sanitation 18% and Multisector, 13%. Three 

operations (totalling UA 51.0 million) are in the areas of Agriculture (DRSLP II, DRSLP III, and 

ENABLE Youth) with no pending issues in satisfying conditions precedent to first disbursements. 

According to the last CPPR conducted in June 2017, the Bank’s overall portfolio performance is 

assessed as satisfactory with an overall rating of 3. There are currently no Problematic Projects (PP), no 

Potentially Problematic Projects (PPP) and no effectiveness delays in the entire portfolio. However, 

some projects such as PFM and DRSLP projects have been affected by PD 02/2015 and currently 

flagged as slow disbursing operations mainly due to difficulties in getting funds transferred as a result 

of US sanctions imposed on the country since 1997. The sanctions were recently lifted and projects have 

started to receive funds in March 2018, which is considered very promising to enhance the portfolio 

performance in the coming three months. 

 

2.7.2 The Formulation of this project drew lessons learnt from these ongoing agriculture projects and 

other similar Bank operations on the continent such as Agricultural Value Chain Development projects 

in Uganda, Angola, Gambia, and Cameron. The design of the project also draws lessons from ongoing 

similar interventions in the country by other development partners (IFAD, WB) in the project area 

including Western Sudan Resources Management Project (WSRMP), Revitalizing the Sudan Gum 

Arabic Production and Marketing Project (RSGAMP), and Seeds Development Project (SDP). The 

lessons learned from these interventions are described in Annex B1 (Technical Annexes). The main 

lessons applied to the project are described in Table 2.7 
 

Table 2.7: Lessons learned and reflected in project design 

No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

1.  Weak M&E system at project level 
which often results in poor assessment 

of implementation progress 

A robust results-oriented M&E system with adequate 

financial allocation has been included in the project 

design. The M&E system will be developed in PY1.  

2.  Inadequate consultation with 
stakeholders in some project designs 

and preparations compromised 

sustainability and ownership 

Components and activities under this project were 

designed and prepared with full participation of all 

stakeholders including government, target beneficiaries, 

private sector, agricultural lending banks, and 

development partners. 

3.  Challenges in transferring project funds 
to Sudan due to US sanctions has 

resulted in implementation and 

disbursement delays of some projects  

 

The sanctions were recently lifted but intermediate 

Banks are still reluctant to transfer money to Sudan The. 

Therefore project AWPB and PP will take into account 

and anticipate these potential delays    

4.  Interventions intended for increased 
crop production and productivity should 

The project is designed to address not only increased 

crop production and productivity, but also providing key 



 

10 

 

No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

be complemented with enhanced post-

harvest storage, processing and market 

access. 

infrastructures for market access, and postharvest 

handling facilities and services. 

5.  The project management staff should 
have inadequate skills and training 

essential for effective conduct of their 

responsibilities. 

Recruitment of PIU personnel on performance based 

contracts. Continuous training of PIU staff by the Bank 

project management clinics will also ensure 

strengthened capacity. 

 

2.8. Project Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The project’s key performance indicators to be measured throughout its life span are presented in 

the Results Based Logical Framework. The M&E expert of the PIU will carry out internal project 

monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with the other PIU staff to monitor performance of the 

project. The main indicators defined for monitoring the project outcomes and outputs include (i) average 

crop yield (kg/feddan) in project area; (ii) volume (tons) of certified potato seed produced locally and 

available to farmers; (iii) proportion of target farmers with access to  real-time market information; and 

(v) average earning from a feddan. Regular implementation progress will be measured through Quarterly 

Progress Reports, bi-annual Bank supervision missions, and annual technical and financial audits. These 

reports will systematically render an account of the achievement level of indicators, which will be 

regularly presented to decision and policy makers to guide project mid-term review and to facilitate 

project management after completion. 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1 The main economic benefits of the project are an increase in production and productivity of 

groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes, enhanced access to markets and ultimately an 

increase in beneficiary incomes and strengthening of food security and climate resilience. Other project 

benefits include jobs generated by business developed, improved balance trade of agricultural products 

as the country will export more groundnuts and sesame and its products. At farm level, the project will 

directly reach out to at least  236,457  farm households4 cultivating groundnut, sesame farmers, and gum 

arabic as well as  50,000 irish potato  farmers. Groundnuts, sesame and Gum Arabic will be exported, 

while the entire additional potatoes produced by the project will be consumed locally. 

 
3.1.2 Main assumptions: The main assumption underpinning the economic and financial analysis is an 

anticipated increase in area under production of groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes by 

20,000 feddans. As a result of increased farm mechanisation, improved seeds and fertilizer use, and 

capacity building), the project is expected to increase productivity of groundnuts and sesame from the 

current 210 and 57.7 kg/feddan to 450 and 200 kg/feddan respectively. With domestic generation of 

potato seeds, a total amount of USD 4.3 million per annum will be saved from importation. Post-harvest 

losses for groundnuts and sesame will be reduced from 20% to 10%. On-farm consumption of 

groundnuts and sesame accounts for 25% the net total production. The remaining 75% is sold directly 

to middlemen or processed by farmers and then sold to traders or consumers. Ninety eight (98%) of gum 

Arabic produced at household level is sold to middlemen.  

 

3.1.3 The production costs including processing costs are derived from the results of the similar projects 

implemented in the country and computed field data from Sudan. Prevailing 2018 market prices are used 

for input and output valuation. Infrastructure operating and maintenace costs are estimated at 7% of 

investment costs. Groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes are treated in the analysis, as a 

                                                 
4 On average, each household has a total of 5 to 6 members. 



 

11 

 

traded and import substitute goods. All project costs and prices are estimated on the basis of constant 

market prices for a life span of 25 years. The average market prices of processed crops and their by-

products (seed cakes) are used to value groundnuts and sesame. On-farm consumption is valued at farm-

gate prices. 

 

3.1.4 For the economic analysis, (i) groundnuts, sesame, potatoes and gum arabic are adjusted to reflect 

their economic values. (ii) All agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, agro-chemicals and farm tools, are 

imported without any import duty or withholding tax. Furthermore, no government interventions in 

terms of input subsidies or import restrictions are recorded. Therefore, the market prices are used as the 

shadow prices for tradable goods used in domestic rice and maize production.  

The FIRR is 28% with a NPV of US$ 20.3 million at a capital opportunity cost of 15%. The EIRR is 

26% for a NPV of USD 19.4 2 million at a capital opportunity cost of 15%. The summary result is 

tabulated below: 

 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 28%, NPV (15%): US$ 20.3 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 26%, NPV (15%): US$ 19.4 million 

 

3.1.5 The economic rate of return (EIRR) and the internal rate of return (FIRR) are sensitive to changes 

in prices and costs. A 10% increase in the prices of agricultural products generates an EIRR of 16% and 

a FIRR of 18%. Similarly, a 10% increase in production costs decreases the EIRR and the FIRR to 15% 

and 14% respectively. More details of financial and economic analysis is presented in Annex B7 of the 

technical annexes 

 

3.2.  Environmental, Social and Climate Change Impacts  

 

3.2.1 Environmental Issues: The proposed project is expected to result in a number of minimum 

localized environmental impacts including: (i) biodiversity loss through vegetation clearing and 

destruction of natural habitats during construction works; (ii) soil compaction and some destabilization 

of the geological balance during excavations; (iii) increased use of agricultural chemicals leading to 

pollution as a result of increased agricultural activities; (iv) increased environmental damage through 

excavations and creation of burrow pits to get construction materials; and, (v) dust pollution during 

construction works and transportation of construction materials. Mitigation measures to address these 

impacts have been proposed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The 

preparation and implementation of site-specific environmental impact assessments (EIAs) will be 

carried out by the individual contractors under the supervision of the Executing Agency, in consultation 

with resident engineers and environmental authorities in Sudan. The Bank as the financing entity will 

ensure compliance with its environmental and climate change safeguards. Because of the limited and 

localized environmental impacts, the project has been classified as Category 2 in the Bank’s 

environmental and social safeguard systems. 

 

3.2.2 Gender Issues: Access to information, marketing and finance is a challenge faced by both male 

and female farmers in North and West Kordofan. However, consultations indicated that female farmers 

are significantly more affected due to domestic duties and reduced access to collateral. The majority of 

female farmers involved in groundnut and sesame value chains are functioning in informality and with 

low productivity. There have been successful initiatives by the Government and Development Partners 

to organize women groups to access finance, with some promising results. In sesame and groundnut 

Producer Associations, women represent approximately 30% of participants, with some Producer 

associations consisting of only women. The project will endeavour to support women in, and women-

only, cooperatives to formalize and professionalize through targeted training. In terms of markets, 

women are found mainly trading horticultural products and constitute 50-60% of traders in markets 

targeted in this project. Consultations with them indicated their need for infrastructure that protects them 



 

12 

 

from the sun, improved transport to reduce their costs, and better representation in management of 

market structures.   

 

3.2.3 The Comprehensive National Policy for Women (2002-2027), which the Ministry of Agriculture 

was involved in developing, recognizes women as an important human resource in the achievement of 

comprehensive country development and seeks to enable them economically to achieve gender equality. 

The Government of Sudan has also developed “The Policy Document of the National Rural Women & 

Empowerment Project”. This project will align itself to the policy frameworks to put in measures that 

aid equitable access and equity in the distribution of resources to women farmers. 

 

3.2.4 It is expected that this project will reap significant results for women in the target region. There 

are three targeted interventions to manage the gender gap between men and women: (a) the project PIU 

will be trained on Results Based Management and Gender in order to ensure that project objectives are 

defined from the start in a gender-disaggregated manner; (b) a Gender Action Plan will be developed 

by the PIU to create an institutional framework and mechanisms to achieve the advancement of women 

farmers/traders; and (c) a Targeted training for women-led cooperatives, and women in cooperatives, 

on leadership, business management, and negotiation. Whilst the Ministry of Agriculture is highly aware 

of issues faced by men and women in agriculture wholly, the PIU will be capacitated with a Gender 

Officer who is also involved in community mobilization to ensure targeting, monitoring and reporting 

in a systematic way. 

 

3.2.5 Social and economic importance: The project will have several social and economic benefits 

among them: (i) improved agricultural production due to improved and structured market outlets and 

enhanced market access; (ii) reduced post-harvest losses because of improved storage and warehousing 

facilities; (iii) enhanced employment opportunities in the Borsa, warehousing and storage facilities; (iv) 

improved incomes at households and community levels; (v) improved living standards; (vi) improved 

national income through exports; (vii) improved industrialisation through processing and value addition; 

and, (viii) minimised out-migration hence reducing rural-urban migration. Improvement in the market 

infrastructure development and improvement of the rural market access roads in the two states of North 

Kordofan and West Kordofan is a great opportunity for the youth to enhance their participation in trade, 

agricultural production and increased incomes through improvements in transportation. 

 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement: There will be no involuntary resettlement of the population from the 

project sites. The agricultural farms are already existing farming areas. The project will only support 

reorganization of the farming system through farmer grouping and farm amalgamation to make the farm 

units more viable and larger production units. The targeted areas for market construction comprise 

existing market centers and government lands that have over the years been set aside for market 

expansion and development. 

 

3.2.7 Climate change and green growth:  In terms of climate change and green growth, the project 

will contribute to climate change resilience through constructing and rehabilitating rural access roads to 

all weather standards and through increased marketing of the agricultural produce by improving the 

marketing segment of the value chain. The project will also enhance climate change resilience through 

improved storage and warehousing facilities which will minimize post-harvest losses and farmers’ 

desperation to sell their crops at throw-away prices due to lack of storage facilities, especially at harvest 

time. By improving infrastructure through improvement of market and rural access roads, the project 

will also reduce transportation costs hence improving the farmers’ incomes and consequently reducing 

poverty and as such enhancing resilience of the poor farmers as well as their adaptation to climate 

change. The project supports the Government of Sudan in achieving its obligations in the Nationally 

Determined Contributions. Using the Climate Safeguard Systems, the project was screened and 

classified as Category 2. 

 



 

13 

 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1  The Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) is the implementing agency of the project. The 

Project will have a Steering Committee (SC) chaired by the Undersecretary of the MoAF  with Director 

Generals of ministries of agriculture of North and West Kordofan as deputy co-chairs. The SC will also 

include members from ministries of Finance & Economic Planning, Industry, Trade, Physical Planning 

and Public Utilities in North and West Kordofan States, Producer Associations, and Agriculture 

Financing Banks.  

 

4.1.2 The MoAF will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with key staff including project 

coordinator, civil engineer, value chain specialist, procurement officer, M&E officer, gender/social 

development expert, Financial Management specialist and an assistant accountant.  For closer 

implementation, monitoring and follow up of project activities, the PIU will be located in Kordofan 

Region (El-Obeid, North Kordofan), where the Project Coordinator and all project technical officers 

will be based. To build capacity of the staff of the executing agency, the assistant accountant can be 

seconded from the Chamber of Accounts, if such expertise is not available in the MoAF. In addition, a 

Gum Arabic focal person will be seconded from the Forests National Corporation (FNC) to be part of 

the PIU to coordinate activities under Gum Arabic component of the project. Furthermore, two state 

focal officers will be seconded; one from Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to coordinate the 

activities under the seed multiplication center and one from West Kordofan State Ministry of Agriculture 

to coordinate activities in the state. The Executing Agency, through Ministry of Finance & Economic 

Planning will nominate a focal point before negotiations to facilitate the processing and project start-up 

until the process of competitive recruitment of the PIU is finalized.  

 

4.1.3 Procurement Arrangements: Procurement of goods (including non-consulting services), works 

and the acquisition of consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in 

accordance with the “Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015, as 

amended from time to time,  and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology 

(BPM) using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation Documents SDs and in exceptional 

circumstances the Borrower’s Procurement System (BPS), for any category of procurement.  

 

4.1.4 The various items under different expenditure categories and related procurement arrangements 

for each contract to be financed by the Grant together with the respective procurement methods or 

consultant selection methods, estimated costs, prior-review requirements, and time frame as agreed 

between the Recipient and the Bank are detailed in the Procurement Plan under Annex B5 of the 

Technical Annexes. To ensure timely project launching and start-up, Advance Contracting will be used 

for the recruitment of key PIU staff before project approval. 

 

4.1.5 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: The assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector and Project level and procurement capacity of the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes to be 

used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The appropriate risk 

mitigation measures have been proposed to reduce any fiduciary risk in project implementation (Section 

5.2.4 of the Technical Annexes). 

 

Financial Management (FM): The Bank carried out a FM assessment to determine the adequacy, 

strength and weakness of the financial management systems. The FM assessment concluded that the 

overall risk is “Substantial”.  Mitigation measures in the risk analysis table include (i) Recruiting a 

Financial Management Specialist (ii) Acquisition of suitable accounting software for the project (iii) 



 

14 

 

training on Bank Financial Management requirements and International Accounting Standards (iv) 

Development of the Project Administration and Financial manual.  They will enhance the Project ability 

to (1) use the funds for the intended purposes in an efficient and economical way, (2) prepare accurate, 

reliable and timely periodic financial reports, and (3) safeguard the entities’ assets. 

 

4.1.6 The Executing Agency of the project is the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF). The 

overall accountability of the project will be the Project Steering Committee chaired by the 

Undersecretary of MoAF through the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the Project Coordinator. 

MoAF has experience in managing Bank financed projects, and the ongoing project Enable Youth Sudan 

is complying with the Bank requirements including maintenance of special account.  The financial 

transactions of the project will be initiated, processed, recorded and reported in accordance with the 

country’s Financial and Accounting Act (2007), and the Financial and Accounting Regulations (2011) 

which incorporates Generally Accepted International Accounting Standards. The project Financial 

Management Specialist (FMS), recruited competitively with qualification and experience acceptable to 

the Bank, will undertake the day-to-day financial management function. MoAF will assign an Assistant 

Project accountant to strengthen internal control and capacity building for the Ministry. 

 

4.1.7 The Project will prepare quarterly reports and submit them to the Bank within 45 days after the 

end of each quarter. The Internal controls of the Ministry including the internal audit of the project will 

apply to this project. This will include the inclusion of the project in the internal audit program and 

conducting audit at least twice per annum based on risk basis. 

 

4.1.8 Audit: An independent auditor will audit the project annual financial statements in line with the 

General Conditions of the Grant Agreement. The National Audit Chamber (NAC) or Private Audit Firm 

appointed with the involvement the NAC in accordance to the terms of reference for Bank financed 

Projects should audit the Project. The submission of audited project financial statements, along with the 

management letter, to the Bank is within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year. The cost of the 

auditing the project is part of the eligible expenditure of the Project to cater for audit fees of the private 

audit firm. If the audit is conducted by NAC, no audit fees is payable, but on exceptional circumstances,  

re-emburseable expenses like per diem for staff and transportation can be paid if NAC is facing financial  

constraints. 

 

4.1.9 Disbursement Arrangement: The direct payment and special account/revolving fund methods 

used by the Bank to disburse funds will apply to the Project to pay eligible Project activities. The other 

two methods also described in the Disbursement Handbook maybe used when necessary with prior 

approval from the Bank. The funds from the Transition Support Facility (TSF) are disbursable and 

payable in only US dollars and Euros. The project contracts and disbursement applications should be 

denominated and made payable in EUR or USD. In the transition period (post lifting of sanctions) where 

there are difficulties still encountered in remitting USD to or involving Sudan,  MoAF should  take steps 

to persuade contractors to sign contracts and take payments in only Euros. The ADF Fund will apply 

the direct payment method to disburse ADF resources. 

 

4.1.10 The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter stipulating key disbursement procedures and 

requirements. With regard to the special Account (revolving fund method), the Recipient will be 

required to open two (2) special accounts. The first will be an account denominated in foreign currency 

(preferably in EUR) and the second a local (operating) account at bank (s) acceptable to TSF. Funds 

paid directly into the foreign currency special account by the Bank are draw able by the Project, as and 

when required, into the operating account to cover local costs expenses including local contractors.  The 

Project implementation Unit will centrally manage the Project funds 

 



 

15 

 

4.2.  Monitoring  

4.2.1  The project will put in place an adequate computerized Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system 

based on a results-based framework with an emphasis on outcomes and impacts, as well as the regular 

monitoring of inputs and outputs covering the four main project components. Effort will be made to 

ensure gender-disaggregated data at every level and where applicable. The project will make use of 

national data sets (e.g. Central Bureau of Statistics, Household surveys, Annual reports, Bureau of 

Statistics, Project reports, etc.) whenever possible. In order to stimulate stakeholder participation in 

M&E, the project will employ participatory approaches such as beneficiary assessments and use of focus 

groups. The Bank office in Sudan will closely monitor day-to-day implementation of the project. The 

Bank will field supervision missions twice a year. The PIU will submit quarterly progress reports 

according to the format and procedures of the Bank. The Mid-Term Review will be undertaken in PY3. 

Project Completion Report will be prepared during PY5. Below is a summary of provisional project 

implementation schedule. 

 

Activity  Responsible Entity  Timeframe  

Appraisal  ADF Feb/March 2018 

Negotiations  Government/ADF April 2018 

Project Approval ADF May 2018 

Signature of Grant Agreement Government/ADF June 2018 

Fulfilment of 1st Disbursement 

Conditions 

ADF  July/August 2018 

Project Launching  ADF/ Government/ PIU August 2018 

Mid-term Review   ADF/Government/PIU June 2021 

Completion Report  ADF/ Government/ PIU August 2023 or when 85% 

disbursement rate achieved  

Auditing  Government/ PIU Annually  

 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 Recent international assessments show that Sudan has improved its accountability and 

transparency ratings and indicators of Governance including corruption control, rule of law, 

regulatory quality and Government effectiveness. However, the Bank is in the process of undertaking 

a comprehensive PFM assessment, which will provide more clarity on the Government efficient use 

of public resource. The design of the project has catered for a comprehensive governance structure to 

manage the implementation, monitoring and fiduciary aspects of the project. To ensure conformity 

with the Bank’s procurement procedures, an initial procurement plan is prepared and this will be 

updated regularly during project implementation.  

 

4.3.2  The main governance issues for the project are related to contracting and bidding processes 

mainly due to lack of adequate familiarization with the Bank’s procurement rules and procedures. To 

mitigate the problem, the project will: (i) ensure the use of standard bidding documents and 

procedures of the Bank; (ii) provide financial management manual to guide project staff; (iii) promote 

regular submission of progress reports; and (iv) recruit qualified and experienced National Project 

gram Coordinator, Procurement Specialist and Financial Management  Specialist for the PIU. The 

Bank will also ensure that PIU is trained on Bank requirements and guidelines during the project 

start-up. To ensure regular and quality reporting on implementation progress, the project provides for 

the appointment of a monitoring and evaluation officer in the PIU. Supervision missions and audits, 

with close follow up by COSD, will monitor adherence to the Bank standards and procedures to 

ensure value for money is achieved.      

 



 

16 

 

4.4.  Sustainability  

4.4.1 The Government of Sudan attaches great significance to the proposed AVCDP as it is the 

foundation of the first modern Commodity Exchange in the country soon to be established in North 

Kordofan State and later be rolled out to other states. The operation is a multi-purpose one expected to 

provide an enabling environment for private sector development and agricultural value chains, 

improving food security and contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy as well as 

employment generation. The Government has already commissioned a comprehensive study on the 

establishment of a modern commodity exchange in North Kordofan State and requested the Bank to 

assist the development of key market-access infrastructures for the proposed commodity exchange. The 

project’s sustainability is ensured by the very strong will and determination at both state and national 

levels for this project. A high-level committee headed by the North Kordofan State Governor is in place 

for the realization of the Borsa project.  
 

4.4.2 In Sudan, the rural feeder roads are under the responsibility of the State ministries of physical 

planning and public utilities. Funds for maintenance planning and management is set aside in the 

national/state budget annually and private sector contractors for the execution of maintenance works. 

The main Borsa building and the 13 market warehousing receipt facilities in North and West Kordofan 

will be managed by the existing state Crop Market Administrations (CMA). The facilities are expected 

to sustain themselves with revenues generated from various fees (storage, grading, marketing, market 

data subscription, membership, etc.) charged on the users.  Availability of commodity prices for the 

smallholder farmers in real time will enable them to produce for the market at a profitable price, which 

will in turn help them build a sustainable business relationship with traders, processors and exporters. 

In addition, the public-private partnerships established through the project provides the basis for 

continuous cooperation among the relevant players, connecting non-financial and financial services, and 

leveraging the private sector in the delivery of business services. 
 

4.4.3 Another key factor of the sustainability of AVCDP is the establishment of the Risk Guarantee 

Fund for the Farm Consolidation Scheme to incentivize the lenders’ participation in the scheme. The 

State Authorities in North Kordofan underscored its commitment to contribute to the current Fund and 

to periodically top-up to ensure sustainable access to finance for the farmers even after the operation 

closes. The Project will also provide adequate resources to train all the technical staff from the 

participating ministries, at all levels, who will support the farmers’ cooperatives as well as the private 

sector involved in the project 
 

4.5 Risk Management 

4.5.1 A Potential risk to the successful execution of the project could stem from a macroeconomic 

instability negatively affecting productivity and project benefits especially the impacts of economic 

sanctions and high inflation rates. Improved diversification of GDP resulting from the project 

intervention and the Government’s strong commitment on economic diversification through revival of 

agriculture sector remaining government priority will mitigate this risk.  Other potential risks include 

Climate Change impacts that could hinder project benefits. This risk will be mitigated by ensuring that 

project infrastructures are constructed/upgraded to all weather standard. Weak capacity of the PIU team 

might undermine effective conduct of their responsibilities of the project. To ensure smooth project 

implementation, the project has broadly defined the skills and qualifications of key members of the PIU 

team, who will be recruited on a competitive basis, following the Bank’s rules and procedures. The 

project has similarly identified focal points in each of the beneficiary states for facilitating technical 

coordination. Continuous training of PIU personnel by the Bank project management clinics will also 

ensure strengthened capacity. 
 

4.6  Knowledge Building  

4.6.1 Given its innovative nature of supporting the establishment of a modern electronic commodity 

exchange and piloting the Farm Consolidation concept, the Sudan AVCDP will generate considerable 



 

17 

 

knowledge that will add value to the overall design and management of agricultural value-chain 

development operations across the continent. Progress reports, audit reports, mid-term review reports, 

and completion reports as well as other information routinely collected, as part of monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be used to document the lessons learnt. PIU will collect, collate, and analyse 

project outputs, outcomes and impact data, including standardized M&E reports. The Bank will share 

this knowledge with other development partners and stakeholders engaged in similar operations.  

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument  

5.1.1 The financing instruments proposed are a TSF (pillar 1) grant of UA 24.95 million and an ADF 

(PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million.  

 

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to Entry into Force: The grant agreements shall enter into force on the 

date of signature by the Recipient and the Bank.  

 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to First Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank to make the first 

disbursement of the Grant in each agreement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the 

Agreements  

  

5.2.3 Other Conditions  

 

(i) The opening of a foreign currency denominated Special Account and a local currency 
account by Recipient in a bank acceptable to the Bank. 

(ii) No later than three months from the date of signature of Grant Agreements, the Recipient 
shall submit project annual work plan and procurement plan covering the first 18 months 

approved by the Project Steering Committee 

 

For the TSF Grant:  

(iii) No later than nine months from the date of signature of the grant, the Recipient shall establish 
a Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) framework and the development and submission of 

operational manual. The RGF seed money will be disbursed upon the fulfilment of the 

following conditions:    

a. The opening of a foreign currency denominated account by the Recipient in a bank 
acceptable to the Bank into which the RGF seed money will be deposited.  

b. The submission of evidence by the Recipient in form and substance acceptable to the Bank, 
of the Farm Consolidation financing agreement signed among participating Financial 

Institutions (FI), private sector (agricultural inputs service providers), and farmer 

cooperatives. 

 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  

VI – RECOMMENDATION 

 

6.1 Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed TSF (Pillar 1) grant of 

UA 24.95 million and an ADF (PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million to the Republic of Sudan for the purposes 

of this project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this document.  






























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

BURKINA FASO 
 

 

 

 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING  

AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) 
 

 

 

 
 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT  
 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Project Information Sheet 

Customer Information 

BORROWER                    :   Burkina Faso 

 

EXECUTING AGENCIES: Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH) 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA million) Instrument 

ADF 7.500 Loan 

   

   

Government of Burkina Faso 0.126 Counterpart 

Contribution 

TOTAL COST 7.626  

 

Key Financial Information on the Loan 

 

ADF 

Loan 

Interest Type* NA 

Interest Rate Margin* NA 

Service Commission* 0.75% 

Other costs (Commitment Fee) 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Timeframe   2058 

Grace Period 5 years 

FRR, NPV (Baseline scenario) NA 

ERR (Baseline scenario) NA 

 

*Where applicable 

Duration – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note Approval March 2018 

Appraisal July 2018 

Country Team October 2018 

Project Approval November 2018 

ADF Loan Effectiveness February 2019 

First Disbursement March 2019 

Last Disbursement March 2021 

Completion September 2021 



iii 

 

Project Summary 

Project 

Overview 

Project Name: Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA) 
Geographical Context: Nationwide 

Implementation Timeframe: March 2019 - March 2021 

Project Cost: UA 7.625 million  

Project 

Objectives 

The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in 

order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso's rural environment. The specific 

objectives of the project are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing by establishing an agribusiness 

bank known as Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); (ii) support the 

country's economic transformation by creating an agro-industrial value chain that provides local 

employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for bank financing by 

promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the agricultural sector, in particular 

agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

Given the importance of the agricultural sector, the structural transformation of Burkina Faso's economy 

will be based on the development of this sector with respect to production and processing, hence the need 

to address the high marginalisation of this sector as regards financing (only 3.5% of bank loans in 2017). 

Accordingly, in addition to establishing this bank, which receives support from the project, the authorities 

intend, in the medium term, to strengthen the agricultural financing mechanism through the Shared Risk 

Facility, following the example of countries such as Nigeria, Togo, Ghana, etc. 

Needs 

Assessment 

Agriculture is the mainstay of Burkina Faso’s economy. However, its contribution to the creation of national 

wealth remains below its potential. While it employs more than 80% of the working population, it 

contributes only slightly more than 30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face 

constraints on its full contribution to the national economy, particularly production, difficulties in accessing 

financing, and transportation of agricultural products to markets. The proportion of financing devoted to the 

sector accounts for barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) 

financial institutions. 

 

In addition, the unavailability of agricultural insurance, which would even out farmers' income and thereby 

encourage them to repay their loans to financial institutions, is a handicap to agricultural financing. 

Project 

Beneficiaries 

The main beneficiaries are farmers and economic operators engaged in processing activities in the 

agricultural sector. The banking sector, in particular BADF, will witness an improvement in its loans to the 

sector following establishment of the agricultural insurance mechanism. 

Outcomes and 

Impact 

The project will help to create enabling conditions for more sustained and inclusive growth through better 

financing of the agricultural sector, which is a pillar of Burkina Faso's economy. It will improve farmers' 

access to credit and promote the financial inclusion of the farming population. Similarly, the project will 

help to reduce the proportion of non-resilient households.  

Value Added 

for the Bank 

The Bank’s value added resides in the fact that by improving access to agricultural financing and ecosystem 

security through agricultural insurance and warrantage, it will increase and consolidate the impact of projects 

by the Bank and other donors in the sector. Similarly, everyone will benefit from agricultural insurance and 

use of the warrantage mechanism. Agrihub projects supported by some donors will also be open to another 

financing window with BADF.  

Knowledge 

Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice in 

agribusiness investment financing; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the 

emergence of agricultural processing units; and (iv) studies to be conducted on agricultural insurance and 

warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within the administration and to non-State actors through 

the documents produced, procedures manuals, and training sessions that will be organised under the project. 



iv 

 

PROVISIONAL PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

 

CALENDRIER D’EXECUTION PREVISIONNEL DU PROJET  

 

 

 

 

 



v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Project Goal: Help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in order to reduce poverty and fragility 

  RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

    
Indicator (Including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Increase in the growth 

rate of the agricultural 

sector and improvement 

in its productivity 

Annual growth rate of 

the agricultural sector  

 

Primary sector 

productivity 

5.% in 2016                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

 

EUR 544 

/share in 

2016 

6.5% in 2020                                                                                                                                                                              

 

 

EUR 816/share 

in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports 

BADF activity 

reports 

  

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

Outcome 1.1: Improved 

access to financing for 

the agricultural sector. 

Share of bank credit 

to the agricultural 

sector 

3.5% in 

2017 

4.5% in 2019 and 

5% in 2020  
  

Risks and Mitigation Measures 

(i) Rising socio-political tensions 

Government commitment to continue negotiations to ensure 

that socio-economic and political demands are coherently 

and reasonably taken into account.  

(ii) Increased security risk 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong 

and sustainable responses, and has resolutely embraced a 

regional counterterrorism framework (G5 Sahel) to address 

the various threats. 

(iii) BADF’s weak human and institutional capacity to 

properly manage the bank 

BADF's management has extensive experience in banking 

and, particularly, in agricultural financing. In addition, the 

technical assistance contract with CNCA of Senegal will 

provide support to BADF in various areas, particularly in 

information systems management and risk management 

systems and procedures. 

(iv) Governance: Strong Government participation in the 

bank’s capital following the Central Bank's request to pull out 

shareholders deemed financially weak. 

Outcome 1.2: Increased 

agricultural processing 

rate  

Increase in the 

agricultural product 

processing rate 16% in 2016 25% in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports  

 

BADF activity 

reports 

Outcome 2: Enhanced 

resilience of agro-sylvo-

pastoral households, 

wildlife and fisheries to 

risks. 

Proportion of non-

resilient agricultural 

households 

42.68% in 

2017 

35% in 2019 and 

25% in 2020  
  

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Output 1.1: BADF's 

capital is 100% 

subscribed 

Government pays its 

share in BADF capital  
Not done 

100% subscribed 

capital in 2019 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 

Output 1.2: BADF is 

established 
BADF is established Nil 

WAEMU 

Banking 

Commission 

grants 

accreditation to 

BADF 

BCEAO 

Output 1.3: BADF is 

operational 
BADF grants loans Nil 

XOF 34 billion 

of loans to the 

agricultural 

sector in 2020 

and 88 jobs 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 



vi 

 

created, 30% of 

which were 

created by 

women 

The Burkina Faso Fund for Economic and Social 

Development (FBDES) holds the Government’s participation 

and additional shares owned by organisations considered 

weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is 

requested to gradually transfer the shares, as well as the 

Government’s participation, to stakeholders in line with its 

area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is also being considered. 

Independent directors will also be co-opted to the Board of 

Directors to improve the quality of the management structure. 

(v) Risk of strong pressure on management from farmers' 

cooperatives who consider BADF as a bank established on 

their initiative and dedicated to them. 

Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the 

outset by farmer organisations, and therefore their 

willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In addition, the 

continued and strong sensitisation of farmer organisations on 

the need for the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority 

to organised farmers' networks that will help collect customer 

information and, if necessary, collect unpaid debts. 

(vi) Strong competition from existing banks 

Given the strong ownership by farmer organisations, BADF 

will rely on farmer sectors to attract farmer customers. The 

bank's activities will be diversified by financing non-

agricultural sectors. 

 

  

Output 1.4: Gender 

equity in BADF 

operations 

BADF loans to 

women farmers 
Nil 

20% of total 

loans 
Same as above 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Output 2.1: The 

agricultural insurance 

mechanism is 

established and 

operational 

Definition of 

insurance indices and 

products, and 

preparation of 

insurance policies 

 

 

 

Procurement and 

operation of 

automatic weather 

stations that meet 

WMO standards 

Insurance 

indices and 

products not 

defined and 

insurance 

policies not 

prepared 

 

 

No 

automatic 

weather 

stations 

Insurance indices 

and products 

defined and 

insurance 

policies prepared  

 

 

 

 

Automatic 

weather stations 

that meet WMO 

standards 

procured and 

installed 

 MAAE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MAAE 

Output 2.2: The 

warrantage system is in 

place and operational 

Elaboration and 

adoption of regulatory 

texts 

 

Creation of a 

warrantage database 

 

 

Sensitisation of  

stakeholders 

No texts  

 

Lack of a 

warrantage 

database 

 

Warrantage 

not known 

Regulatory texts 

elaboratd and 

adopted  

 

Warrantage 

database created  

 

Actors sensitised 

on warrantage 

 MAAE 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  

    

Components  

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Resources 

ADF                : UA 7.5 million 

Government    : UA 0.125 million 



1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY MANAGEMENT OF THE AFRICAN 

DEVELOPMENT FUND TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING THE 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) IN 

BURKINA FASO 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to grant an 

African Development Fund (ADF) loan of UA 7.5 million to Burkina Faso to finance the Support 

Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA). This is an institutional support project that 

will be implemented over the 2018-2020 period to cover Government’s participation in the capital of 

the new bank and establish an agricultural insurance system and a warrantage mechanism in Burkina 

Faso. Therefore, this project will not only strengthen access to agricultural financing but also improve 

the business environment of the agricultural sector and diversify agricultural financing mechanisms. 

 STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) is the national 

reference framework for interventions by the Government and its partners over the 2016-2020 

period for the structural economic and social transformation of Burkina Faso to achieve strong, 

sustainable, resilient, and inclusive growth that will create decent jobs for all and improve social 

well-being (TA A1). PNDES comprises three strategic pillars: (i) Pillar 1: reform institutions and 

modernize the administration, (ii) Pillar 2: develop human capital, and (iii) Pillar 3: boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy and jobs. PACBA is aligned on Pillar 3, which aims to boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy, particularly by developing an agricultural, silvicultural, pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sector that is productive and resilient. 

1.1.2.  The Bank's intervention strategy in Burkina Faso over the 2017-2021 period is based 

on the country's development framework (i.e. the PNDES), with particular emphasis on the 

structural transformation of the economy. Consequently, the CSP is structured around two 

pillars: (i) promote access to electricity, and (ii) develop the agricultural sector for inclusive 

growth. Under the second pillar, the Bank will focus on the following actions: (a) support reforms in 

the agricultural sector; (b) develop value chains and water management, relying mainly on support 

for the emergence of growth hubs such as Bagré Hub and cotton processing; (c) promote youth 

employment with particular emphasis on the development of agro-business and professional skills; 

(d) access to financing for the sector with institutional and financial support from an agricultural bank 

being established; and (e) construction of access infrastructure to improve the marketing of 

agricultural products and intra-regional trade. In this regard, PACBA is fully aligned on the Bank's 

strategy, particularly with points (i) to (iv) indicated above. 

1.1.3. In addition, by broadening access to economic opportunities for the people, 

particularly farmers, PACBA is aligned on the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) with 

respect to the objective of inclusive growth. 

1.1.4. PACBA is also consistent with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 

("Feed Africa"), which aims to "transform African agriculture into a competitive and inclusive agro-

industrial sector that can create wealth". 

1.1.5. The project also falls within the Bank's Second Climate Change Action Plan, 

particularly under its pillar relating to intensified financing for adaptation. 

1.1.6  Finally, PACBA falls within the Bank's Financial Sector Development Strategy, which 

aims to "help increase access to financing, deepen African financial institutions and markets in RMCs 



2 

 

and at regional level, and support financial stability", as well as its Gender Strategy (2014-2018) in 

its focus on women’s economic empowerment.  

1.2. Context of the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 With regard to the economic and social context, activity is picking up vigorously after 

a period of economic sluggishness in 2014 and 2015. Burkina Faso's economic growth remains 

strong despite a fragile security context (TA A4-Note on Fragility). Economic growth is estimated 

at 7% in 2018 after 6.7% in 2017 and 5.9% in 2016. The impact of transformative investments under 

the National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES 2016-2020), particularly in increasing 

energy supply, has contributed to this economic dynamism. In addition, the performance of the 

extractive industries through increased gold production has provided additional support for economic 

activity. 

1.2.2. In 2018, the Government concluded a three-year programme supported by the IMF’s 

Extended Credit Facility, which seeks to ensure stability of the macroeconomic framework and 

reduce the fiscal deficit to 5% in 2018 and to a maximum of 3% of GDP in 2019, in line with the 

WAEMU convergence criterion.  

1.2.3. As regards execution of the State budget, the Government intends to continue its efforts 

towards controlling current expenditure, consolidating revenue mobilisation reforms, and 

implementing the PNDES. The measures to be taken in 2018 to increase revenue consist in further 

computerisation of tax services (online procedure, digitalisation, etc.), as well as further consolidation 

of business segmentation and reforms to modernise customs administration. 

1.2.4. At the social level, Burkina Faso falls within the category of countries with low human 

development. The latest poverty survey in Burkina Faso (the Permanent Multisector Survey - EMC) 

estimated the poverty rate at 40.1% in 2014 compared to 46.7% in 2009, which corresponds to a 6.6% 

decline. Despite this progress, the prevalence of poverty in rural areas (41%) is higher than that at 

national level and in urban areas (14%).  

1.3. Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.3.1. Unlocking access to financing for Burkina Faso's key economic sector (TA A3): The 

agricultural sector’s contribution to national wealth creation remains below its potential. While it 

employs more than 80% of the working population, agriculture contributes only slightly more than 

30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face constraints that hamper it from 

contributing fully to the national economy. These constraints include difficulties regarding 

production, accessing financing and transporting agricultural products to markets. Admittedly, the 

financing of the cotton sector is a success story, thanks mainly to the quality of supervision of the 

sector and the smoothing mechanism put in place (TA C4). However, access to agricultural financing 

remains a real handicap, aggravated by the privatisation of BACB, which has created an institutional 

vacuum in agricultural financing. The proportion of financing devoted to the sector accounts for 

barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) financial 

institutions. There are many reasons for the banks' little interest in agricultural financing. One of the 

main reasons is the high risk inherent in such financing but, above all, the lack of control over the 

value chain: the vast majority of operators in the sector can neither offer adequate guarantees nor 

control the storage and marketing schedule for their products.  

1.3.2. Securing the risk environment to ensure BADF viability and promote the attractiveness 

of agricultural financing for commercial banks. The farms face considerable risks (climate, 

markets, health risks, locust invasions, etc.), which can even lead to total production loss. It should 

be noted that the unavailability of agricultural insurance neither allows farmers to even out their 



3 

 

income nor encourages them to repay their debts to financial institutions. Consequently, it is 

necessary to set up an insurance system. Furthermore, the limited diversification of mechanisms to 

promote agricultural financing remains a handicap, hence the need to develop warrantage. In this 

regard, the Ministry of Agriculture in September 2017 prepared a national strategy to guide 

warrantage interventions with the support of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). 

It is now necessary to move from strategy to action. Finally, it should also be noted that banks 

operating in Burkina Faso lack expertise in providing support and advisory services on agricultural 

sector financing. To help it get started and avoid all these pitfalls, BADF has decided to use the 

technical assistance of Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole (National Agricultural Credit Fund) 

(CNCA) of Senegal, an institution with more than thirty years' experience in financing Senegalese 

agricultural development.  

1.3.3. Continue and intensify financing actions for agricultural and agrifood SMEs and SMIs 

initiated in sub-projects supported through lines of credit granted by AfDB to Coris Bank (December 

2016) and Fidelis Finance (June 2014). These financial institutions provide significant support for 

agricultural financing, which is neglected by commercial banks. The support will continue and be 

reinforced with BADF, whose medium- and long-term credit forecasts for the agricultural sector is 

estimated at XOF 4.1 billion in 2019 to XOF 14.54 billion in 2024, with an annual growth rate of 

28%. Furthermore, this operation will help to achieve three of the High 5s1 identified by Senior 

Management, namely: "Feed Africa", "Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for 

people in Africa", through the financing of agro-industrial projects that will contribute to promoting 

food security and improving living conditions in rural areas.  

1.3.4. Reinforce and consolidate the Bank's involvement in Burkina Faso’s agricultural 

sector: PACBA will reinforce and consolidate the impact of many other existing projects: Support 

Project for Bagré Growth Pole, Participatory Forest Management Project, Cashew Nut Development 

Support Project in Comoé Basin for REDD (PADA-REDD+), Preparation of PPG PGFC/REDD++ 

FIP, Resilience Building Programme (P2RS) and PPF for Youth and Women’s Integration in Agro-

Sylvo-Pastoral Sectors. PACBA falls within the Lending Programme of CSP 2017-2021 and is a 

Pillar II flagship operation.  

1.3.5. Replicating Existing Success Models in West Africa 

1.3.5.1 Banque Nationale de Développement Agricole du Mali (National Agricultural Development 

Bank of Mali) (BNDA) (TA C7), initially based on a fully agricultural banking model, has gradually 

diversified its portfolio to strengthen its viability. At the end of 2017, it had 54% of its portfolio in 

agricultural value chains, and 46% outside the agricultural sector. It is in its 38th year of existence and 

has remained profitable over the past twelve (12) years.  Originally, BNDA was completely State-

owned. After demonstrating its ability to be viable, it attracted several shareholders, including the 

French Development Agency (20% of the capital) and the German Development Finance Agency 

(DEG) (21% of the capital). BADF will be built on this semi-agricultural banking model, with 40% 

of its exposure outside the agricultural sector. This will allow it to mobilise deposits from other sectors 

and mitigate the effects of any crisis in the agricultural sector. In addition, gradual government 

withdrawal from its capital is being considered to make way for financial partners with expertise in 

agricultural financing. 

1.3.5.2. Caisse Nationale du Crédit Agricole du Sénégal (National Agricultural Credit Fund of 

Senegal) (CNCAS) (TA C7), drawing on the lessons learned over the years, has finally found a model 

that guarantees its viability. CNCAS intervention is accompanied by a series of measures to secure 

the agricultural financing ecosystem in Senegal, in particular: (i) agricultural insurance, of which the 

                                                 
1  The five strategic priorities ("High 5s") identified by Senior Management are: "Light up and power Africa", "Feed Africa", "Integrate Africa", 

"Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for people in Africa". 



4 

 

Senegalese Government finances 50% of the premiums, enables it to increase the resilience of its 

borrowers, thereby curbing their default rate; (ii) Government’s subsidising of agricultural credit rates 

to allow a greater number of farmers to have access to credit, thereby promoting diversification of 

CNCAS portfolio; and (iii) guarantees to be granted by the Government in financing major 

agricultural projects will allow CNCAS to have sufficient margins under its prudential ratios to 

increase its financing volumes. With PACBA, the Bank intends to support the establishment of a 

secure ecosystem similar to that of CNCAS in Senegal to strengthen BADF’s viability. To that end, 

a technical assistance contract has been concluded between CNCAS and BADF. CNCAS will assist 

BADF in starting up its activity, particularly the information systems, risk systems, and commercial 

strategy. 

1.3.6. Recent Cases of Bank Support for Agricultural Financing 

1.3.6.1 In December 2016, the Board approved a UA 67 million ADF loan for a 40-year period, 

including a 10-year grace period, to the Government of Tanzania to be on-lent to the Agricultural 

Bank of Tanzania. Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank was officially launched and began its 

operations in 2015. It is structured to provide medium- and long-term financing, in the form of loans, 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments, to fill the financing gaps in agricultural value chains in 

Tanzania. The support for the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank has not yet been disbursed. 

1.3.6.2. In December 2014, the Board approved a total financial plan of USD 500 million for the 

Federal Republic of Nigeria for the establishment of the Development Bank of Nigeria. The financial 

plan included: (i) an ADF loan of USD 50 million for 30 years, including a five-year grace period; 

(ii) a USD 400 million loan for 20 years, including a five-year grace period, from the Bank's regular 

resources; and (iii) a direct Bank equity participation of up to USD 50 million in the capital of the 

Development Bank of Nigeria Plc (DBN), with a redemption obligation for DBN after 10 years. The 

purchase of the Bank's stake by DBN is guaranteed by the Federal Republic of Nigeria. The Nigerian 

Development Bank has not yet published its first financial performance for preliminary lessons to be 

learned with respect to financial sustainability. 

 

1.4 Aid Coordination 

1.4.1 The Bank plays a key role in coordinating TFP assistance. After chairing the TFP troika from 

2013 to 2014, it was lead partner of the Sector Dialogue Framework for Infrastructure from 2014 to 

2015, and for Water and Sanitation from June 2015 to October 2016, and finally, the Bank was the 

coordinator of TFPs operating in the youth and vocational training sector from 2014 to 2016. 

1.4.2 With respect to overall intervention volume, the Bank is the third-largest development aid 

TFP, after the European Union and the World Bank. The Bank is also Burkina Faso's main partner in 

the infrastructure sector (Annex 3 and TA A6). 

1.4.3. As regards the financial sector, the Bank is Burkina Faso's leading TFP, especially with the 

different lines of credit granted to the country's banks. As for the agricultural sector, the Bank is 

within the TFP average (those between 10% and 50% of the sector's financing). PACBA’s leverage 

effect on the entire agricultural sector will contribute to better complementarity with the actions of 

other TFPs in the sector.  



5 

 

1.4.4 Concerning warrantage, KFW intends to work with the Government for proper 

implementation of the mechanism, thereby creating good complementarity with support provided by 

PACBA in this area. 

1.4.5 Other TFPs are involved, at different levels, in the project’s activity areas (TA A5). 

1.4.5.1 USAID, in partnership with Coris Bank International, held a training seminar on "Financing 

Agricultural Value Chains" on 3-4 December 2016. To narrow the financing gap in the sector, the 

Trade Hub, a USAID programme which, after analysing the financing rate in West Africa by most 

banks to agrifood and agro-industrial sector stakeholders, took the initiative in 2015 to embark on 

expanding its network of banking institutions to facilitate access to credit for small processors and 

exporters. USAID underscored the importance of the Trade Hub Project and for the United States to 

share its experience in credit guarantees for agricultural financing. 

1.4.5.2 Through "Développement International Desjardins (DID)", Canada initiated the Project for 

Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA). Several MFI networks, supported 

by DID, operate in rural areas and are required to serve this relatively complex market. DID's Project 

for Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA) essentially aims to support a 

number of the MFIs as follows: (i) promote access to credit for small farmers; (ii) mitigate credit risks 

associated with the sector; and (iii) increase the profitability of MFIs operating in rural areas. 

1.4.5.3 Other TFPs, particularly Proparco and IsDB, have also intervened through lines of credit to 

Société Générale Burkina Faso and Coris Bank International to support private sector development, 

particularly SMEs and SMIs, as well as promote Islamic financing. 

 PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

2.1.1 The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its 

productivity in order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso’s rural 

environment. The specific project objectives are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing; (ii) 

support the country's economic transformation through the emergence of an agro-industrial value 

chain that provides local employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural 

sector for bank financing by promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the 

agricultural sector, particularly agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

2.1.2. The project is structured around two components: (i) support for improving access to 

agricultural financing through Government participation in the capital of the newly established 

Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); and (ii) support for security 

of the agricultural financing ecosystem by establishing an agricultural insurance system and a 

warrantage mechanism. 

2.1.3 Component 1: Support for Improving Access to Agricultural Financing 

2.1.3.1. Through this component, the project will, in view of the high expectations of the population, 

particularly in the agricultural sector, as well as the significant financing needs of agriculture and its 

transformation, enable the Government to play its role as a driving force by acquiring a stake in 

BADF's capital. Considered as a priority in the Bank's 2017-2021 Strategy for Burkina Faso, the 

establishment of this bank will contribute to efforts towards responding to the scarcity of bank 

financing dedicated to the agricultural sector and lay the foundations for effective implementation of 

agricultural value chains. Thus, the Bank will provide financial support to the Government, 

amounting to XOF 5 billion, for the acquisition of a stake in BADF’s capital. It should be noted that 



6 

 

BADF was approved by the Minister in charge of Finance by decree N° 

183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF on 16 April 2018 after favourable opinion of the WAMU Banking 

Commission on 14 March 2018 and is currently working towards its operationalisation. The Bank’s 

support will be through the reinboursment method (please refer to section 4.1.4.1). 

2.1.3.2  An analysis of the financial sector (TA A2) shows strong expansion of the banking system 

in Burkina Faso, with bank loans increasing by 20% in 2017 and by more than 6% per year on average 

over the 2012-2017 period. The feasibility study on the Banque Agricole du Faso Project2 shows that 

although it is a competitive sector, the prospects for developing the credit market confirm the 

existence of a niche for the establishment of a new bank dedicated to agricultural financing. Since 

ECOBANK's takeover of Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina (Agricultural and 

Commercial Bank of Burkina Faso) (BACB)3 in 2008, there is no longer any credit institution 

specialised in agricultural financing in Burkina Faso. This accounts for the small proportion of bank 

financing to the primary sector, the importance of which can no longer be underestimated. 

Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure, BADF intends to capture only 1% of deposits and loans at 

start-up, and gradually increase its market share to 3% in the fifth year. BADF will provide 60% of 

its assistance to the agricultural sector (particularly agro-industries), with the remaining 40% going 

to the trade and industry sectors. Accordingly, the establishment of BADF will help to increase the 

share of agricultural financing from 3.5% of bank loans in 2017 to 5% in 2020 and 7% in 2022 (or 

EUR 685 million). The establishment of BADF will create 114 new direct jobs4 in 2023 and more 

than 3,000 indirect jobs5 through recruitment in the agricultural companies that will be financed. To 

contribute to gender mainstreaming in agricultural financing, BADF intends to earmark at least 20% 

of its agricultural financing for women farmers, and subsequently increase it by 15% per year. The 

project will help to increase the country's number of bank account holders, which is expected to rise 

from 26% in 2016 to 40% in 2020.6  

2.1.3.3  Once the banking licence has been obtained, BADF will launch its operationaliSation: (i) a 

headquarters has been identified and rehabilitation works are in progress. The towns selected for 

the first two branches outside Ouagadougou are Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; (ii) SOPRA 

Amplitude banking solution has been selected for BADF's IT systems following a competitive 

bidding process; (iii) connections to GIM UEMOA, STAR-UEMOA and SWIFT payment 

platforms are in progress; (iv) staff recruitment, which began with IT staff, will continue with the 

hiring of commercial and credit officers for the headquarters and Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso 

branches; and (v) communication is being organised with the creation of a website, the search for a 

logo, and the recruitment of a communication agency to define the bank’s communication strategy.  

2.1.3.4  Detailed Analysis of Banque Agricole du Faso (BADF) (TA C3) 

2.1.3.4.1   Objectives 

2.1.3.4.1.1 The BADF's corporate goal will be to provide its target customers in rural and urban areas 

with a wide range of financial services (credit, savings, insurance, money transfers, etc.) tailored to 

their needs. The target customers will include rural stakeholders (farmers, stock-breeders, fishermen, 

craftsmen, suppliers of agricultural inputs and equipment, agricultural product traders, processors, 

transporters, etc.) and those in other sectors of the national economy. 

                                                 
2  Sponsored by BADF promoters and implemented by ACS consulting firm. 
3  National Agricultural Credit Fund (CNCA), established by the Government in 1979, was transformed in 2002 into BACB, which oper ated as a 

commercial bank and did not grant medium-term loans. It was sold to ECOBANK under the programme with IMF. 
4  Source: BADF feasibility study. 
5  Based on long- and medium-term loans in 2023 resulting in an investment of XOF 120 billion, estimating the average cost of creating a job at XOF 

40 million. 
6  Source: BCEAO. 



7 

 

2.1.3.4.1.2  The specific objectives are to: (i) promote the development of the agricultural sector 

and offer a range of community-based financial services to the rural and urban population 

throughout Burkina Faso; (ii) contribute to the creation of added value in the agricultural sector 

through the financing of value chains; (iii) promote local investment, development and wealth 

creation among the population; (iv) increase the number of bank account holders in Burkina Faso, 

through gradual geographic coverage of the national territory, with the opening of branches in the 

headquarters of urban and rural municipalities that have enormous potential; and (v) become a 

benchmark in rural financing on the banking market in Burkina Faso and WAEMU.  

2.1.3.4.2  Promoters, Shareholders and Management 

2.1.3.4.2.1.  Shareholders: The high government stake in the BADF’s capital is due to: (i) the 

strong government commitment to the establishment of BADF; and (ii) the Central Bank's initial 

remarks on the financial soundness of the benchmark shareholders, particularly farmers’ 

organisations and associations whose financial structure was considered weak by the Central Bank. 

In order not to delay the establishment of BADF, the shares of these shareholders were taken over by 

FBDES pending their reorganisation in accordance with banking regulations. However, given the 

importance of farmer organisations in BADF's business model, they will continue to sit on the Board 

of Directors. 

Structure of BADF’s Share Capital 

 

2.1.3.4.2.2.  Management Team: The majority of the management team will be members of the 

technical committee responsible for managing BADF implementation. The committee has already 

directed the market survey conducted by ACS, and is preparing the application for a banking licence. 

The committee, headed by the Chief of Staff of the Prime Minister and current Chair of the BADF 

Board of Directors, previously a senior executive at BCEAO, is composed mainly of former BACB 

senior executives and representatives of the agricultural community through farmer organisations. 

The General Manager was the last General Manager of BACB7, which he managed for more than 6 

years. In particular, he led the merger and integration of BACB into ECOBANK. He has more than 

thirty years of banking experience. Before joining BACB's General Management, he had held several 

key management positions in the Credit and Commitments Department and the Administrative and 

Financial Department, and was the Deputy General Manager. His long experience in the banking 

sector, particularly in agricultural financing, will be essential to assisting BADF to cope with 

difficulties inherent in a new bank. 

2.1.3.4.3  Governance: BADF is governed by a Board of Directors, whose role is to define 

strategic guidelines for the bank and ensure their implementation. The Board comprises 10 members, 

                                                 
7  Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina  

Actionnaires Part dans le Capital 

Participations publiques 87,56% 

Etat burkinabè (à travers le FBDES) 63,04% 

Sociétés d'Etat 24,52% 

Caisse Autonome de Retraite des Fonctionnaires (CARFO)  14,01% 

Loterie Nationale du BURKINA (LONAB) 10,51% 

Organisations paysannes 0,66% 

Sociétés privées 6,71% 

WATAM SA 4,90% 

CORIS Bank International (CBI) 0,70% 

Autres 1,11% 

Personnes physiques 5,07% 

Total 100% 

 



8 

 

with 4 Government representatives or 5 if the CARFO representative is included. The other 5 

members are as follows: 2 representatives of the farmers' unions (UNPCB and UNPSB), the 

representative of smallholders, the representative of WATAM, and the representative of the rural 

population. It should be noted that three of the four Government representatives, including the Chair 

of the Board of Directors, have no voting rights. However, the Government and its departments retain 

decision-making power with an absolute majority of voting rights. The farmers and the rural 

population are represented by an observer with no voting rights. The Board of Directors does not 

currently have any independent experts in the banking sector, although independent directors will be 

co-opted as time goes on. Similarly, the diversification of shareholders, with the envisaged entry of a 

leading technical and financial partner, could help to remedy the situation. The Board of Directors 

has three standing committees: (i) the Audit Committee comprises at least 3 directors and is in charge 

of the monitoring and control strategy; (ii) the Credit Committee is composed of at least 5 directors 

and has decision-making powers over any commitment exceeding XOF 50 million; and (iii) the 

Selection and Remuneration Committee comprises 3 directors who direct BADF's remuneration and 

selection policy.  

2.1.3.4.4. Strategy: BADF's model consists in mobilising financial resources and then directing 

them mainly towards financing agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso. The end objective is to 

promote the development of the agricultural sector, as well as achieve more inclusive growth by 

unlocking access to financial services and financing for rural people who form the majority of Burkina 

Faso’s population. To fully implement this strategy, BADF intends to mobilise various sources of 

financing, namely: (i) development finance institutions (DFIs) on which BADF intends to rely to raise 

long-term resources at concessional rates for its activity. Since these resources are not included in the 

basic business plan, this leaves BADF some room for manoeuvre as regards its resources; and (ii) 

customer savings, developed and captured for transformation purposes, constitute BADF's total 

resources, excluding equity, over the entire projection period.  

2.1.3.4.5  Financial Analysis 

Capital: The XOF 14.277 billion capitalisation level at start-up is adequate. This provides a risk 

coverage ratio of 48% in the first year, 31% in the second year, and an average of 20% in the 

subsequent three years. BADF's capitalisation level is significantly higher than that required by the 

Central Bank (8%). It is also higher than the national average (9.3% in 2016) and the WAEMU zone 

average (11.3% in 2016). Finally, it is higher than that of CNCAS, whose average over the past three 

years was 16%.  

Assets: BADF expects to attain a credit portfolio of XOF 26 billion at the end of the first year, i.e. 

1% of the total volume of credit at national level. Over the subsequent four years, it expects to post 

an average annual growth of 40%, resulting in a 0.5% increase in the market share to reach 3% of the 

credit market at the end of the fifth year. This volume of credit represents on average 40% of the 

estimated agricultural financing needs in Burkina Faso. The estimate of gain in market share seems 

conservative, given the limited proportion of agricultural sector financing in the existing bank and 

the strong involvement of the farming community in setting up BADF. BADF expects to maintain a 

high quality portfolio with only 1% of loans in default at the end of the first year, and then a 1% 

increase per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years (compared to a 

national average of 8.8% in 2016). In the long term, it will be essential to secure BADF's environment 

to enable it to maintain such a rate.  

Profitability: BADF expects to post a Net Banking Income (NBI) of XOF 1.4 billion in the first year 

and an average annual growth rate of 60% subsequently, to reach XOF 8.3 billion by 2022. The 

cost/income ratio is expected to improve steadily from 112% in the first year to 39% in 2022, 

reflecting a low delinquency rate, with provisioning charges remaining under control at 16% of NBI 

over the period. As a result, after a first-year deficit of XOF 419 million, BADF is expected to become 



9 

 

profitable in the second year with a net income of XOF 564 million. The net income should then 

increase steadily to XOF 3.1 billion in 2022.  

Liquidity: BADF’s liquidity seems to be comfortable over the entire projection period. The short-

term liquidity ratio8 averaged 150% compared to 100% required by the Central Bank, reflecting the 

preponderance of savings over demand deposits. Over the projection period, term deposits and other 

savings will account for 54% of deposits (46% for demand resources). The long-term structural 

liquidity ratio9 is comfortable over the first two years, at 180% and 132% respectively, compared to 

100% required. It will gradually decline to 106% in 2022, reflecting deposits and savings mostly at 

less than one year. 

2.1.3.4.6. Supervision. Like all WAEMU banks, BADF will be subject to the supervision and control 

of the Banking Commission. In this regard, it is required to comply with prudential and governance 

regulations, as well as all other aspects of WAEMU banking regulations. For all intents and purposes, 

it should be stressed that the regulations are consistent with Basel international norms and standards, 

with a transition phase from Basel 2 to Basel 3 currently underway. 

2.1.3.5  Expected Outcomes of this Component: The expected outcomes include: (i) an increase in 

the share of bank credit to the agricultural sector from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; and (ii) an increase 

in the processing rate of agricultural products from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020. 

2.1.4 Component 2: Support for Security of the Agricultural Financing Ecosystem (TA C1) 

2.1.4.1 Context  

2.1.4.1.1.  As regards the establishment of BADF, the authorities of Burkina Faso have undertaken to 

establish and operationalise a system to secure the agricultural financing environment. The objective 

is to enable the new bank to operate in a secure environment that allows it to absorb any shocks related 

to climatic hazards and changes in the prices of agricultural products and/or inputs. In addition, given 

the high level of financing needs for agricultural value chains as expressed in PNDES 2016-2020, the 

Government of Burkina Faso hopes to reinforce the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for private 

commercial banks through these mechanisms. 

2.1.4.1.2.  In this connection and through an ADF loan of XOF 888 750 000, PACBA will support 

the operationaliSation of: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism being designed between Société 

Nationale d'Assurance et de Réassurance du Faso (Faso National Insurance and Reinsurance 

Company (SONAR) and its technical partner, Mutuelle Agricole Marocaine d'Assurance (Moroccan 

Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA); and (ii) warrantage and third-party holding 

arrangements to ensure decent price levels for farmers, even during periods of falling prices. 

2.1.4.4.1.3 A complementary mechanism for securing the agricultural environment is being 

considered, and will be financed by the Government or other donors. The mechanism is the 

Agricultural Credit Security Fund, with funds for natural disasters and interest rate subsidies. 

2.1.4.2 Need for an Agricultural Insurance Mechanism 

2.1.4.2.1. A secure ecosystem is essential to ensure the viability of agricultural banks. An insurance 

mechanism guaranteeing farmers' income in the event of a drop in prices and/or a poor harvest is 

crucial to ensure a minimum income for farmers, enable them to honour their debt repayments and 

thus be able to borrow again to prepare for the new season. In addition, a secure environment will 

                                                 
8  Ratio of outstanding amounts of high-quality liquid assets (cash and quasi-cash) to expected net cash outflows over the next 30 days. This emanates 

from Basel III and is applied in WAEMU zone as from 1 January 2018. 
9  The ratio of stable financing available (equity, long-term debt) to stable financing due. 



10 

 

allow BADF to diversify into several crops, thus avoiding the effects of concentration. In Burkina 

Faso, the examples of the former banks CNCA-B and BACB illustrate this very well. Such a system 

is essential to help BADF maintain a high quality portfolio. In the basic business plan, BADF intends 

to maintain a portfolio with only 1% of loans in arrears at the end of the first year and then 1% increase 

per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years. The BADF portfolio 

objective in terms of quality is significant when compared to the national average delinquency rate 

of 8.8% over the past three years and the average rate in WAEMU zone at 14.4%. Therefore, an 

agricultural insurance system that can strengthen borrowers' resilience is essential to enable BADF 

to achieve its portfolio quality objectives. 

2.1.4.2.2. Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole du Burkina Faso (Burkina Faso National 

Agricultural Credit Fund) (CNCA-B) went through some difficulties in 2002. Those difficulties were 

due to the fall in world commodity prices to below producer prices. Since farmers' income did not 

allow them to meet their loan charges, CNCA was directly affected by the shock due to the lack of a 

safety net. The crisis was exacerbated by the poor organisation of the sectors. Thus, to diversify 

activities and limite risks, the CNCA-B changed its name for Banque Agricole et Commerciale du 

Burkina (Burkina Faso National Agricultural and Commercial Bank) (BACB). 

2.1.4.2.3. Having drawn lessons from CNCA-B, BACB, has focused its exposure on organised 

sectors to facilitate credit collection and limit delinquencies. The cotton sector, which is better 

structured, has benefited the most from BACB financing. In 2007, higher input prices combined with 

poor rainfall affected cotton harvest volumes. Consequently BACB, which had focused on the cotton 

sector, experienced difficulties that led to its acquisition by ECOBANK Group in 2008, although it 

was profitable. 

2.1.4.2.4. In addition, it is necessary to have a secure environment to prevent the agricultural 

bank from being "forced" to move away from its primary role and core business. Better still, by 

securing the agricultural financing environment, the sector will be able to attract commercial banks 

seeking better diversification. The need for such an environment is demonstrated by the success of 

BNDA in Mali and CNCAS in Senegal (TA C7). 

2.1.4.2.5. Finally, it is imperative to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank to 

enable it to deploy its resources efficiently. The licence granted to the new bank is a generalist bank 

licence that does not take the special nature of the agricultural sector into account. Borrowers in the 

sector have income that are difficult to predict, volatile and very often seasonal. This carries a higher 

risk level, resulting in a much higher charge of capital for agricultural banks. The establishment of an 

insurance fund is crucial to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank and enable it to 

deploy its resources as effectively as possible and remain competitive with commercial banks. 

Without such a mechanism, the agricultural bank will be constrained in its ability to lend and will 

most often be limited to short-term loans with a requirement for collateral that is difficult for 

agricultural customers to obtain.  

2.1.4.4.3  Agricultural Insurance (TA C1 / C1.1) 

2.1.4.4.3.1 Description: The agricultural insurance mechanism will start with a three-year pilot 

phase in three regions covering 35% of Burkina Faso's agricultural population (Boucle du Mouhoun, 

Centre-West, and East). The pilot phase will involve three crops whose production account for about 

86% of Burkina Faso's annual food consumption (white and red sorghum, rice and maize). As regards 

the production volume, the pilot phase will cover 1,639,800 tonnes, or 36% of annual national 

production volumes. The mechanism will have two specific parameters to trigger compensation - 

performance coupled with climate data (local weather records). This will increase the mechanism’s 

reliability. Triggering compensation that closely reflects the reality of claims is vital to ensure 

credibility of the system.  No mechanism that combines meteorological data and yields has so far 



11 

 

been established in Burkina Faso. Planet Guarantee, in collaboration with Alliance, has launched two 

insurance products since 2011: (i) one for maize based solely on rainfall; and (ii) the other for cotton 

based solely on yield. Unlike the Planet Guarantee system, the mechanism under this project will be 

based on meteorological data collected locally (through mini weather stations) by the National 

Meteorology Agency (ANM). The installation of an adequate number of mini weather stations in the 

pilot phase areas will help to enhance the reliability of the data collected. The mechanism will 

compensate for any errors made by the current weather stations and take into account all types of 

disasters affecting agricultural production, particularly insects.      

2.1.4.3.2  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: This component of the project will be 

implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture. The main actors and their respective roles in the project 

implementation include the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH), Mutuelle 

Marocaine d’Assurances Agricoles (Moroccan Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA), 

Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and Reinsurance Company) 

(SONAR-IARD), and the National Meteorological Agency (ANM). The activities supported under 

the project are as follows: (i) definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies; and (ii) procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet the 

standards of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 

2.1.4.3.2  Status: To date, an inter-ministerial technical committee has been set up (end of 2017) 

for the definition of indices and insurance products, and the development of insurance policies. This 

technical committee has since worked with the technical partner MAMDA, the National Agency for 

Meteorology and Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and 

Reinsurance Company) (SONAR). The AfDB support expected at this level relates to the financing 

of the work of the committee set up for this purpose. This includes the financing of the continuity of 

the different wokshops already started by the Committee since its set up end of 2017. 

Agricultural Insurance Scheme 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Farmers,
Premium, 50 
compensation

Farmers,
Premium, 50 

compensation

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Moroccan Agricultural 
Insurance Company

Definition of insurance policies
Billing
Insurance products

Install and run meteorological stations
Make data available

Carry and pool the risk with (1)
the other local companies (2) 
the rest at international level via 
reinsurance

National Insurance and 
Reinsurance Company

Sale of insurance product

National Meteorological 
Agency



12 

 

 

 

 

2.1.4.4.   Warrantage and Third-Party Holding Mechanism (AT C1 / C1.2) 

2.1.4.4.1  Description: 

Warrantage (or storage credit) is a loan 

granted to a producer/farmer and 

guaranteed by his/her product harvest. 

The main purpose is to allow the 

farmer/producer to sell his crop when 

price conditions are most favourable. 

Three actors are involved in this 

mechanism: (1) the third party holder 

who offers storage services; it receives, 

stores and manages conservation of the 

agricultural produce under the 

warrantage throughout the transaction; 

(2) in exchange for his produce, the 

farmer receives from the third party 

holder a certificate which shows storage of his/her produce; (3) the bank, in exchange for the 

certificate held by the farmer, makes available to the latter a loan for an amount equivalent to the 

value of the produce stored by the third party holder.  The operation is closed when the farmer sells 

his produce and repays to the bank the amount borrowed.  

2.1.4.4.2  Objective: Create favourable conditions for the successful development of community 

warrantage and third party holder activities. This mechanism allows farmers to access bank loans 

based on the value of their harvest.  

2.1.4.4.3.  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: The project will be implemented 

through the Ministry of Agriculture; the implementation team is still to be set up. The implementation 

will be conducted with the assistance of the German Cooperation Agency through KFW, which has 

shown interest in providing technical support to the Government of Burkina Faso, particularly in the 

area of professional storage credit. The proposed project activities under warrantage are as follows: 

- Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

- Submit the draft texts for adoption; 

- Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

- Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

- Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

- Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; and 

- Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

2.1.5.  Project Cost 

The table below provides cost estimates of the various project components. Component 1 has only 

one operation, namely financing of Government's participation in BADF's share capital, for a total 

XOF 5 billion (or UA 6,367,642.19). Component 2 consists of two sub-components: Sub-component 

Warrantage Scheme 

PREPARATION
- Current status
- Information-sensitization
- Planning

NEGOTIATION
PREPARATION OF STORES 
AND STORAGE

50%-80% monetary value of 
the warrantage stock at 

harvest

CREDIT

AGR Development Consumer credit

Farmers’ organizations
BADF

CREDIT REIMBURSEMENT

HARVEST

NO

YES

On-farm
consumption

Stock 
marketing

STOCK RECUPERATION

INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP 
SALE FOR REIMBURSEMENT



13 

 

2.1 "Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism"; and Sub-component 2.2 "Assistance to 

the development of the warrantage activities". 

Table 2.1-1 

Project Components and Cost Estimates in UA Thousand 

Sub-Components Description of Components 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

UA 6,368 thousand  Financing of the share capital 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  

Establishment of an agricultural 

insurance mechanism  

UA 846 thousand 

 Procurement and installation of automatic weather stations10  

 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies 

Development of community 

warrantage and third-party 

holder activities  

UA 380 thousand 

 Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

 Submit the draft texts for adoption;  

 Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

 Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

 Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

 Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; 

 Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

Project Audit UA 32 thousand 

TOTAL COST UA 7,626 thousand 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 During dialogue with various stakeholders (Government, BADF, farmers’ organisations, 

etc.), several options were presented regarding activities to be supported to improve the agricultural 

financing environment in light of the multiple constraints and challenges. With regard to the project 

implementation arrangements, although the institutional setup was not a problem since it was 

determined by decree for all Burkina Faso projects, there were several possibilities for the 

establishment and management of an implementation unit. The decisions taken were based on the 

need to focus the project on its ambitions in line with the financial package and synergies with other 

Bank projects in the sector, as well as the interventions of other TFPs. 

 

 

                                                 
10

  Measurement of temperatures, air humidity, rainfall and wind speed. 



14 

 

Table 2.2.1 

Alternatives Considered and Reasons for their Rejection 

Establishment of a 

project 

implementation unit  

Establish a project 

implementation unit 

comprising experts recruited 

for the project implementation 

and fully dedicated to the task 

The decree establishing the institutional set-up for projects in 

Burkina Faso determines the de facto financial and technical 

supervisory authority and, in the case of PACBA, it is the 

Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MEFD) 

and the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH), respectively. MAAH has qualified technical and 

human resources to carry out agricultural insurance and 

warrantage activities. Furthermore, any additional support in 

this regard would be provided as part of the counterpart 

contribution. 

Consider all 

components 

required to improve 

the agricultural 

financing 

environment 

In this respect, the Government 

provides for several actions, in 

particular agricultural 

insurance, warrantage, the 

establishment of a subsidy 

fund and an agricultural 

security fund 

Despite their relevance, the establishment of a subsidy fund 

and an agricultural security fund were not retained, mainly 

because of limited reflection on the tools and their 

complexity, as well as their high financial costs. In addition, 

as regards relevance, urgency, maturity and cost, agricultural 

insurance and warrantage tools are more appropriate for 

support through PACBA. 

2.3 Project Type 

PACBA is an institutional support project financed from ADF resources by a loan intended to: (i) pay 

the Government's participation in the capital of the new BADF amounting to XOF 5 billion; and (ii) 

finance, for an amount not exceeding XOF 888 750 000, the establishment of agricultural insurance 

and warrantage to improve the agricultural financing environment by reducing credit risks inherent 

in this sector in a country like Burkina Faso. 

2.4 Project Costs and Financing Arrangements  

The total project cost, excluding taxes and customs duties, is estimated at UA 7.626 million (about 

XOF 5.988 billion), all in local currency. The cost does not take into account any physical 

contingencies and/or price escalation, which will be borne by the Government of Burkina Faso. The 

ADF contribution to the project financing is UA 7.5 million and covers the financing of Government's 

participation in the capital of BADF (UA 6.368 million) and the cost of establishing an agricultural 

insurance and warrantage mechanism (UA 1.131 million). The tables below provide more details on 

the overall project cost by component, expenditure category and source of financing. The detailed 

cost table is presented in the Technical Annex. 

Table 2.4-1 

Project Cost Estimate by Component 

Components/Sub-Components 
Cost in XOF Billion Cost in UA Million 

% F.E. 
F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural 

financing 
 5.000 5.000  6.368 6.368 83.5% 

2. Support for security of the agricultural 

financing ecosystem 
 0.963 0.963  1.226 1.226 16.1% 

3. Project Audit  0.025 0.025  0.032 0.032 0.4% 

TOTAL BASE COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

Provision for price escalation (2%)        

Provision for physical contingencies (3%)        

TOTAL PROJECT COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

 



15 

 

Table 2.4-2 

Cost Estimate by Source of Financing (in UA Thousand) 

Source of Financing 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

in XOF 

Base Cost 

in UA 

Total 

Cost 

ADF   7,500.00 7,500.00 

Government  125.76  125.76 

Other Sources of Financing     

Total  125.76 7,500.00 7,625.76 

Table 2.4-3 

Project Cost by Expenditure Category (in UA Thousand) 

Expenditure Categories 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

Total 

Cost 
% Total 

A. Goods 720.00  720.00 8.6% 

B. Services 32.00  32.00 0.4% 

C. Training 209.00  209.00 2.5% 

D. Operating Costs 297.00  297.00 3.6% 

E. Other: Financing of the Government’s 

participation in BADF's share capital 
6,368.00  6,368.00 84.9% 

Total Base Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

Provision for implementation contingencies     

Provision for price escalation     

Total Project Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

 
Table 2.4-4 

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA Thousand) 

Components/Sub-Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural financing 6,368     

Financing of Government’s participation in the share capital 6,368     

2. Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  1,226   1,226 

2.1 Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism   846   846 

2.1.1 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies  126   126 

2.1.2 Procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet 

the standards of the World Meteorology Organisation (WMO)  720   720 

2.2 Assistance to the development of the warrantage activities  UA 

410,710  380   380 

2.2.1 Preparation of regulatory texts  19   19 

2.2.2 Validation of the proposed texts  13   13 

2.2.3 Workshop for ownership/dissemination of adopted texts  83   83 

2.2.4 Creation of a warrantage database for networking  66   66 

2.2.5 Standards dissemination workshop  59   59 
2.2.6 Sensitisation on the establishment of warrantage 

cooperatives  67   67 

2.2.7 Support for constituent general meetings of warrantage 

cooperatives  73   73 

3. Project Audit  10.6 10.6 10.6 32 

TOTAL COST 6,368 1,236.6 10.6 10.6 7,626 

 



16 

 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

PACBA covers the entire territory of Burkina Faso. Consequently, under BADF, not only will its 

products, particularly loans, be open to all agricultural activities in the country, but it will gradually 

open branches nationwide. Agricultural insurance product will start with a pilot phase for three 

regions, while warrantage will cover the entire national territory. By improving agricultural 

production through productivity and processing, as well as the creation of agricultural value chains 

through increased access to agricultural financing, PACBA will benefit all people in Burkina Faso, 

particularly those living in rural and agricultural areas, young people and women, economic 

operators, and particularly agricultural organisations and leaders (TA C5). In addition, by improving 

the business environment for agricultural financing through agricultural insurance and warrantage, 

PACBA will benefit BADF and the entire banking system. Finally, Government’s participation in 

BADF capital will help to complete its financing and bring the capital up to the minimum level 

required by WAEMU banking regulations. 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

At project preparation and appraisal, the main stakeholders were consulted, including farmers’ 

organisations, the association of banks and financial institutions, as well as microfinance and 

insurance institutions, and BCEAO. The same applies to the BADF Design and Establishment 

Committee, set up since July 2016 and chaired by the Prime Minister, BADF Management, the 

consulting firm that prepared the BADF accreditation documents, BADF’s technical partner (Crédit 

Agricole du Sénégal) and the Burkina Fund for Economic and Social Development. At Government 

level, meetings were held with the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH). Based on these consultations, the 

project challenges and content were determined and PACBA designed.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 As at 28 February 2018, the total portfolio volume in Burkina Faso was UA 440.09 million, 

for 17 active projects. The overall disbursement rate was estimated at 50% at that date, for an average 

age of 2.8 years. The sector breakdown of the active portfolio comprises transport (52%), agriculture 

(16.1%), energy (14%), water and sanitation (7.7%), private sector (7.9%), and multi-sector projects 

(2.3%). As regards performance, the Bank's portfolio in Burkina Faso is deemed highly satisfactory 

with an overall score of 3.04 on a scale of 1 to 4, and does not contain any problematic projects. Two 

operations are ongoing in the financial sector: (i) a line of credit for UA 2 million granted in 2014 to 

Fidelis Finance, which was used to finance SMEs operating in various sectors, including agrifood; 

and (ii) a line of credit for UA 32 million approved in 2016 and granted to Coris Bank International 

to finance SMEs operating mainly in the agricultural processing sector. Since these operations are 

still active, there are no completion reports for the sector yet. The project design team also drew 

lessons from the Bank's recent experience in establishing the Tanzania Agricultural Bank and the 

Nigerian Multisector Development Bank. 

2.7.2. Overall, the Bank's portfolio in the agricultural sector in Burkina Faso is significant with 4 

operations and 1 PPF amounting to UA 58.88 million. This represents about 15% of the total project 

portfolio (Annex 2). Ongoing operations include: (i) the Bagré Growth Pole Support Project; (ii) the 

Project to Build Resilience to Food and Nutritional Insecurity; (iii) the Classified Forests Participatory 

Management Project (PGFC) and the Comoé Basin Cashew Nut Development Support Project. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1 The key performance indicators identified for measuring expected outcomes upon project 

completion are included in the results-based logical framework. The indicators are essentially:    



17 

 

 Project Impact: The annual growth rate of the agricultural sector is expected to 
increase from 5.9% in 2016 to 6.5% in 2016.  

 Project Outcomes: (i) The proportion of bank credit to the agricultural sector is 
expected to increase from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; (ii) the processing rate of 

agricultural products is expected to increase from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020; and 

(iii) the proportion of non-resilient households active in the agro-sylvo-pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sub-sectors is expected to fall from 49% in 2010 to 25% in 2020. 

 Component 1 Outputs: (i) The Government pays its share in BADF's capital, allowing 
for the capital to be closed and for compliance with the prudential standards of 

WAEMU Banking Commission; (ii) BADF is established and operational, and targets 

XOF 34 billion loans to the agricultural sector in 2020; (iii) gender equity in BADF's 

operations with 20% of total loans granted to women in 2020; this figure is expected 

to increase substantially when BADF launches its special product for women. 

 Component 2 Output: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism is established in 2020; 
and (ii) warrantage is operational in 2020. 

2.8.2 Progress towards achievement of outcomes will be measured at regular intervals, through a 

variety of activities, including regular Bank supervision missions, and quarterly progress reports and 

audits. Objectively verifiable evidence of progress to the highest targets will be obtained from the 

reports of the quarterly portfolio monitoring meetings organised by COBF with the Bank's project 

implementation units in Burkina Faso. 

 PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance   

3.1.1  As an institutional support project, PACBA does not generate direct income to be used in 

determining the financial return. However, through the direct and indirect effects of improving access 

to agricultural financing and the degree of processing agricultural products, PACBA would achieve 

economic and social performance. 

3.1.2  Furthermore, with regard to BADF (TA C3) itself, the analysis, based on the documents sent 

to the Central Bank for the 5-year business plan, shows a profitable banking model from the second 

fiscal year, driven by: (i) sustained growth in Net Banking Income (NBI), +60% on average per year 

to XOF 8 billion at the end of the fifth year; the NBI is driven by the portfolio volume whose average 

annual growth of 40% helps to give the bank 3% of the credit market share at the end of the fifth year, 

(ii) optimised operating expenses with a steadily decreasing operating ratio before stabilisation at 

39% from the fourth year onwards; and (iii) a portfolio maintained at a very high quality, with an 

average default rate of 4% as from the fourth year of operation.  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental Impact (TA B7) 

3.2.1.1 By nature, PACBA is a financial sector project. The sub-projects to be financed by BADF 
will be projects with medium, minimal and/or no negative social or environmental impacts (agrifood, 

services, and soft services). Consequently, it has been classified under Category 4 (2) by the teams in 

charge of verifying the environmental and social compliance of Bank projects (SNSC). BADF is in 

the start-up phase and has not yet started its operations. However, as recommended by SNSC, the 

project will establish an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in close 



18 

 

collaboration with SNSC teams. BADF will submit the final ESMS to the Bank for opinion and 

approval. 

3.2.2 Impact on Climate Change 

3.2.2.1 Since the project is in the financial sector, it is not in itself vulnerable to climate change, 
neither is it eligible for categorisation by the Bank's Climate Protection System. The sub-projects are 

in the agricultural sector, which is highly exposed to climatic hazards – droughts and floods caused 

by heavy rains and successive rainy days. Local measurements of these climatic hazards will 

contribute to measuring them more appropriately and providing proportional insurance. There are 

risks that other hazards that affect agricultural production may not be taken into account. Such is the 

case with capricious and staggered rainy seasons, their abrupt end not allowing for full maturation of 

crops (shorter duration of the rainy season). 

3.2.3 Social Impact 

3.2.3.1 The social impact of PACBA has many dimensions. First, by increasing agricultural 
productivity and production, it will increase the income of farmers, many of whom are young people 

and women, as well as enhance food security. Better still, not only will income increase but it will 

also be stabilised through agricultural insurance. Similarly, the number of jobs created is expected to 

increase and, thanks to the securing of agricultural income, the jobs will steadily become less 

precarious. These are key factors for settling the rural population, and thereby avoiding massive rural 

exodus due mainly to poverty, droughts or sudden floods. Finally, PACBA opens new windows of 

investment opportunities for the private sector.  

3.2.4 Gender (TA A5) 

3.2.4.1 Burkina Faso ranked 146th under the Gender Equality Index in the 2016 Human 

Development Report, out of 188 countries surveyed. This is due to inequalities based on social 

perceptions and practices that restrict women's rights and reduce their access to economic and social 

opportunities in comparison to men (financial inclusion or political involvement). Women make up 

55% of the agricultural labour force, but only 40% of them own land. Consequently, access to 

property likely to be mortgaged as collateral with the banking system is a discriminatory factor against 

women's access to credit, as well as lack of knowledge of the procedures for obtaining credit. As a 

result, women have less access to credit than men (8% compared to 15% for men). 

3.2.4.2. The PACBA project is classified in Category 3 of the Bank's gender categorisation system. 

Specifically the project will: (i) improve women's access to financing, as well as financial and non-

financial services; (ii) increase women farmers' productivity and income; and (iii) facilitate women's 

financial inclusion by supporting access to credit and financial education programmes for women. 

During the start-up period of the bank's activities, it is expected that 20% of the loans will be allocated 

to women. This figure is expected to double rapidly as BADF intends to introduce a specific product 

for women. In this regard, BADF plans to apply for a line of credit from potential donors. Under the 

project, efforts would be made to collaborate with AFAWA to provide strategic advice and services 

to BADF for better access for women.  

3.2.5 Involuntary Settlement 

3.2.5.1. The PACBA project will not lead to involuntary population displacements. However, the 

ESMS will allow for environmental and social screening of sub-projects that will subsequently be 

financed by AfDB to determine whether they will eventually lead to involuntary population 

displacements requiring the preparation of a resettlement action plan in line with AfDB's integrated 

safeguards system. 



19 

 

 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional Arrangements (TA B3)   

4.1.1.1  The institutional framework is based on Decree No. 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID of 15 

February 2018 defining general regulations governing development projects and programmes 

implemented in Burkina Faso. 

4.1.1.2  Financial supervision of the project will be provided by the Ministry of Economy, Finance 

and Development (MINEFID) through the General Directorate of the Treasury and Public 

Accounting (DGTCP). Its role is to mobilise financial resources required for project implementation. 

Technical supervision will be provided by the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH) through the General Directorate for Promotion of the Rural Economy (DGPER), which will 

be in charge of the project management. Therefore, it will ensure its effective implementation. The 

project is linked to the "Agricultural Economy" budget programme, one of the operational 

objectives of which is to improve access to financing. 

4.1.1.3  The Budget Programme Officer will be the Project Coordinator. He/she will ensure 

permanent monitoring of project implementation, particularly the expected outcomes. 

4.1.1.4  The Review Committee will steer the project. It will contribute to project implementation by 

adopting and approving key documents. In this capacity, it will be the project’s decision-making 

body. 

4.1.2. Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework (TA B4) 

4.1.2.1  All goods and consultancy services financed by the Bank's resources will be procured in 

accordance with the Procurement Framework for operations financed by the Bank Group approved 

in October 2015. In accordance with the framework and following various evaluations conducted, it 

was agreed that all goods and consultancy services will be procured in accordance with the Bank's 

procurement system using the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) provided for that purpose and 

based on the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMP) specified in the Procurement Plan. 

More specifically, procurements will be made as follows: 

(i) All goods required for the project and to be procured using the PMP will be in 

accordance with the provisions of Article 8.5 of the Bank Group Procurement Policy 

document; and 

(ii)  All consultancy services required for the project and to be procured using the PMP 

will be in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.6 of the Bank Group 

Procurement Policy document. 

4.1.2.2  Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): To take into account the specific 

aspects of the project, the Bank has assessed: (i) the risks at national, sector and project level; and (ii) 

the capacity of the executing agency. The results of the assessments showed that the procurement risk 

was "moderate" and helped to determine the appropriate risk mitigation measures included in the 

PRCA action plan indicated in para. B.5.9 of Annex B5.    

4.1.3. Financial Management Arrangements 

4.1.3.1  PACBA financial management will be provided by the General Directorate for Promotion 

of the Rural Economy (DGPER) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Fisheries Resources, 



20 

 

which has been appointed the Project Executing Agency. The project will be managed by a DGPER 

Project Implementation Unit that will be established and its capacity strengthened in terms of project 

management and compliance with Bank rules and procedures. The DGPER Director General will be 

responsible for the overall project financial management, and will be assisted in this regard by the 

DGPER Administrative and Financial Director. The fiduciary risk following the assessment is 

deemed substantial (See the Technical Annex for more details).   

4.1.3.2. The project will prepare and submit quarterly reports (financial and technical) to the Bank 

within 45 days following the end of each quarter. The Internal Accounts Inspectorate of the 

supervisory Ministry should include the financial operations of the project in its annual audit 

programme as part of its role as the project internal auditor.   

4.1.4  Disbursement Arrangements   

4.1.4.1   Throughout the component 1, the Bank’s support will be through the reinboursment method. 

Sice obtaintion the approval of the new bank is a prerequisite for the support provided by the Bank 

through the PACBA, the reinboursement method will be used to enable the Bank repay, up to five (5) 

billion FCFA, the State of Burkina Faso for the expenses it incurred as part of its participation in the 

capital of BADF. These expenses concern those incurred in order to obtain the favourable opinion of 

the WAMU Banking Commission obtained on March 14, 2018 and the approval of the Minister in 

charge of Finance obtained on April 16, 2018 by Order N ° 183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF which 

dedicates the effective creation of the BADF. It should be recalled the the Bank's support was 

requested to reimburse the State of Burkina Faso's stake in the capital of a bank, called Banque 

Agricole du Faso. Since the Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso started to exist as a bank only after 

the authorization obtained on April 16, 2018, this date is used as the date on which the Burkinabe 

State's expenditure on the operation acquisition of a stake in the capital of BADF was incurred. For 

all intents and purposes, the timeline for the creation of the Agricultural Bank of Faso was as follows: 

i. On October 4, 2017 and September 21, 2017, the Burkinabe State, like the other shareholders, 
disbursed the amount corresponding to its planned share in the capital of BADF in two 

blocked bank accounts registered in the name of the "Société en formation (company in 

constitution) Banque Agricole du Faso"; 

ii. On October 13, 2017, Banque Agricole du Faso was created as a public limited company. 
This step is a prerequisite for the review of the BADF application by the UEMOA Banking 

Commission. Thus, at this stage, the BADF does not yet have the status of a bank and is not 

yet registered on the list of WAEMU banks. 

iii. On April 16, 2018, the limited company Banque Agricole du Faso is approved as a bank and 
registered under the number C 0207 J on the list of banks of the UEMOA. 

 

4.1.4.2. Disbursements and Cash Flows: Disbursements from ADF resources will be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s disbursement prodecedures. Three (3) disbursement methods will be 

used:  

1) The reimbursement method: it will be used to enable the State of Burkina Faso to request 
repayment to the Bank of the exepenses, ocuring starting April 16, 2018, related to its 

participation in the capital of the BADF for a total amount not exceeding UA 6,368 million as 

stipulated in the paragraph 4.1.4.1 of the evaluation report referring to the retroactive financing. 

Repayment by the Bank may be made upon receipt of a request for reimboursement 

accompanied by evidence of pre-financing by the State of its participation in the capital of 

BADF. The amount reimboursed will be up to the amount of shares owned by the State of 

Burkina Faso and held in the capital of the BADF. 



21 

 

2) The special account method: it will be used to finance the operation and the training and 
workshop activities organized by the project implementation unit. The provisions of the 

disbursement manual will be fully applicable for the management and justification of resources 

disbursed to the special account. A special account will be opened at the National Treasury with 

the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) for the Bank financing. The special account 

will operate under the principle of double signature. This account will receive the funds to pay 

the eligible expenses on the counterparty. 

3) The direct payment method: it will be used for the payment of contracts and for expenses related 
to the implementation of component 2 "Support for Securing the Agricultural Financing 

Ecosystem", notably for payments in respect of the procurement of the weather stations and 

their maintenance contract. 

4.1.4.3. In addition, disbursements from counterpart funds will be made at national level through a 

special counterpart funds account opened at the treasury and operating under the double signature 

principle. The account will receive the funds intended to pay for eligible expenses from the 

counterpart funds.  

4.1.5 Audit Arrangements  

The project's financial statements will be audited yearly by an independent audit firm acceptable to 

the Bank. The audit report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to the Bank within 

six months following the end of the fiscal year in accordance with the Bank's terms of reference. The 

cost of the audit will be borne by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.2.1 The physical implementation of the project will cover 25 months, from December 2018 to 

December 2020.  

4.2.2  Upon effectiveness of the loan agreement, a launching mission will be organised to train 

BADF officials in the Bank's procedures. Supervision missions will be organised at least twice a year. 

Quarterly and annual activity reports will also be prepared and submitted to the Bank.  

4.3 Governance 

Burkina Faso has made significant progress in governance over the past three years. At the political 

level, the progress made is in terms of the creation and strengthening of republican institutions, the 

consolidation of the rule of law, and the reinforcement of human rights. As regards corruption, 

according to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index in 2016, the country is ranked 

72nd out of 172 countries in the world, and among the top 10 least corrupt African countries. With 

respect to public financial governance, Burkina Faso has, with IMF support, implemented major 

reforms to improve transparency and efficiency in public resource management. With regard to 

BADF, it should be noted that as a bank approved by BCEAO, it will be subject to the supervision of 

the WAEMU Banking Commission and will have to comply with the banking regulations in force in 

WAEMU.   

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 PACBA will naturally be sustainable because, given its agricultural insurance mechanism, 

it comprises major actions to reinforce the sustainability of BADF in particular, and agricultural 

financing in general. In addition, the authorities' clear intention to consolidate the PACBA mechanism 



22 

 

by establishing an Agricultural Credit Security Fund, namely the Natural Disasters Fund and the 

Interest Rate Subsidy Fund, will strengthen, complement and replicate the impact of PACBA. 

4.5 Risk Management 

Table 4.5 

Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

Risks Level Mitigation Measures 

Rising socio-political unrest Moderate Government commitment to continue negotiations with a view to taking socio-

economic and political demands into account. 

Increased security risks 
Moderate 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong and sustainable 

responses, and has resolutely embraced a regional antiterrorism framework (G5 

Sahel) to address the various threats. 

BADF’s weak human and 

institutional capacity to properly 

manage the bank 

Moderate 
BADF's managers have extensive experience in banking and, particularly, in 

agricultural financing. In addition, the technical assistance contract with CNCA 

of Senegal will provide support to BADF in various areas, including IT systems 

management and risk management systems and procedures. Similarly, the entry 

of a technical and financial partner into BADF's capital is still under 

consideration.  

Governance: Strong Government 

participation in the bank’s capital 

following the Central Bank's 

request to pull out shareholders 

deemed financially unsound.  

Moderate  
The Burkinabe Fund for Economic and Social Development (FBDES) holds the 

Government’s participation and additional shares owned by organisations 

considered weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is also requested to gradually 

transfer the shares, as well as the Government’s participation, to stakeholders in 

line with its area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is still being considered. Independent directors 

will also be co-opted to the Board of Directors to improve the quality of the 

management structure. 

Risk of strong pressure on 

management from farmers’ 

cooperatives who consider BADF 

as a bank established on their 

initiative and dedicated to them 

Moderate  
Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the outset by farmers’ 

organisations, and therefore their willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In 

addition, the continued and strong sensitisation of farmers’ organisations on the 

need to ensure the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority to organised 

farmers' networks that will help to gather customer information and, if necessary, 

collect unpaid debts.  

Strong competition from existing 

banks 

Moderate  BADF will address segments not covered by existing banks. Given the strong 

ownership by farmer organisations, BADF will rely on farmers’ networks to attract 

agricultural customers. The bank will also diversify its activities by financing non-

agricultural sectors.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice 

in agribusiness investment financing within an innovative context; (ii) the adoption of appropriate 

instruments and an attractive deposit remuneration system to substantially improve the mobilisation 

of national savings; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the emergence of 

agricultural processing units and improve agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso; and (iv) studies 

to be conducted on agricultural insurance and warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within 

the administration and to non-State actors through the documents and procedures manuals produced, 

procedures manuals, as well as training sessions that will be organised under the project. The 

knowledge will be acquired through producing the following reports: technical assistance reports, 

activity reports prepared by the executing agency, supervision reports, project completion report, and 

"discussion and working documents" of the Bank's Office in Burkina Faso. Finally, the knowledge 

and lessons learned will be disseminated within the Department, the Bank and in the host country by 

the AfDB through seminars and IDEV reports. 



23 

 

 LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

PACBA will be financed from ADF resources by a loan of UA 7.5 million, for which a loan agreement 

will be concluded between the African Development Fund and Burkina Faso (the Borrower). 

5.2 Conditions for Intervention by the African Development Fund 

 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness 

Effectiveness of the loan agreement shall be subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of Section 12.01 of 

the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the Fund 

(Sovereign Entities). 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan  

In addition to effectiveness of the loan agreement, the first disbursement of loan resources shall be 

subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of the following conditions: 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the Project Coordinator whose experience and 
terms of reference would have been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; and 

(ii) Provide evidence of the attachment of the project to the review committee of the 
program “Agricultural economy” (écnomie agricole) which will ensure continuous 

monitoring of project implementation, particularly the adoption and approval of key 

documents and the expected outcomes. 

 Environmental and Social Safeguard Clauses 

The Borrower undertakes to implement an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 

to ensure that the new Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) identifies and 

implements environmental and social management measures for its sub-projects before the loans or 

investments are approved by BADF, and that BADF also applies the required level of sub-project 

control during the loan period.  

 Other Undertakings 

(i) Provide evidence of BADF’s establishment of a computerised management system 
(accounting and financial management software) and training staff in its use latest by 

31 March 2019; 

(ii) Prepare and submit to the Fund an Administrative, Accounting and Financial 
Procedures Manual for the project unit, and train staff in its use latest by 31 March 

2019; 

(iii) Prepare and submit to the Fund a BADF Operational Business Plan latest 30 
September 2019; and 

(iv) Provide to the Fund, by December 31st of each year, evidence of the budgeting of the 
annual tranche for the following year of the borrower's contribution to the starting 

fiscal year 2020.  



24 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with applicable Bank policies. 

 RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant Burkina Faso an 

ADF loan of UA 7.5 million to finance the Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank 

(PACBA) under the conditions set out in this report. 

 


























































 

 
 

 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 
 

CHAD 
 
 

PROJECT TO BUILD RESILIENCE FOR FOOD SECURITY AND 
NUTRITION IN CHAD’S RURAL COMMUNITIES 

 
 

 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2018 

 
 
Project Information Sheet  

Client Information  
Borrower    :  Republic of Chad 
 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry in charge of Agriculture 
 
Financing Plan  
 
Source Amount (in USD) Instrument 
GEF 5,329,452 Grant 
ADF 15,045,800 Grant (already 

approved) 
TOTAL COST 20,375,252  

 
Key Financing Information  

 
Grant Currency  

 
USD 

Duration  36 Months 
ERR, NPV (baseline scenario) 13% 

*if need be  
 
Timeframe  – Main Milestones (expected) 
 

 
GEF Project Information Sheet (PIS) approval  

 
April 2015 

Project validation by the  GEF Chief Executive 
Officer  and  Chairperson  

September 2017 

AfDB Board Approval   
Signing of Grant Agreement   
Effectiveness   
Mid-term Review  
Date of Last Disbursement   
Completion  31 December 2022 
Last Reimbursement  N/A 

 



 

iv 
 

Project Executive Summary 

1.1 Project Overview: A Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant of USD 5,329,452 (UA 
3.807 million) was mobilized to finance the project entitled “Building Resilience for Food 
Security and Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities ”. This co-financed grant will be used to 
maximize the impact of the Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity 
in the Sahel (P2RS), funded with African Development Fund (ADF) resources. P2RS, 
approved by the Board of Directors in October 2014, was designed for a 20-year period 
tosustainably increase agro-sylvo-pastoral and fisheries productivity in the Sahel. In addition 
to the regional component, some countries are implementing their own national projects. P2RS 
Project 1 involves seven Sahel countries most affected by food crises, including Chad. The 
project will serve as a basis for GEF co-financing. The P2RS-Chad component, placed under 
the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, specifically aims to strengthen the resilience of 
rural communities through the development of agriculture and livestock, irrigation systems and 
regional markets for agricultural inputs and livestock products. The implementation of P2RS 
Project 1 is under way and involves both central and decentralized entities responsible for 
agriculture, animal resources, the environment and nutrition. GEF’s co-financing, which 
targets the same objectives as the initial P2RS, will be implemented concurrently with the Chad 
component. The GEF Project Identification Form (PIF) was approved on 28 April 2015 and 
endorsed by its Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson on 13 September 2017. The aim of 
the GEF project is to help restore and maintain the basic productivity of the natural resources 
on which people depend. The idea is to strengthen food security and nutrition by using 
sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems in the target regions. 

1.2 The underlying concept of the GEF project is that resilience in the Sahel will be 
impossible if equal attention is not paid to both  the rational and sustainable management of 
the natural systems that support rural livelihoods. The proposed project will also seek to restore 
and maintain the productivity of natural assets in fragile ecosystems through: (i) the 
improvement of agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in arid zones; (ii) the promotion of integrated 
ecosystem management to protect biodiversity; and (iii) knowledge building and monitoring 
and evaluation. It aims to build the resilience of communities and households regularly affected 
by climate-related extreme events, through a sustained increase in the productivity of natural 
resources, thus helping to enhance food security and nutrition in Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
provinces. Therefore, the project will enable stakeholders to contribute to the restoration of 
biodiversity in fragile ecosystems. On this basis, the GEF project will be implemented in the 
regions targeted by the initial P2RS over a four-year period. The Ministry of Agriculture, which 
oversees the initial P2RS, will remain the executing body for the GEF project. The activities 
will be implemented by the existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and managed by the 
same steering committee. It should be noted that the GEF project has already been approved 
by the GEF Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson, and has now been submitted to the Board 
of Directors for approval. 

1.3 Needs Assessment: In line with the rural development, environmental management 
and climate change priorities and the Chad Vision 2030 for Development, whose main 
objective is to make Chad an emerging country by 2030, the Government has developed and 
launched a number of sectoral policies and national development strategies, including the 
National Development Plan 2017-2021, which succeeds the previous National Development 
Plan 2013-2015, the National Poverty Reduction Strategies I and II, the National Biodiversity 
Strategy and Action Plan (2014 - 2020) and the National Adaptation Programme of Action on 
Climate Change (NAPA, 2009). The project interventions will help to reduce land degradation 
and promote sustainable management of natural resources, thereby building economic, social 
and climate resilience. As such, it is in line with thrust 4 of the Vision 2030 paper, which aims 



 

v 
 

to improve the quality of life of the Chadian people by creating a healthy environment with 
preserved natural resources. 

1.4 Target Beneficiaries: The project’s direct beneficiaries are the 11,000 smallholder 
farmers who engage in subsistence agriculture and livestock farming on marginal lands and 
derive their income from agriculture, livestock farming or the gathering of wood and non-wood 
products. Through the various activities that will be initiated, the project will help to bolster 
their resilience to food and nutrition insecurity and improve access to agro-pastoral and 
transhumance resources, which should be developed with an emphasis on resource 
sustainability and diversification.  

Professional organizations, grassroots community organizations and actors at both local and 
central levels involved in the implementation of the planned activities will have their capacities 
strengthened through the activities proposed by the project. 

1.5 Bank’s Value Added: The Bank will build on and develop implementation approaches 
and principles based on its long experience in the Sahel, especially in water mobilization and 
control, sustainable natural resource management and resilience-building among vulnerable 
groups. In Chad,, the Bank has developed and implemented a number of projects in the rural 
development sector, including the Surface Runoff Water Enhancement Project (PVERS), the 
Natural Resources Management Project in the Sudan Region (PGRN-ZS) and the Food Crops 
Cultivation Project in the Sudan Region (PCVZS). These have shown that technical support 
for production through the dissemination of appropriate soil fertility management techniques 
and access to water, accompanied by adequate medium- and long-term investments in a 
participatory approach are necessary to cope with shocks and reduce the adverse effects of 
climate change. Through this GEF financing, the Bank will draw on this wealth of experience  
to undertake more sustained investments in support of the organization of farmers, women and 
young people, focusing on the mainstreaming of environmental, climate issues and nutrition 
issues.   

1.6 Knowledge Building: The project will support environmental awareness and 
stakeholder capacity-building, focusing on improving integrated landscape management and 
agro-sylvo-pastoral planning. The project will also comprise sustainable land and forest 
management technologies as well as the dissemination of best practices in Sahelian agriculture 
and biodiversity conservation to stakeholders. The knowledge that will result from the 
implementation of these approaches and techniques, as well as the lessons learned therefrom, 
will be capitalized for dissemination and development  during the design and management of 
future projects.  

Lessons learned will be captured in quarterly and annual progress reports, technical reports 
and the mid-term review and completion reports. 

 



 

vi 
 

Results-Based Logical Framework (Project’s Logical Framework/ Matrix) 
 

Country and Project Name: CHAD –  Project to Build Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition in Rural Communities 
Project Goal: Strengthen Food and Nutrition Security through Sustainable and Resilient Agro-Sylvo-Pastoral Systems in the Sahel Regions of Chad 

RESULTS-CHAIN  
 PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION RISKS /MITIGATION  MEASURES  Indicator 

 (including CSI) Baseline Data  Goal  

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Impact:  Improvement 
of the quality of life for 
the people of the 
project area. 
Contribute to the 
reduction of the food 
and nutrition insecurity 
and to the growth of 
the agricultural sector.   

Incidence of food insecurity  
High rates of global acute 
malnutrition  
Child and infant mortality  
- Share of the agricultural 

sector in the GDP  

18.5% (2016) 
 

13.9% (2017) 
 
133 (2015) 

23% 
(2015) 

5% (2030) 
 

 
5% (2030)              

 
 

100 (2030) 
 
Increase by +5.4 (2021) 
 

- National strategies 
review report 
(ANADER).  

- Statistics Directories, 
- Reports by the 

Ministry of Health. 
- Reports by the 

Ministry in charge of 
the Plan and National 
Economic Statistics 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

Outcome 1.1: 
Sustainable increase in 
agricultural and 
livestock production to 
support food security 
and resilience 

Surface area of degraded 
land recovered. . 

Not available 7,000 ha of degraded arable 
land under SLM 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term  and  completion 
reviews 

Risk 1: The people may not use the new 
techniques correctly, although they know 
the benefit of adopting them  
 
Mitigation measures: Constant 
awareness-raising in local communities so 
that they may focus on the proper use of 
land and natural resource technologies. 

 
Risk 2: Different groups with opposing 
interests (e.g., herders/grazing versus 
farmers/agricultural production) may 
disrupt the project implementation 
 
Mitigation Measures: Focus at each stage 
on the overall  complementarity of project 
activities and benefit of integrated 
management 

Volume of natural fodder 
available on rangelands 

Not available 3,000 ha under rangeland 
pastoral management 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, mid-
term review and project 
completion review 

% increase in agricultural 
and livestock production due 
to better land and ecosystem 
management 

Not available 5 micro-projects using 
suitable land conservation and 
regeneration techniques and 
mixed cropping systems 
implemented by farmers and 
stockbreeders 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, mid-
term review and project 
completion review 



 

vii 
 

Number of land users trained 
in the use of  INRM/SLEM 
of best practices 

Not available 11,000 land users trained in 
INRM and SLEM 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term and completion 
reviews  

 

Number of staff trained in 
INRM policies and practices 

Not available 150 local staff trained in 
sustainable INRM policies 
and practices 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term and  completion 
reviews  

Output 1.2: 
Development of  
irrigation and pastoral 
infrastructure and 
adapted agro-sylvo-
pastoral techniques to 
improve livelihoods 
and reduce 
vulnerability 

No. of ponds and boreholes 
drilled 

Not Available  
 

15 ponds and 15 boreholes Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports   
 
Acceptance and allocation 
reports 
 
Design reports 

Risk 1: Failure by herders and  farmers to 
agree on the location of water points 

 
Mitigation measures: Ensure everyone's 
participation in the project, from launch to 
implementation  
 
Risk 2: Reluctance of engineers to comply 
with new guidelines and designs 
 
Mitigation measures: Organize training in 
a timely manner, implement activities and 
learn lessons quickly. 
 

No. of water points created   

 

Not available 20 village water points -   

 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports 

 
Allocation reports 
 
Design reports 

Land area in hectares 
managed for irrigated crops 

Not available Controlled irrigation on 345 
ha on an exposed site 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports  
 
Allocation reports 
 
Design reports 



 

viii 
 

Quantity and variety of 
improved seeds planted and 
rate of increase in crop 
productivity 
 

Not available Resilient seed varieties 
identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 
households and farmers' 
organizations  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, reports 
on field extension services  
 
Allocation reports 
 
 
Acceptance reports 

Number of sustainable 
income-generating activities 
developed and % increase in 
incomes 
 

Not available 6 other income-generating 
activities (3 in the agricultural 
sector and 3 in the livestock 
sector)  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports 
 

No. of cereal banks created  
 

Not available 30 grain banks Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, reports 
on field extension services 
Acceptance reports 

No. of input  shops built Not available 20 agricultural input shops Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports , 
reports on field extension 
services  
Allocation reports 
Acceptance reports 

No. of livestock feed stores 
set up   
 

Not available 30 livestock feed stores set up Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports , 
reports on field extension 
services  
Allocation reports 
Acceptance reports 



 

ix 
 

Outcome 1.3: 
Improving agro-
systems management 
methods to generate 
sustainable flows of 
services related to the 
agricultural and 
forestry ecosystem 
 

 
 No. of hectares of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries, 
 
No. farmers practising 
agroforestry 

Not available  

 

Not available 

5,000 ha of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries 
and agroforestry 
 
 
50% in both regions 
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 

 

Risk 1:  Current policy prohibiting tree 
cutting, for whatever reason, may 
discourage tree planting activities. 

 
Mitigation Measures: Farmers-
Government discussions to reach an 
agreement on how farmers will benefit 
from reforestation 
 

 
Risk 2: Risk that the battle for water will 
divert resources to "priority areas", such as 
livestock and food crops. 
 
Mitigation measures: Water supply is 
provided before or simultaneously with 
other project activities so that there is 
enough water to meet all needs 

 
No. of producer groups  
 

Not available 10 local producer groups 
(including a minimum of 5 
women's groups)  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Outcome 2.1: 
Improving integrated 
landscape planning to 
ensure the resilience 
and protection of 
habitats 
 

No. of integrated land-use 
plans  
 

Not available Integrated land-use plan at 
each project site 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Risk: Lack of political commitment to 
mainstream climate change issues and 
integrated natural resource management 
into development processes, with the 
primary aim of preserving existing gains 
from core development programmes. 
 
Mitigation measures: Organize training, 
carry out activities and draw lessons 
quickly to demonstrate the benefits. 
 

Area subject to sound land-
use management  
 

Not available Appropriate management of 
all farmland in the project 
area, with maintenance or 
increase of vegetation cover 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Outcome 2.2: A 
favourable 
environment through 
land conservation 
mechanisms, wood 

No. of SLFM Plans 
 

Not available SLFM is implemented in all 
sections of the project area 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports ,  
SLFM plans 

Risk: Lack of political commitment to 
mainstream climate change issues and 
integrated natural resource management 
into development processes, with the 
primary aim of preserving existing gains 



 

x 
 

biomass and 
biodiversity 

Certification system in place Not available Certification system (Plan 
Vivo) in place 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
certification documentation 
developed  

from core development programmes. 
 
Mitigation measures: Identification and 
acquisition by the project of the services of 
a consultant with technical skills, 
interested, available and willing to work 
with communities and the Government in 
the context of participatory monitoring, 
while building local capacities to ensure 
sustainability.  

No. of areas and hectares 
assessed for protection 

Not available Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
eco-regions of the Sahelian 
acacia savannah or the flooded 
savannah of Lake Chad  

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports , 
consultation reports, 
delimitation maps 
 

 
Outcome 3.1: The 
lessons learned are 
recorded and 
knowledge 
disseminated  
 

Best practices knowledge 
products available, shared 
and in use 

Not available At least 10 major knowledge 
products acceptable by 
international publication and 
information standards, and are 
adapted to local needs clearly 
used in training 

Project monitoring systems, 
project implementation 
reports, publications  
 

 

 

Outcome 3.2: The  
project impact 
ismonitored and 
evaluated  

Involvement of communities 
in vulnerability monitoring 

Not available A series of indicators for 
monitoring community 
vulnerability and resilience is 
adopted and intensely used 

Community monitoring 
reports, project monitoring 
systems, district reports, 
participatory monitoring, 
evaluation, reflection and 
learning (PMERL) report   

 
 
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

Output 1.1: 
Land degradation is 
decreasing: 7,000 ha of 
degraded agricultural 
land under SLM and 
3,000 ha under 
rangeland management  
 

1. Ha of degraded arable 
under SLM and km of 
managed pastoral land  

0 7 000 ha of degraded farmland 
under SLM, 3 000 ha of 
degraded land under rangeland 
management 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

 

2. No. of micro-projects using 
land-based conservation and 
regeneration techniques and 
mixed cropping systems 
implemented by farmers and 
herders 

0 5 micro-projects  

2. . Capacity of the agro-
sylvo-pastoral actors built 

0 11,000 land users trained in 
the INRM and the SLWM 
 

-  

3.  No. of local staff trained in 
sustainable INRM policies 

0 150  -  



 

xi 
 

and practices at workshops 

Output 1.2: 
Investments are being 
made in SLM, rural 
hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure, crop 
diversification, 
income-generating 
activities and grain 
banks 

No. of investments in SLM 
and rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure 

0 20 village water points, 
controlled irrigation on 345 
ha on exposed sites) 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Appropriate crop species 
and varieties of disseminated 

0 Resilient seed varieties 
identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 
households and farmers' 
organizations - 
 

-  

3. No. of income-generating 
activities promoted 

0 3 agricultural and 3 livestock 
activities identified and 
implemented jointly with 
households - 

-  

4. No. of grain banks, farm 
input stores and livestock 
feed stores established   

0 30 grain banks, 20 farm input 
stores and 30 livestock feed 
stores set up 

-  

Output 1.3: Increased 
SFM area, training in 
SFM and arable land 
management and 
diversification of local 
producer groups  
 

1. Area (ha) of land under 
SFM 

0 5,000 ha of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries, 
agroforestry, etc.  

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Capacity-building in SFM 
and land management at 
district and local levels 

0 Farmers, landholder groups, 
local authorities, etc., trained 
in SFM and land management 

-  

3. Diversification of income 
sources  through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities 

0 10 groups of local producers 
(at least 5 women's groups) 
diversify their sources of 
income through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities 

-  

Output 2.1: 
Demonstration of 
participatory land-use 
planning, integrated 
land use planning for 
priority 
agroecosystems, and 
effective land-use 
management 
 

1. Demonstration of 
participatory land-use 
planning 

0 Number of participatory land 
restoration and land-use/NRM 
plans developed with local 
authorities and communities 
 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Integrated land use plans 
for agroecosystems 

0 Number of local land use 
plans in targeted areas that 
mainstream  INRM  and the  
conservation and sustainable 
exploitation of biodiversity 

-  



 

xii 
 

 3. Surface area of well-
managed arable land, with 
maintenance or increased 
vegetation cover  

0 Number of hectares of 
properly managed arable land 

-  

Output 2.2: 
Intensification of  
SFLM practices and 
introduction a 
certification system for 
forest and agroforestry 
products 
 

1. Integration of SFLM 
practices 

0 Intensification of land-use 
systems by integrating SFLM 
practices, which will improve 
soil condition and carbon 
sequestration (and avoid 
deforestation and land 
degradation) 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports  
 

-  

2. Establishment of SFLM 
support mechanisms over 
wider areas, and appraisal and 
implementation of benefit-
sharing mechanisms to raise  
SFLM awareness  at 
community level. 

0 300 improved cooking stoves 
are distributed 

-  

3. Introduction of a 
certification system for 
forest/agroforestry products, 
as well as management 
systems with third-party 
implementation 

0 Plan Vivo system and standard 
used for certification of forest 
and agroforestry products - 

-  

4. Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
the ecoregions of the Sahel  
acacia savannah or the 
flooded savannah of Lake 
Chad  

0 Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
the ecoregions of the Sahel  
acacia savannah or the flooded 
savannah of Lake Chad 

-  

Output 3.1: 
Assessment of 
biodiversity and 
conservation needs, 
development of an 
awareness campaign 
framework, including 
dissemination guides 
and kits 

1. Information on biodiversity 
and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
ecoregions and possible 
response mechanisms 

0 Assessment of biodiversity 
and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
ecoregions and possible 
response mechanisms 
 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports  
 

-  

2. Awareness campaigns and 
training in ecosystem 
management aimed at raising 
consciousness and creating 

0 Framework developed for 
awareness campaigns and 
training to raise consciousness 
and  create an enabling 

-  



 

xiii 
 

 
  

an  enabling environment environment for ecosystem 
management 

3. Guides and kits on 
innovative INRM and 
biodiversity conservation 
practices in drylands 

0 Development and 
dissemination of guides and 
kits on innovative INRM and 
biodiversity conservation 
practices in drylands 

-  

Output 3.2: 
Establishment of a 
project monitoring 
system, including an 
M&E system to enable 
analysis of land 
degradation and 
biodiversity impacts, 
and the conduct of the  
mid-term review and 
final evaluation 
 

1. Systematic information on 
the progress made towards 
achievement of outcomes 
and outputs  

0 Adoption of the project 
monitoring system  
  

-  -  

2. M&E system for analysing 
the trend of land degradation 
and the socio-economic and 
biodiversity impacts 

0 M&E system for analysing the 
trend of land degradation and  
socio-economic and 
biodiversity impacts 

-  

3. Mid-term and final 
evaluations 

0 Mid-term and final 
evaluations conducted 

-  

 

Contributions: 
Component 1: : Improving agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in aridlands:        
Component 2:  Promoting of an integrated ecosystem management system for building resilience and biodiversity:  
Component 3: Knowledge management and M&E: 
Project management cost 

 
USD 2,525,000  
USD 1,750,000 
USD 800,668  
USD 253,784  



 

xiv 
 

Project Implementation Schedule  
 

 
No. 

 
Description of Activities  

2019 2020 2021 2022 
Quarter 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

0.0 Preparatory activities, Signature/ Effectiveness of Grant                 
1.0 Component 1: Improving Agro-sylvo-pastoral Productivity in Dryland                 
1.1 Improving agricultural, livestock and pasture production to support food security and resilience                 
 1.1.1 Decrease of land degradation: 7,000 ha of degraded farmland under SLM and 3,000 ha under pastoral 

management 
                

 1.1.2 Five (5) micro-projects using environment-adapted soil conservation / regeneration techniques and mixed 
cropping systems practiced by farmers and herders 

                

 1.1.3 Strengthenthe capacity of agro-sylvo-pastoral actors: 11,000 land users trained in INRM and SLWM                 
 1.1.4 150 local employees trained in sustainable INRM policies and practices through workshops                 
1.2 Improving agro-pastoral techniques and access to productive assets to enhance livelihoods and reduce vulnerability                 
 1.2.1 Investments in the SLWM: rural hydro-agricultural infrastructures (30 ponds and boreholes, 20 village water 

points, controlled irrigation on 345 ha on exposed sites) 
                

 1.2.2 Crop diversification and farming of appropriate species: Resilient seed varieties are identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 households and farmers' organizations 

                

 1.2.3 Six (6) other income-generating activities (3 agricultural, 3 livestock) identified and implemented by 
households  

                

 1.2.4 Thirty (30) grain banks, 20 farm input stores and 30 livestock feed stores established                 
1.3 1.3 Improving forest management and/or reforestation generates sustainable flows of agricultural and forest 

ecosystem services 
                

 1.3.1 Increase in land under SFM: 5,000 ha of arable land, woodlots, community forests, nurseries, agroforestry, 
etc. 

                

 1.3.2 Training in SFM and farmland management at the district and local levels (farmers, landholder groups, local 
authorities, etc.) 

 
 

               

 1.3.3 Ten local producer groups (including at least 5 women's groups at least) diversify their income through and 
sylvo-pastoralism 

                

2.0 Component 2: Promoting Integrated Ecosystem Management to Enhance Resilience and Biodiversity                 
2.1 2.1 Improving integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation                 
 2.1.1 Participatory land-use planning demonstration: No. Participatory restoration and exploitation/NRM plans 

developed with local authorities and communities 
                

 2.1.2 Integrated management plans for priority agroecosystems: Number of local land use plans in targeted areas, 
concerned with INRM practices and the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity 

                

 2.1.3 Hectares of cultivated land properly exploited, with maintenance or increase of the vegetation cover                 
2.2 Enabling environment improved through land conservation mechanisms, woody biomass and biodiversity                 
 2.2.1 Intensification of land-use systems by integrating SLFM practices, improving soil condition and carbon 

sequestration (deforestation and land degradation avoided) 
                



 

xv 
 

 
No. 

 
Description of Activities  

2019 2020 2021 2022 
Quarter 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

 
 2.2.2 Support mechanisms created for SLMF in larger landscapes, including assessment and implementation of 

benefit-sharing mechanisms to promote SLM practice at the community level, and 300 improved stoves distributed  
                

 2.2.3 Evaluation and introduction of a "sustainable forest management" certification system for forest products, 
agro-forestry or third-party certified management systems 

                

 2.2.4 Assess the feasibility of creating a protected area for the ecoregions of the Sahel acacia savannah or the 
flooded savannah of Lake Chad 

                

3.0 Component 3: Knowledge Management and Monitoring and Evaluation                 
3.1 Lessons learned, recorded and knowledge disseminated                 
 3.1.1 Assess biodiversity and conservation needs in the Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal ecoregions, and possible 

response mechanisms 
                

 3.1.2 Framework developed for awareness campaigns and training to raise awareness and promote an enabling 
environment for ecosystem-based management 

                

 3.1.3 Development and dissemination of guides and kits on innovative INRM practices and biodiversity 
conservation in drylands 

                

3.2 Monitoring and evaluation of project  impact                 

 3.2.1 Establishment of a project monitoring system, which provides systematic information on progress towards 
achievement of outcome and output targets 

                

 3.2.2 M&E systems for analysing the evolution of land degradation and associated socio-economic and biodiversity 
impacts. 

                

 3.2.3 Mid-term review and completion review conducted                 
 



 

1 
 

MANAGEMENT’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION TO THE BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO  FINANCE  FROM GEF 

RESOURCES  THE PROJECT TO BUILD RESILIENCE FOR FOOD SECURITY 
AND NUTRITION IN CHAD’S RURAL COMMUNITIES 

 

Management hereby submits the following report and recommendation for a GEF grant 
of USD 5,329,452 (UA 3.518 million) as additional resources to finance the Project to 
Build Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities, as part 
of the P2RS Programme. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUSTS AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The Government's development programme is set out in the Vision 2030, the objective 
being for Chad to "become an emerging middle-income country by 2030, whose economy is 
driven by diverse sustainable sources of growth and value-added activities". The National 
Development Plan (NDP 2017-2018) is the first operational planning paper of the Vision 2030. 
It replaces the NDP 2013-2015 and the successive national poverty reduction strategies (2003-
2006; 2008-2011), which give priority and special attention to agriculture and rural sector 
development, with a view to increasing food production and improving the incomes of rural 
communities. The Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in the Sahel 
(P2RS) was designed to sustainably increase agro-sylvo-pastoral and fisheries productivity in 
the Sahel, thus facilitating the achievement of Vision 2030. The three main components of 
P2RS are (i) rural infrastructure development; (ii) value chains and regional markets 
development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The initial P2RS will serve as 
the basis for GEF co-financing. The project is  in line not only with Chad's Country Strategy 
Paper (CSP) 2015-2020,  focused on "the development of infrastructure to promote robust and 
more diversified economic growth", but also  with the objectives of the Bank's Ten-Year 
Strategy since it will help Chad to move along a growth path that protects livelihoods, promotes 
greener growth and stimulates economic development. The project is also consistent with two 
of the Bank's five priorities, namely: “Feed Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for the 
people of Africa”. 

1.1.2 The GEF Project Identification Form (PIF) was approved in April 2015 and validated 
on 13 September 2017 by the Facility’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson for an amount 
of USD 5,329,452. The project aims to build the resilience of communities and households 
regularly affected by extreme weather events, through sustained growth in natural resource 
productivity, which will help to improve food security and nutrition in Kanem and Bahr el 
Ghazal provinces. The project will thus enable stakeholders to contribute to the restoration of 
biodiversity in fragile ecosystems. The GEF project is fully aligned with national strategies and 
P2RS, in that it aims to reduce and reverse trends in desertification, land degradation and 
biodiversity loss, which will improve productivity and food security while preserving the 
natural resources that support agro-ecological production. 

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Involvement 

1.2.1 Chad is increasingly confronted with problems of environmental degradation and 
extreme weather events, which are much more pronounced in such sectors as agriculture, 
livestock, fisheries and health. All policy papers (Vision 2030, National Development Plan, 
poverty reduction strategies) highlight the importance of protecting natural resources in a 
context of worsening weather phenomena in Chad, and the need to implement actions that 



 

2 

promote food security and build the adaptive capacities of affected populations. However,  
capacity to sustainably managenatural resources in the face of climate change is limited due to 
the shortage of human and financial resources in existing administrative entities (ministries, 
government agencies and local governments). 

1.2.2 The project is in line with the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022), the ultimate 
goal of which is sustainable inclusive growth. The focus is on protecting livelihoods, enhancing 
water, electricity and food security, promoting the sustainable use of natural resources, creating 
jobs, stimulating innovation and developing the economy. It will help to achieve the objectives 
of the Ten-Year Strategy by strengthening agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity and promoting 
integrated ecosystem management and inclusive growth. Undertaken in the Sahel, a region that 
attracts particular attention because of the difficult living conditions and vulnerability of its 
rural populations, but also because of its agricultural potential, the project will have an impact 
on agriculture and food security, thus helping to achieve two of the Bank’s “High 5s”. Given 
that the project also aims to promote innovative production techniques such as agroforestry and 
sylvo-pastoralism, activities that are mainly carried out by women, it will also help in the 
implementation of the Bank's Gender Strategy. Through its adaptation actions, the project will 
also help in the implementation of the Bank's 2016-2020 Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP), 
contributingapproximately 80.21% of the budget of components (1) and (2). 

1.2.3 As on 1 October 2018, the African Development Bank has 15 operations in Chad, with 
a net commitment of UA 214.23 million. Under the CSP 2016-2020, the Bank's support is 
based on two pillars: (i) infrastructure development to promote inclusive green growth; and (ii) 
promotion of good governance to increase the effectiveness of public actions and make the 
economic framework more attractive.  The Bank's strategic approach is to help create 
conditions conducive to more inclusive economic growth and to improve the country's 
integration into a sub-regional economy. Since the project's interventions aim to reduce land 
degradation and promote sustainable natural resource management, this will improve socio-
economic resilience while strengthening agro-pastoral and transhumance resources, which 
should be developed to enhance sustainability and diversify growth in the country. 

1.3 Donor Coordination  

1.3.1 A Technical and Financial Partners Committee, established in April 2011, is 
responsible for harmonizing donor interventions in Chad. The committee is composed of nine 
thematic groups and is chaired by France. The committee acts as a platform for dialogue, 
consultation and collaboration on development issues and on bilateral and multinational 
cooperation between Chad and its partners. A State/partners committee has also been set up to 
encourage dialogue with national authorities and improve aid management. A matrix of 
interventions for 2018-2021, which presents all partners’ planned interventions, has helped to 
better assess their areas of intervention and improve the division and coordination of work. Aid 
coordination has facilitated co-financing with technical and financial partners such as BADEA, 
the OPEC Fund, BDEAC, UNDP, EU and IsDB. 

2. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of P2RS (Core Project) and GEF Project  

2.1.1 Objectives and Components of the Initial P2RS: The P2RS Chad project served as a 
basis for mobilizing co-financing for the GEF project. The P2RS programme aims to eliminate 
the structural causes of acute and chronic food and nutrition crises by helping vulnerable 
households to increase their production and income, secure access to basic social infrastructure 
and services, and increase their livelihood options. It was designed for a 20-year period in four 



 

3 

phases, the first of which (Project 1) will be implemented over a five-year period, from 2015 
to 2019. The overall cost of P2RS Project 1, which covers seven CILSS countries, amounts to 
USD 271.77 million funded by ADF-XIII in the form of grants and loans, representing 85% of 
the total cost of Project 1. The remaining 15% is funded by (i) the governments of the countries 
involved in this first phase (Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and 
Senegal); (ii) the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS); 
and (iii) beneficiaries. 

2.1.2 In Chad, P2RS is under the technical supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture. The 
project strategy  is based on the development of agricultural and livestock farming products, 
the promotion of irrigation systems, accessibility to input markets and capacity-building for 
private and public institutions and communities in the agricultural sector. In that regard, the 
project is  constructing  pastoral and village water infrastructure in targeted rural districts and 
will help vulnerable households to not only improve their productivity through rational and 
sustainable management of natural resources but also to have better access to markets. A value 
chain approach based on growth sub-sectors is currently being used to ensure, maintain and 
increase access to and the marketing of agricultural products. The basic project will be 
implemented through three components, covering: 

(i)  Rural infrastructure development: This component aims to increase and improve 
agricultural production, processing and marketing infrastructure, which is 
indispensable for increasing the competitiveness of promising agricultural 
sectors and strengthening the resilience of agricultural operations in the Sahel. 
The main activities focus on the development of pastoral infrastructure and 
facilities, conservation, processing and marketing infrastructure, and basic 
social infrastructure. 

(ii)  Development of regional value chains and markets: This component aims to 
increase on a sustainable basis the production and productivity of the main agro-
sylvo-pastoral farming systems and to strengthen nutrition.  

(iii)  Programme management: The last component aims to define and deliver the 
institutional architecture for the management and coordination of all project-
related aspects, including procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and 
communication. 

2.1.3 A standing committee, composed of representatives of the central administration of 
the rural sector and all the actors involved in the development of the regions within the project 
area, is responsible for managing and making decisions concerning P2RS. 

2.1.4 Objectives and description of the GEF project: Entitled "Building Resilience for Food 
and Nutrition Security in Rural Communities in Chad", the GEF project will be based on the 
activities planned under the original project, to increase their impact on the environment and 
on the people. The activities are grouped into three components: (i) improvement of agro-
sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands; (ii) promotion of integrated ecosystem management to 
enhance resilience and biodiversity; and (iii) knowledge management and monitoring and 
evaluation, in accordance with the GEF eligibility criteria for the areas of intervention under 
which this project is funded, namely land degradation, biodiversity and sustainable forest 
management. The components and activities are presented in Table 2.1 below. 

The GEF project’s main expected outcomes  are as follows: (i) improvement of rural 
communities’ agricultural production practices and the management of natural pasture to 
support food security and resilience; (ii) use by rural communities of improved agro-pastoral 



 

4 

technologies and their access to production assets for enhanced livelihoods and reduced 
vulnerability; (iii) improved  management of forests  and/or reforestation areas, to generate 
sustainable flows of ecosystem services; (iv) enhanced integrated landscape planning for 
habitat resilience and preservation; (v) enabling  natural environment is enhanced through 
mechanisms for the conservation of land, woody biomass and biodiversity, (vi) lessons learned 
are captured and knowledge is disseminated; and (vii) the project impact is monitored and 
evaluated. 

2.1.5. The first objective of the initial P2RS is to develop rural infrastructure, value chains 
and regional markets. The additional GEF project will build on the first objective (development 
of rural infrastructure) to undertake investments in irrigation schemes development,  establish 
cereal banks, agricultural input shops and livestock feed shops, and ensure sound land and soil 
management (soil conservation/regeneration techniques and sustainable forest management). 
The second objective of the initial P2RS (development of value chains and regional markets) 
will be strengthened in the additional GEF project through crop diversification, identification 
of resilient seed varieties and selection of other income-generating activities. The additional 
GEF project will therefore increase the attention given to sustainability and resilience in the 
initial P2RS. Its purpose is to enable stakeholders to restore and maintain the productivity of 
natural resources and biodiversity in fragile ecosystems, in order to ultimately improve their 
livelihoods and the natural resources on which they depend. This approach is based on the 
premise that agro-sylvo-pastoral systems are essential for improving food and nutrition 
security. 
 
2.2 Project Components 
 

Table 2.1: Project Components and Costs 
 

Component 1: Enhancing agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands  

Outcomes Outputs GEF 
financing  

Co-financing 

1.1. Improved 
agricultural, rangeland 
and pastoral 
production in support 
of food security and 
resilience 

1.1.1 Land degradation is reduced: 7,000 ha of 
degraded cropland in sustainable land 
management mode and 3,000 ha in rangeland 
pastoral management mode.     

764,974 2,575,000 

1.1.2 Five micro-projects on soil and associated 
crop management and restoration techniques are 
being implemented by farmers and herders 
1.1.3 The capacities of agro-sylvo-pastoral actors 
are improved: 11 000 land users trained in 
integrated management of natural resources and 
sustainable land and water management 
1.1.4 150 local employees trained in sustainable 
integrated natural resource management policies 
and practices through workshops 

1.2 Improved agro-
pastoral technologies 
and access to 
production assets for 
enhanced livelihoods 
and reduced 
vulnerability 

1.2.1 Investments in sustainable land and water 
management: rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure (30 ponds and boreholes; 20 rural 
water points; controlled irrigation system on 345 
ha on exposed sites) 

1,264,820 3,258,000 

1.2.2 Crop diversification and cultivation of 
appropriate species: resistant seed varieties 
identified, produced and distributed to 100 
households and farmers’ organizations (FOs) 
1.2.3 Six alternative income-generating activities 
(3 agricultural and 3 livestock activities) are 
identified with households 



 

5 

1.2.4 30 cereal banks, 20 input stores, and 30 
fodder banks are set up 

1.3 Improved forest 
management and/or 
reforestation generate 
sustainable flows of 
agro- and forest 
ecosystem services 

1.3.1 Increased land area in sustainable forest 
management mode: 5,000 ha of forests, 
community forests, nurseries, agroforestry, etc. 

495,206 1,167,000 

1.3.2 Training in sustainable forest management 
and cropland management at the local level 
(farmers, land user groups, local authorities, etc.) 

1.3.3 10 local producer groups (at least 5 women's 
groups) diversify their income through 
agroforestry and sylvo-pastoralism 

Component 2: Promoting integrated ecosystem management for enhanced resilience and biodiversity 
conservation 
Outcomes Outputs GEF 

financing 
Co-financing 

2.1 Enhanced 
participatory 
landscape planning for 
habitat preservation 
and resilience 

2.1.1 Demonstration of participatory land-use 
planning: Number of participatory restoration and 
land use /natural resource management plans 
developed with local authorities and 
communities. 

633,186 1,809,103 

2.1.2 Land-use plans for priority agro-
ecosystems: Number of local plans for land-use in 
targeted areas including both integrated natural 
resource management and conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity 
2.1.3 3 ha of agricultural land under effective 
land-use management with maintenance or 
increase of vegetation cover 

2.2 Enabling 
environment enhanced 
through land, 
biodiversity and 
woody biomass 
conservation 
mechanisms 

2.2.1 Increase in participatory land management 
systems includes sustainable land and forest 
management practices, resulting in improved soil 
conditions and carbon sequestration (avoided 
deforestation and land degradation) 

1,116,814 3,190,897 

2.2.2 Support mechanisms for sustainable land 
and forest management are established in larger 
areas, including the evaluation and 
implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms to 
encourage sustainable land and forest 
management practices at the community level, 
and 300 improved stoves distributed 
22.2.3 Evaluation and establishment of a 
certification system for forest and agro-forestry 
products or management systems with 
implementation by a third party 
2.2.4 Evaluation of the feasibility of creating a 
protected area for Sahel Acacia forest stands or 
the floodable ecoregions of the Lake Chad 
savannah 

Component 3: Knowledge management and monitoring and evaluation  
Outcomes Outputs GEF 

financing 
Co-financing 

3.1 Lessons learned 
captured and 
knowledge 
disseminated 

3.1.1 Biodiversity and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal ecoregions and 
possible response mechanisms are evaluated 

462,514 1,210,000 

3.1.2 Framework developed for awareness and 
training campaigns to increase awareness and 
promote an environment for ecosystem 
management 



 

6 

2.3 Project Type 

2.3.1 The proposed project aims to consolidate and increase the benefits of the existing 
P2RS project. It will be financed from the resources of the GEF Special Fund and implemented 
as part of the P2RS-Chad project. 

2.4 Project Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The overall cost of the GEF project is estimated at USD 5.329 million (UA 3.807 
million) for a period of four (4) years. It will be financed by the GEF and will cover 100% of 
the total project cost, net of taxes, fees and/or charges in Chad. The cost allocations, as extracted 
from the letter of approval from the GEF Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson, are 
presented in the tables below. 

Table 2.2: Summary of project cost by component 

Component  USD UA 
Cost in: Local 
Currency 
(CFAF) 

A) Improving agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity on arid land 2,525,000 1,666,887 1,427,938,000 
B) Promoting integrated ecosystem management to improve 
resilience and biodiversity 1,750,000 1,155,268 

989,660,000 

C) Knowledge management and monitoring and evaluation 800,668 528,564 452 793,767 
Total base cost  5,075,668 3,350,719 2,870,391,767 
Project management cost (Project Management Unit) 253,784 167,536 143,519,928 
Total project cost 5,329,452 3,518,255 3,013,911,695 

 
Table 2.3: Sources of financing and contribution percentage (%) 

Source of Financing Amount (USD) and Contribution Percentage (%) 

 Foreign Exchange % 
Local 
Currency 

% Total % 

GEF Special Fund 5,329,452 100 - - 5,329,452 100 
Government - - - - - - 
Beneficiaries - - - - - - 
Overall  project cost 5,329,452 100 - - 5,329,452 100 

  

3.1.3 Innovative guides and tools on biodiversity 
conservation and integrated natural resource 
management practices in drylands are developed 
and disseminated 

3.2 Project impact 
monitored and 
evaluated  

3.2.1 Project monitoring system established, 
providing systematic information on progress 
made towards achieving the targeted outcomes 
and outputs 

338,154 885,800 

3.2.2 Monitoring and evaluation system for the 
analysis of land degradation trends and related 
socio-economic issues and impacts on 
biodiversity 
3.2.3 Mid-term and final evaluations are carried 
out 



 

7 

Table 2.4: Project cost – Expenditure categories 

Expenditure Category 
Amount Expected from the GEF Special Fund (USD) 
Cost in Foreign Exchange Cost in Local 

Currency 
Total 

A. Goods 
666,497 

- 
666,497 

B. Works 2,555,014 - 2,555,014 
C. Services 1,048,862 - 1,048,862 
D. Operating costs 805,295 - 805,295 
E. Retained 253,784 - 253,784 
Overall  project cost 5,329,452  5, 329,452 

 
Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD)  

Component Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total 
1. Improving agro-sylvo 
pastoral productivity on 
dryland 

757,500 883,750 631,250 252,500 2,525,000 

2. Promoting integrated 
ecosystem management to 
strengthen resilience and 
biodiversity 

525,000 612,500 437,500 175,000 1,750,000 

Knowledge management and 
monitoring and evaluation 

240,200 280,234 200,167 80,067 800,668 

Total base cost  1, 522,700 1,776,484 1,268,917 507,567 5,075,668 
Retained amount 76,135 88,824 63,446 25,378 253,784 
Overall project cost  1,598,835 1,865,308 1,332,363 532,945 5,329,452 

2.4.2 Experiences and lessons learned by the Bank: The AfDB has been active in the Sahel 
for many years, mainly in the following areas: water management and control, development of 
agriculture, livestock farming, fisheries, and natural resource management. Its experience 
shows that investing in the medium and long terms in the resilience of rural households is 
essential for helping them to cope with shocks (famine, drought, conflict, etc.) and for reducing 
their vulnerability. As at 1 October 2018, the Bank's net commitments in Chad for active 
operations amounted to UA 214.23 million. After a portfolio review conducted in 2013, key 
lessons were learned from previous CSPs and ongoing rural development initiatives. These 
include: the need for greater selectivity in terms of country allocation, division of labour and 
implementation capacity; the need for greater economic integration, stronger partnerships and 
co-financing (to increase the economic and social impact of interventions); the need to 
consolidate governance gains and build Chad's institutional capacities; and the need to promote 
the role of the private sector, particularly in the agricultural sector. 

2.5 Project Impact Area  

2.5.1 The proposed project will be implemented in the Sahel regions of Kanem and Bahr el 
Ghazal, where food insecurity is most acute in Chad, mainly due to difficult agro-ecological 
conditions and high malnutrition rates. The project beneficiaries will be smallholder farmers 
engaged in subsistence agriculture and livestock farming on marginal land, and who derive 
their income from agriculture, stock-breeding or the gathering of wood products. The project 
will specifically target 11,000 land operators who will receive training in integrated natural 
resource management (INRM) and sustainable land and water management (SLWM) with 
demonstrations. It will also train 150 local employees in sustainable INRM policies and 
practices, distribute resilient seed varieties to 100 households, and assist 10 local producer 
groups (including at least five women's groups) to diversify their incomes through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities. As the land on which they depend is characterized by sand dunes 
and low-productivity wadis, the beneficiaries live on non-irrigated agriculture. The project will 



 

8 

address this issue by promoting sustainable land management, site-specific soil conservation 
systems and mixed cropping systems, the construction of rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure, and crop diversification with the cultivation of appropriate species. Low 
agricultural productivity, lack of income opportunities and lack of rural socio-economic 
infrastructure are the main causes of poverty in these areas. Poverty and insecurity are further 
exacerbated by the weakness of community-based organizations, coupled with inefficient 
service delivery, lack of resources (especially land in the wadis) and weak decision-making 
power and scarcity of information. 
 
2.6. Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 
 
2.6.1 During the identification of the core programme, extensive consultations were held, 
and a participatory approach was adopted for the development of the programme. During the 
preparation and appraisal phases, discussions and a workshop were held with key institutions 
and stakeholders, including national institutions responsible for agriculture, fisheries, 
livestock, environment, health and water (20 September 2016 to 5 October 2016). The 
consultative process was extended to civil society (NGOs, including women's organizations, 
farmers' organizations, etc.). Meetings were held with communities, key actors in production 
systems, and administrative and local authorities, which provided an opportunity not only to 
share information on the project and collect data on impact areas, but also to discuss planned 
activities. Women's organizations were involved in these meetings to better understand the 
difficulties they face and better capture their challenges and needs. These elements were fully 
reflected in the design of the intervention and this participatory approach will be maintained 
during the project implementation. Various stakeholders will also be involved in the 
development of the envisaged monitoring and evaluation system to ensure smooth 
implementation and achievement of goals. 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group’s Experience and Lessons Learned in Project 
 Design 

2.7.1 The Bank has extensive experience in resilience-building programmes in the Sahel 
region. For instance, it implemented a USD 4 billion (2014) grant operation aimed at promoting 
stability and economic growth in the region. In addition, the Bank, through the African Water 
Facility (AWF) established in 2006, has funded 9 national and 11 multinational projects 
focusing on capacity-building for integrated water resources management, and established 
appropriate frameworks for collaborative water management, for example for Lake Chad, 
among other interventions. Several statements have been made on the issue of water security 
in the Sahel, reiterated as a priority for the Bank. The lessons learned from these previous Bank 
interventions, as well as the P2RS design, and the actions implemented during the design of 
the proposed project, are presented below in table form: 
 
  



 

9 

No. Lessons Learned Consideration in Project Design 
1. Institutional and organizational 

weaknesses 
The project is based on existing structures, including 
P2RS, and on national project implementation bodies, 
which allows for smooth implementation. 

2 Importance of taking into account 
conflicts between farmers and herders 

Mediation efforts and specific activities that take into 
account their realities and needs, which are distinct yet 
are closely linked 

3 Community conflicts around the project Establishment of consultation mechanisms and 
organization of awareness-raising activities, including a 
communication plan and workshops, and development of 
a capacity-building and training programme 

4 Weakness of the management and 
evaluation system that undermines the 
assessment of progress in 
implementation  

Inclusion in the project design of participatory and 
regular monitoring and evaluation activities with 
sufficient financial allocation 

 
2.8 Key Performance Indicators  
 
2.8.1. The impact, outcome and output indicators are those mentioned in the logical 
framework, which will be measured using the existing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system developed under P2RS. The impact indicator, which will serve as a gauge for the 
development objective, is the improvement of food security and nutrition following the 
adoption of sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems in the Sahelian regions of 
Chad. Monitoring tools reflecting the multifocal nature of the project will also be developed 
for the GEF project activities, in accordance with the requirements of this institution. 

3. PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1 Economic and financial analyses carried out were based on the premise that incentive 
measures, sustainability considerations and an enabling environment are essential for the 
success of any intervention, all of which conditions the P2RS and the proposed project plan to 
fulfil. The measures envisaged in this regard are: (i) a multi-stakeholder participatory process, 
the creation of three nurseries, the construction of hydro-agricultural infrastructure, the 
establishment of land-use plans and the provision of training in sustainable land and water 
management; (ii) the establishment of pilot areas, training of beneficiaries, promotion and use 
of improved stoves, and the adoption of a forest certification system to encourage the 
sustainable use of land and forests; (iii) the development of grazing plans, the reseeding of 
grazing land, the adoption of species testing based on extension services to ensure the 
availability of healthy animals; (iv) fencing to prevent crop destruction, seed trials, extension 
services and cereal banks to improve crop productivity; (v) pilot/learning sites for training 
activities to encourage soil conservation; and (vi) identification, training and prioritization of 
IGAs to improve livelihoods, mainly for women and young people. 

3.1.2 The implementation of the GEF Project in parallel with the core project (P2RS) is 
expected to build food security and improve nutrition in the project areas. The adoption of 
sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems will improve agricultural production and 
enhance the availability of fodder resources for livestock. Similarly, integrated space 
management will increase land availability for crops and restore soil condition. The 
dissemination and use of improved stoves, the promotion of related IGAs will reduce the 
pressure on wooded areas and curb deforestation and land degradation. The implementation of 
project activities focused on building resilience and food security will amplify the economic 
benefits of the project, as well as the positive impacts on living conditions and the quality of 
life.  



 

10 

3.1.3 A number of socio-economic benefits should stem from the project, including: (i) 
greater food and nutrition security resulting from the overall increase in agricultural and 
livestock products; (ii) reduced vulnerability due to crop diversification and the cultivat ion of 
resistant seed varieties; (iii) constant flows of agricultural and forest ecosystem services with 
improved habitat resilience and preservation; (iv) the introduction of a sustainable forest and 
IGA management certification system, which will further stabilize incomes; and (v) increased 
awareness and a more favourable environment for managing the ecosystem and combating 
climate change. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: P2RS, the core project, is classified in Environmental Category 2 and 
has undergone Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), in accordance with the relevant 
procedures of the Bank, as well as its policy and regulatory framework. The purpose of the 
SEA is to integrate environmental, socio-economic and institutional concerns into the design 
and implementation of P2RS. For instance, P2RS-funded infrastructure investments will have 
short-term negative environmental impacts specific to the area. The assessment led to the 
development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework Plan (ESMFP) 
outlining the various mitigation and enhancement measures. The GEF Project specifically aims 
to increase the attention devoted to environmental protection in the core project, which should 
produce a generally positive environmental impact. 

Assessment of environmental conditions during the field visits confirmed that the proposed 
project will have positive impacts. A number of negative environmental impacts are 
foreseeable in the construction and works implementation phases, but they will be limited, 
reversible and controllable, subject to monitoring and the implementation of appropriate 
mitigation measures. These measures will comprise the preparation and validation of a sub-
project selection procedure that is consistent with Chad's regulations, the establishment and 
monitoring of land-use plans in each council or municipality within the project impact area, 
the development of environmental and social project management guides, and the promotion 
of best practices in agriculture and natural resource management. 

3.2.2 Climate Change 

To combat climate change, Chad is committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions 
unconditionally by18.2% and conditionally by 71% by 2030, through adaptation and mitigation 
measures. Climate change adaptation is a major concern for the country, which has developed 
its National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), among other documents, in an effort 
to reduce its climate vulnerability. 

The GEF Project is committed to promoting climate resilience by improving food and nutrition 
security. Livelihoods will be diversified through the introduction of mixed cropping systems, 
crop diversification, agroforestry and the identification of alternative activities that would 
generate incomes while at the same time contributing to climate change adaptation. The project 
will support resilience by promoting (i) sustainable agriculture and livestock production, 
including sustainable management of grazing areas; and (ii) better planning of landscape 
development to ensure the resilience of communities and ecosystems. To build the capacity of 
beneficiaries, the project will support the setting up of micro-projects to demonstrate 
appropriate soil conservation techniques, train local staff in sustainable integrated natural 
resource management (INRM), provide training in sustainable forest management and arable 
land management, and a demonstration of participatory land-use planning to better adapt to 
climate change and reduce climate vulnerability. The project will also contribute to mitigation 
actions through reforestation and the establishment of agro-forestry plantations. It will also 



 

11 

foster the implementation of the Bank's 2016-2020 Climate Change Action Plan (PACC2) by 
mobilizing external climate financing. 

3.2.3 Gender: Chad is ranked 150th out of 187 countries on the Gender Parity Index. While 
discrimination against women is clearly prohibited, the principle of equality is undermined by 
resistance and the existence of de facto inequalities between men and women. Barriers rooted 
in traditional practices favour men, thereby hindering the internalization and appropriation of 
laws. The proposed project will mainstream gender-related issues by specifically targeting the 
implementation of activities usually dominated by women, and for which they have recognized 
know-how (trade, market gardening, rice cultivation, small livestock breeding, traditional 
poultry farming, processing, marketing, etc.) and from which they can derive an income. At 
least five women's organizations will benefit from income diversification assistance through 
agroforestry and sylvo-pastoral activities. The project will also have to ensure that women have 
access to project resources by identifying other income-generating activities to be implemented 
in association with households, and that they are fairly represented in project management and 
executing bodies. 
 
3.2.4 Social: A number of socio-economic impacts are envisaged, including: (i) reduced 
vulnerability to climate and other shocks; (ii) diversification of activities, income generation 
and job creation; (iii) better access to socio-economic services; and (iv) food production 
security. The increased resilience of the population brought about by the new infrastructure 
and techniques will improve the socio-economic situation of the beneficiaries, mainly women. 
Improving the delivery of ecosystem goods and services and building resilience will help 
ensure overall food and nutrition security. 

3.2.5 Inclusive green growth: Within a context of diversified, pro-poor growth in a healthy 
environment that preserves natural resources, the project will promote inclusive growth by 
equitably allocating resources to activities, which will benefit all participating communities at 
all levels. The project will help men, women and young people in rural areas to improve dryland 
productivity on the basis of a sustainable and environmentally-friendly agro-ecological model. 
Improved agro-pastoral techniques, such as rural hydro-agricultural infrastructure and grain 
banks, will also provide opportunities for rural men, women and youth to participate in non-
agricultural activities, thereby improving their livelihoods and reducing vulnerability. 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement: The project activities will not entail any involuntary 
resettlement and land acquisition since they will be implemented within the existing P2RS 
areas in the Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal regions. 

3.3 Project Rationale 

3.3.1 Given the extent of poverty in Chad, there is a tendency to forget that improving the 
exploitation of natural resources can enable the country to use the huge assets at its disposal to 
bring sustainable solutions to the recurrent food and nutrition insecurity that prevails in its 
territory and to the problem of environmental degradation. While the unavailability of arable 
land is an obstacle, it may be resolved by investing in integrated natural resource management 
and strategic actions for resilience. 

3.3.2 The funding being sought is supposed to benefit the inhabitants of the Kanem and 
Bahr el Ghazal regions. The project will have positive socio-economic impacts as well as 
generate many benefits for the biophysical and human environment. The GEF funding will 
contribute to rebuilding Chad's fragile ecosystems by enabling local communities and 
institutions to rehabilitate degraded lands and forests and preserve biodiversity, while building 
resilience and ensuring food and nutrition security.  



 

12 

3.4 Project Objectives and Description 

3.4.1 P2RS, the core project, aims to increase on a sustainable basis agro-sylvo-pastoral and 
fisheries productivity in the Sahel. The GEF project strengthens this core component by adding 
to it substantial environmental benefits and a sustainability dimension. 

The expected outcomes of the financing may be outlined as follows:  

x Improved agricultural, rangeland and pasture production in support of security 
and resilience; 

x Improved agro-pastoral technologies and access to production assets for 
enhanced livelihoods and reduced vulnerability; 

x Improved forest management and/or reforestation to generate sustainable flows 
of agro – and forest ecosystem services; 

x Enhanced integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation; 

x Enhanced enabling environment through mechanisms for the conservation of 
woody biomass and biodiversity; 

x Lesson learned captured and knowledge disseminated; and 

x  Project impact monitoring and evaluated.    

3.4.2 This multi-focal project contributes directly to GEF Objective LD-1: Maintain or 
improve flow of agroecosystem services to sustain food production and livelihoods. As part of 
this objective, the project contributes to GEF Outcome 1.1 (Improved agricultural, rangeland 
and pasture production in support of security and resilience), Output 1.2 (Improved agro-
pastoral technologies and access to production assets for enhanced livelihoods and reduced 
vulnerability) and Output 1.3 (Improved forest management and/or reforestation generate 
sustainable flows of agro – and forest ecosystem services).   

3.4.3 It also contributes to GEF Objective LD-3 which seeks to: reduce pressures on natural 
resources from competing land uses in the wider landscape, through Outcome 2.1 (Enhanced 
integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation). 

3.4.4 Under GEF Objective LD-4 (“biodiversity” focal area), which deals with the 
conservation of biodiversity and its sustainable use in marine and terrestrial areas and in sectors 
of economic activity, the project will manage the human-biodiversity interface through 
Outcome 2.2 (Enhanced enabling environment through mechanisms for the conservation of 
land, woody biomass and biodiversity).   

3.4.5 The fourth GEF objective is SFM-2: Enhance forest management: Maintain flows of 
forest ecosystem services and improve resilience to climate change through sustainable forest 
management by means of Outcome 1.3 (Improved forest management and/or reforestation to 
generate sustainable flows of agro – and forest ecosystem services).  
  



 

13 

4.  IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that is currently executing the P2RS Project 
will be the same for the proposed project, and no other one will be set up. The PIU will also be 
responsible for implementing the three components of the GEF additional project.  

Due to the interdisciplinary and inter-institutional nature of the project, its Implementation Unit 
will comprise representatives of institutions implementing related agreements, such as those 
involved in rural development support, agricultural production, pastoral systems, food and 
nutrition techniques, and forestry and agricultural research. Representatives of leading 
government institutions in the sectors of agriculture, food security, water, livestock, 
infrastructure, etc., will also be involved.   

4.2 Procurement Procedure 

4.2.1 All procurements of goods, works and consultancy services financed by the Bank's 
resources shall be made in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Operations financed by 
the Bank Group ("Procurement Policy" of AfDB "), October 2015 edition and in accordance 
with the provisions mentioned in the Financing Agreement. In accordance with this policy and 
following the various evaluations conducted, it was agreed that: (a) all the following Goods 
and Works acquisitions: (i) cooking stoves, (ii) goods for micro-projects, (iii) mobiles materials 
and, work on (i) the development of small irrigated areas and ponds, (ii) the construction of 
water points, (ii) the construction of cereal banks, input shops, shops for animal feeding;(ii) the 
rehabilitation of the program’s headquarters will be in accordance with the country's 
procurement system ("National System") embodied by Decree No. 2417 / PR / PM / 2015 of 
December 17th, 2015 on the Public Procurement Code (PPC); (b) the following acquisitions 
(i) all selections of consultants; (ii) community-based contracts; and (iii) the acquisition of the 
Plan Vivo system and standard used for certification of forest products and agroforestry will 
be in accordance with the Bank's procurement system ("System of Procurement" of AfDB ").  

4.2.2 The use of the National System improves efficiency through, inter alia, the following 
actions: (i) better ownership of the procurement system to be used by the executing agency; 
(ii) a saving of time with the absence of a second control (after that of the national entities) that 
represents, the a priori review of the Bank. However, the Bank reserves the right to ask the 
borrower to return to the use of the Bank System if: (a) the legal framework for Chadian public 
procurement changes to evolve into a system unsatisfactory for the Bank; (b) the provisions in 
force were not complied with by the executing agency or (c) the appropriate risk mitigation 
measures included in the Risk Assessment Action Plan were not complied with. . It is indicated 
that the procurements funded by the GEF are subject to respect for the rule of origin. A waiver 
will be asked to have the same rules for the procurements funded by the GEF and the 
procurements funded by the ADF grant already approved. 

4.2.3 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): In order to take into account the 
specificities of the project, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sectoral and project 
levels; and (ii) the capacities of the implementing agencies. The results of these evaluations 
concluded at a Moderate risk level for contracting and determined, subject to the application 
of proposed mitigation measures, the group of acquisitions to be concluded under the Bank's 
system and those acquisitions likely to be implemented, without major risk, according to the 
National System. 
 
  



 

14 

4.3 Financial Management and Disbursement Procedures  

4.3.1 Financial Management: This GEF funding integrates the P2RS objectives with more 
substantial environmental benefits and a sustainability dimension. The P2RS Management Unit 
(PMU), set up within the Ministry of Agriculture, will therefore be responsible for 
implementing these activities as well as financial management. It has its own accounting and 
financial administrative procedures manual (it will be updated accordingly). The financial 
management system is composed of an Administrative and Financial Manager (AFM) and an 
Accountant. TOMPRO multi-project accounting software is operational and in use. This 
software allows i) to keep the accounts of several projects at once, ii) to generate the main 
accounting sheets and journal, general ledger and account balance and iii) to prepare the 
consolidated and specific financial statements. The RAF and the Accountant are trained on its 
use. The interim and annual reports produced for the P2RS are satisfactory and show that they 
effectively control the use of the software. The accounting system in place is therefore adequate 
and can produce accurate and reliable information. The GEF complementary financing accounts 
will be integrated into the P2RS accounts with the possibility of disaggregation of expenditures 
by source of financing. This allows for accurate and specific financial information on GEF 
funding. 
 
4.3.2 Audit: The Audit of Accounts, relating to activities financed from GEF resources, will 
be carried out as part of the audit of the P2RS annual accounts. Thus, the consolidated and 
specific accounts for all financings will be audited each year by the same independent external 
audit firm, meeting the required criteria and in accordance with the terms of reference (TOR) 
acceptable to the Bank. The audit report must reach the Bank no later than six months after the 
close of the financial year concerned.  

4.3.3 Disbursement procedure: The project will use the Bank's disbursement methods, 
namely: (i) direct payment, (ii) special account (SA), and (iii) reimbursement methods, in 
accordance with the rules and procedures set out in the Disbursement Handbook. A separate 
foreign exchange special account will be opened for the project with the Central Bank of Chad 
and a local currency account with the same bank, which will be used by the Project 
Implementation Unit to finance operating and other recurrent costs, eligible under the project. 
To facilitate the payment of eligible operating costs, a separate local project sub-account, to be 
managed by the Ministry of Agriculture through the Project Implementation Unit, will be 
opened at a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank, in accordance with existing rules and 
regulations. The management of bank accounts, including the payment of eligible expenses, the 
preparation of requests for the withdrawal of funds from the special account (SA) and the 
documentation of all direct payments, will be subject to the existing procedures within the 
executing body (EB), and placed under the general responsibility of the Director-General of the 
Ministry in charge of Agriculture. The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter, the content of 
which will be reviewed and agreed upon during the negotiations. 

4.4 Monitoring 

4.4.1 The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of progress towards achieving project 
outcomes and objectives will be conducted on the basis of the goal and outcome indicators 
identified in the results framework and annual work and budget plans of the project. M&E 
activities will be performed in line with M&E policies and guidelines of the Bank and GEF. 
The day-to-day monitoring of project implementation will be the responsibility of the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) and will include the preparation and implementation of annual 
work plans and budgets, and the drafting semi-annual progress reports (SAPRs) of the project.  



 

15 

4.4.2 Specific reports that should be prepared as part of the monitoring and evaluation 
programme are: the project launch report, the annual work plan and budget, project progress 
reports; the annual project implementation review, technical reports, co-financing reports, and 
a completion report. In addition, GEF monitoring tools for the land degradation (LD), 
biodiversity (BD) and sustainable forest management (SFM) focus areas will be updated and 
supplemented by the project team at the mid-term and the final evaluations. 

It is extremely important for the project to use internationally recognized results-based 
monitoring and evaluation frameworks throughout the project implementation process. 
Responsibility for monitoring will rest with the Ministry of Agriculture, which will be 
supported by the Ministry of the Environment. This work will be done in collaboration with 
the Bank and the project team. The information collected through M&E will be taken into 
account in the activities to help to ensure knowledge management, identify and share best 
practices, identify problems and constraints, and promote sustained improvement of the project 
and its contribution to the implementation of national and regional strategies on food security 
and rural development.   

4.4.3 The M&E mechanism will be fine-tuned to ensure that it mainstreams gender issues, 
with special emphasis on the definition of specific parameters for women and young people. 
The parameters to be monitored and evaluated will include, for example, the level of women's 
involvement in decision-making bodies, and the number of young people trained. 
 

Schedule Milestone Quarter Monitoring Process (Feedback Loop) 
Year 1 (2018) Annual work plans and 

budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 

Q1 
 
Q3 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 

Year 2 (2019) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 
Mid-term review  

Q1 
 
Q3 
 
Q4 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 
Communities, beneficiaries, Ministry of Environment and 
Agriculture, and consultant 

Year 3 (2020) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPBs) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 

Q1 
 
Q3 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 

Year 4 (2021) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 
Project completion report  

Q1 
 
Q3 
 
Q4 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 
Communities, beneficiaries, Ministry of Environment and 
Agriculture, and consultant 

 
 

4.5 Governance 

4.5.1 In Chad, governance is still a cause for concern in the area of public finance 
management, including public procurement. In addition to using the direct agreement method, 
the procurement process is extremely slow. The existing institutional and organizational 
framework does not function properly due partly to non-compliance with applicable rules and 
procedures and partly to the weak human resource capacity of the entities in charge of this 
process.  

To address these issues, supervision missions, financial and procurement audits will be 
conducted to ensure that the services provided and the works performed are consistent with the 
disbursements made. 



 

16 

4.5.2 Mitigation measures provided to address these issues include: (i) the development of 
a tailored-made financial management procedures manual that will provided the  staff of the 
Project Implementation Unit with programme implementation guidelines; (ii) the use of 
MoFL's internal audit services to conduct project pre-audits; and (iii) the acquisition of serial 
accounting software to capture and process transactions and to interface with IFMIS so as to 
facilitate timely financial reporting, considering the IFMIS-related operational problems; and 
(iv) the implementation of a system of timely submission of the interim quarterly progress 
report (IQPR). 

4.6 Sustainability 

4.6.1 Carrying out activities and building infrastructure that are economically, financially 
and technically viable will enhance the sustainability of project interventions. Sustainability 
factors include: proper sizing and targeting of infrastructure, stakeholder participation and 
ownership (men and women), and beneficiary involvement at all stages of planning and 
implementation, the quality of facilities and equipment, and viable production activities adapted 
to the agro-ecological zone. To ensure post-project sustainability, preference will be given, in 
the conduct of each operation, to reliable and simple but resilient mechanisms, which will 
enhance the scope and coherence of the actions implemented.  

4.6.2 The project aims to build resilience by improving food security and nutrition through 
the enhancement of agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands. Training in integrated natural 
resource management (INRM), sustainable land and water management (SLWM) and the 
proposed awareness campaigns will provide tools and approaches for maintaining commitment 
and sustainability after the project completion. All stakeholders will be involved in the 
implementation of project activities, including beneficiary communities, to ensure ownership 
and commitment, as well as the viability of improved agro-sylvo-pastoral production 
infrastructure. The project will strengthen the principles of sustainability which lay emphasis 
on the use of a participatory approach during project preparation. This is important as it helps 
to ensure the relevance of the investments and to build institutional capacity at the community 
level in order to guarantee the sustainability of planned activities. The sustainability will be 
achieved by strengthening and consolidating the institutional framework using existing national 
systems. 

4.6.3 The project will lay a great emphasis on building the capacity of beneficiaries and 
strengthening their institutions, such as interest groups, associations or cooperatives. 
Beneficiaries will be mobilized, organized into viable autonomous entities, trained and 
empowered, so they may view their activities as a business rather than a means of survival. 
Awareness and training on gender mainstreaming at the community and local government 
levels will ensure that women and young people continue to participate in and benefit equitably 
from all project activities.    

4.7 Risk Management 

Description Classification Mitigation Measures  

Climate risks, exemplified by the 
recurrent droughts and floods, rainfall 
deficits, extreme heat, which expose the  
country’s natural resources to severe 
degradation. Indicators of this situation 
include land degradation, desertification, 
deterioration of vegetation cover, 
increasingly frequent conflicts between 
farmers and herders, the decimation of 
wildlife, the drying up of Lake Chad and 

2 (moderate) The project’s special emphasis on resilience, for 
example, agricultural practices, crop diversification, 
heat-resistant species, and water management. This will 
gradually reduce the impacts of climate variability. The 
planned project activities will help rural communities to 
better adapt to shocks and improve resilience. 



 

17 

Description Classification Mitigation Measures  

food insecurity. The sectors most 
severely affected by climate risks are 
agriculture, livestock, fisheries, health 
and housing.  
Institutional and organizational 
weaknesses: Exemplified  by 
insufficient coordination between 
governance structures at national, local 
and community levels   

2 (moderate) Strengthen existing structures, particularly those of 
CILSS and national project executing bodies, encourage 
cooperation and communication between the structures 
to allow smooth implementation of the project. 

Agriculture, livestock and fisheries - 
Declining productivity in these sectors 
may impoverish the people and expose 
them to food insecurity. In the 
agricultural sector, for example, fallow-
free cultivation, poor agricultural and 
land-use practices have reduced soil 
fertility, decreased crop yields and led to 
wind/soil erosion. Fishing, on the other 
hand, is threatened by substantial 
desiccation of important water resources, 
attributed to frequent recurring droughts, 
reduced vegetation around watercourses, 
deforestation and overgrazing.  

2 (moderate) Improved crop varieties and hardy livestock, control of 
livestock population levels to ensure that they match the 
carrying capacity; training in improved land-use 
practices; diversification of livelihoods and construction 
of transport infrastructure. 

Conflicts between farmers and 
herders: The project area has been 
identified as a transhumance area, 
although agriculture continues to be 
practised in the wadis. The source of the 
conflict lies mainly in the increasingly 
fierce competition for land and natural 
resources (pasture and water), due to the 
increased frequency of droughts and 
rainfall deficits.  

2 (moderate) Mediation efforts, activities that are tailored to the 
requirements of each group, bearing in mind their 
distinct but closely related realities and needs 
 
 

Conflicts between the project and the 
communities: Poverty and insecurity are 
exacerbated by weak community 
organization, coupled with inefficient 
service delivery, lack of resources and 
weak decision-making powers and 
information facilities. 
 

2 (moderate) Establishment of broad-based consultation mechanisms 
and awareness programmes, including a communication 
plan, development of capacity building/training 
programmes and organization of workshops. 

Environmental impacts - natural 
resources and biodiversity. The P2RS 1 
core project is classified in 
Environmental Category 2 (AfDB 
Environmental and Social Safeguards). 
 

1 (low) Project activities may have negative impacts ranging 
from low to moderate, which should be outweighed by 
the overall environmental benefits  
 
Compliance with Chadian regulations, preparation and 
monitoring of land-use plans, preparation of sub-project 
ESMPs, promotion of agricultural and natural resource 
management best practices 

Health, Nutrition and Hygiene - Risk of 
epidemics, malnutrition and poor hygiene 

2 (moderate) Early warning mechanisms, hygiene programmes, 
improved nutrition programmes, improved and 
increased livelihoods and rural communities assets 

Energy and transportation 
infrastructure facilities - These will 
include irrigation infrastructure, 
boreholes and socio-economic 
infrastructure. These infrastructure 
facilities should minimize the effects of 
extreme droughts and floods  

2 (moderate) Development of climate-resilient energy sources, 
diversification of energy sources, construction of 
climate-resilient infrastructure  

4.8 Knowledge Building  

4.8.1 The project should generate substantial knowledge that will add value to the overall 
design and management of future similar interventions. The lessons and experiences will be 
shared within the Bank and other institutions interested in implementing similar projects, 



 

18 

through project progress reports, audit reports, the mid-term review report and the completion 
report, especially as they will be part of the knowledge transfer and dissemination tools. The 
project will promote community participation and management of agro-sylvo-pastoral 
infrastructure. It will work closely with women's organizations and key stakeholders to ensure 
the sharing of information and learning materials dealing with empowering women and young 
people to build resilience for food and nutrition security. The project will also focus on building 
the capacity of key staff, and the beneficiaries will be fully involved in the implementation of 
planned activities. Exchanges with project beneficiaries will also be an opportunity to acquire 
the valuable knowledge that will be shared. The project will also collaborate with local NGOs 
and community-based organisations (CBOs) to increase their capacity and knowledge so that 
they may be able to continue to carry out sustainable activities for the promotion of food and 
nutrition security. Knowledge-building information will be systematically collected and 
documented in monitoring/evaluation and supervision reports, as well as in the periodic reports 
that will be shared at the Bank. 
 
5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1 Legal Instruments 

5.1.1 The funding instrument will be a GEF grant agreement between the Republic of Chad 
and the AfDB to finance the costs of the Resilience Building Project for Food Security and 
Nutrition in Rural Communities in Chad. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the GEF grant: The GEF grant 
agreement will enter into force on the date of its signature by both parties. 

5.2.2 Commitment to disbursement of subsequent tranches of the GEF grant: In addition to 
the conditions relating to the grant effectiveness, the disbursement of the first tranche of the 
grant resources will be subject to the fulfilment of the following condition:  

 (i) Recruitment of an Environmental Expert in the Project Implementation Unit and 
whose qualifications and terms of reference must have been deemed acceptable 
by the Bank. 

5.2.3 Undertakings: 

 (i) Each year, to provide a copy of the  annual progress report for the fiscal year 
that ends on 30 June, accompanied by an annual work plan at the latest 3 months 
after the end of the relevant fiscal year; 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 The activities planned to be financed with the GEF resources are in line with all 
applicable Bank and GEF policies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

19 

6. RECOMMENDATION 

6.1 Management recommends to the Board of Directors: 

- to grant the Republic of Chad, under the resources of the GEF, an amount of 5 329 452 
United States dollars for the financing of the project to Build Resilience for Food Security and 
Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities, subject to the conditions set out in this report; 
 
- to decide that the acquisitions of goods, works and services which are financed under 
the resources of the GEF grant will be open to all countries, including those which are not ADB 
States Members. 
















































 

 

 

 

TANZANIA 

 

 

 

 

MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND RURAL FINANCE 

SUPPORT (MIVARF) PROGRAMME 

 

 

 

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT 

(PCR) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/COTZ 
 

July 2019 

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

I  BASIC DATA 
  

A  Report data 
 

Report date Date of report: 27 December 2018 

Mission date (if field 
mission) 

From:  09 November 2018 To:  06 December 2018 

 

B  Responsible Bank Staff 
 

Positions At approval At completion 

Director General Gabriel Negatu Gabriel Negatu 

Country Manager Tonia Kandiero Alex Mubiru 

Sector Director Adbirahman Beileh (Acting)  

Sector/Regional Manager Alex Mend (OIC) Joseph Coompson 

Task Manager Edson Mpyisi Salum Ramadhani 

Alternate Task Manager Salum Ramadhani - 

PCR Team Leader  Salum Ramadhani 

PCR Team Members 
 Salum Ramadhani, Emmanuel Maliti 

(Consultant) 

 

C  Project Data 
 

Project name: Marketing Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance Support (MIVARF) Programme 

Project code: P-TZ-AA0-019 Instrument number(s): 2100150024993 

Project type: Investment  Sector: Agriculture & Agro-Industry 

Country: TANZANIA Environmental categorization (1-3): 2 

Processing milestones – Bank 

approved financing only 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources) 

Key Events (Bank approved 

financing only) 

Disbursement and closing dates 

(Bank approved financing only) 

Financing source/ instrument1: 

ADF Loan 

Financing source/ instrument1:  Financing source/ instrument1:  

Date approved: 29/06/2011 Cancelled amounts: NA  Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 12/09/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved):  NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/12/2018 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 
Extensions (specify dates): 

<31/12/2016 and 31/12/2017> 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2018 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 

  

TANZANIA: MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND 
RURAL FINANCE SERVICES – PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT (PCR) 

 

AFRICAN  
DEVELOPMENT  

BANK GROUP 



 

2 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD Loan 

Financing source/ instrument2: Financing source/ instrument2: 

Date approved: 31/12/2010 Cancelled amounts:  NA Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 25/02/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved): NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/03/2020 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 

Extensions (specify dates): 

31/03/2020 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2020 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 



Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Disbursed 

amount 

(amount, UA): 

Percentage 

disbursed (%): 

Undisbursed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

undisbursed (%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 
ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

37,189,760.47 92.97 2,810,239.53 7.03 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

                                    

675,105.73 

32.00                         

1,404,894.27 

64.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

110,000 100.00 0.00 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                               

89,580,140.23  

85.00                           

15,909,859.77  

15.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million  127,555,006.43 86.37 20,124,993.57 13.63 

Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Committed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

committed 

(%): 

Uncommitted 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

uncommitted 

(%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 

ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

722,238.33 1.81 2,088,001.20 5.22 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                                  

10,369,507.00  

94.00                                  

661,414.50  

6.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million 11,091,745.33 80.14 2,749,415.7 19.86 

 
 

D  Management Review and Comments 
 

Report reviewed by Name Date 
reviewed 

Comments 

Country Manager Alex Mubiru   

Regional Manager Joseph Coompson   

Director General (as chair of Country 
Team) 

Gabriel Negatu   

Sector Director    

 



 

3 

 II  Project performance assessment 

 
A: Relevance 

 

1. Relevance of program development objective  
 

Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  
 

4 The program’s development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth 
through enhancing rural incomes and food security. The objective was well aligned to the needs of the 
beneficiaries – where despite a declining trend, 28% of Mainland Tanzanians remain income poor, more 
so in rural areas (33%) than in urban areas (22%).1.  The program’s objective was the mirror image of 
the of the national strategies including the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II 
(NSGRP), and both the 2013 agricultural policy and the Agricultural Sector Development Program II 
(ASDP). 
 
At the regional level, the program’s development objective aligned to several regional development 
strategies to which Tanzania engaged. The program activities of financing rural markets and storage 
facilities were for instance, the mirror image of the EAC’s food security action plan which specifically 
advocates for the construction of agriculture market facilities, feeder roads and storage facilities as well 
as promotion of low-cost technologies on food processing. 
 
The program underwent two Country Strategic Papers (CSP) 2011-2015 and 2016-2020. It was 
embedded in the CSPs’ infrastructure development pillar which considered rural feeder roads as among 
the key supports to local economic development. The program supported the Bank Group’s Agricultural 
Sector Strategy 2010-2014, and the Bank’s framework paper on Post-Harvest (PH) loss reduction. Such 
Bank’s Group policies have prioritised reducing PH loss and investing in market structures, and agro-
processing as among the important enablers for agricultural transformation. See annex 1 for further 
details on the relevance criteria. 
 

* For all ratings in the Program Completion Report (PCR) use the following scale: 4 (Highly satisfactory), 3 
(Satisfactory), 2 (Unsatisfactory), 1 (Highly unsatisfactory) 
 

2. Relevance of program design  

 
Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  

 
4 As a multi-sectorial focusing on local areas, the institutional design of the program was appropriately 

opted for the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) as the executing agency.2 The program formulation was 
participatory3, and identified geographical areas and clustered projects to maximize expected 
outcomes. Several lessons from the previous Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Program 
(AMSDP) informed the program formulation including better provision for the design of rural roads 
(civil, geodetic/geomatics and geotechnical engineering) and the need for putting in place a well-
designed and robust Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system. The program activities were clustered 
such that investments in warehouses, roads and markets complemented each other.    
 
The program design allowed the district authorities4 to compete for resources based on a set of 
eligibility criteria. To ensure full functioning of the market structures, the design financed service 
infrastructures such as cold-storage facilities located within the rehabilitated markets. To enhance 
sustainability of the program’s investments, the design included capacity development sessions to 
Government staff and beneficiary communities to plan for, implement and manage market/storage 
facilities. The support to the rural economy was also a gender sensitive approach to rural development 
as it is estimated that 84% of Tanzanian women are employed in agriculture, against 80% for men. 
 

 

                                                           
1 URT 2011/12 
2 Up to end of 2015, the PMO office was responsible for LGAs in Tanzania 
3 The preparation mission included a three-day workshop and field visits to Arusha and Zanzibar, while the 
identification mission made field visits to Arusha, Moshi, Morogoro, Dodoma, Mbeya and Zanzibar. 
4 Local Government Authorities. 



 

4 

3. Lessons learned related to relevance  
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add 
rows as 
needed)  

Lessons learned  Target 
audience  

1. 
Institutional 
design of the 
program. 

The support from the PMO, regional and district authorities (the latter two authorities 
were under the PMO during much of the program implementation time) helped to 
address challenges that risked delaying the delivery of the program’s expected 
outputs. An example is the Government interventions when contractors abandoned 
sites – interventions that allowed completion of construction activities. Lessons: 1) 
Multi sectorial programs need to be hosted within authorities higher than sectorial 
ministries 2) It is even more important for program that devolve implementation to 
local levels to be hosted within an authority managing district and regional 
administrations.    
 

The Bank, 
other 
Development 
Partners 
(DPs) and 
Government 
of Tanzania 
(GoT) 

2. Continuity For continuity purpose and transfer of good lessons to the new program, the program 
team was composed of experienced personnel from the previous two programs of 
AMSDP and RFSP. They joined the program with experiences in delivering 
infrastructure development in rural areas, capacity building and networking capacities 
with local authorities.  Lessons: Succession of capacities needs to be prioritised for any 
potential successor to MIVARF. 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Prerequisite
s for the 
matching 
grants 

The program design introduced several prerequisites to be met by potential 
beneficiaries of the matching grants scheme. However, some of the matching grant 
beneficiaries struggled to meet the prerequisites (qualified buildings, electricity 
connection, working capital) and lacked experience on their planned business lines. 
Lessons: Design of agro-processing machinery support needs to include a well-
resourced component on business support to beneficiaries (e.g. skills transfer, 
business advices, certifications etc.) 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

4.  
Geographica
l coverage. 

Because of the widely scattered villages the Bank’s resources were thinly spread with 
the program team covering vast distances during supervision. The 32 program’s 
districts spread across 16 regions had a combined population of about 6.1 million (1.2 
million households). Despite the challenge on the coverage, the program functioned 
successfully because of effective communication with program’s liaison officers at the 
district/regional level and good liaising with the political and administrative 
structures at such levels. Lessons: Dispersion of resources across many projects, wide 
geographic areas and/or too many institutions/districts need to be avoided. Future 
Bank’s rural development programs need to concentrate in fewer places for more 
impactful outcome.  
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

5. Contract 
management 

Limited contract management capacities by some districts resulted into incidences 
under-designing, and contract variations which increased cost to accommodate design 
components not included earlier on. Also, the quality for some of the complicated 
structures could have been improved if districts had requested additional technical 
support. Such challenges were mitigated by the Bank and the Government exercising 
flexibility to accommodate some of the additional costs. In addition, the program team 
backstopped districts lagging behind in implementation. Lessons: 1) to avoid delayed 
no-objection turnaround and contract variations, ensure that all factors affecting 
implementation are considered when establishing contract duration 2) backstopping 
and additional capacity building to weak districts is unavoidable 3) encourage local 
authorities to use own resources in seeking third party opinion on complex designs 
(e.g. bridges design etc); and 4) intensify supervision, and contractors should be made 
liable for faults before the defect liability period lapses. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 
 
 
 



 

5 

B: Effectiveness 

 
1. Progress towards the program’s development objective (program purpose) 

 
Comments 
Provide a brief description of the Program (components) and the context in which it was designed and implemented. 
State the program development objective (usually the program purpose as set out in the RLF) and assess progress. 
Unanticipated outcomes should also be accounted for, as well as specific reference of gender equality in the program. 
The consistency of the assumptions that link the different levels of the results chain in the RLF should also be 
considered.  Indicative max length: 400 words. 
The overall development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and accelerated economic growth 
through enhanced rural incomes and food security. The program planned to contribute to the Government efforts 
in raising rural incomes and food security through improved market access (feeder roads, market centres and 
linkages, and storage facilities), and increased value-added agricultural produce (through training and matching 
grants equipment). The program which was designed to upscale successful activities implemented under the 
former Bank’s and IFAD’s AMSDP and RFSP5 was made up of three components 1) Marketing infrastructure and 
systems development 2) Rural finance; and 3) Program coordination. The implicit assumptions that linked different 
levels of the results chain were consistent and remained valid to date. For instance, the program’s investments in 
rural infrastructures, in particular rural feeder roads, storage facilities and markets were expected to improve 
access to agricultural markets for small holders, reduce PH losses, all of which were expected to contribute to 
poverty reduction through enhanced rural income and food security. 
 
The program’s 2017 outcome study confirmed the advances made towards the development objective of poverty 
reduction through enhancing rural income. About 78% of program’s beneficiaries in the surveyed program’s wards 
acknowledged increased monthly household income from TSh 95,194 in 2012 to TSh 307,696 in 2017. Surveyed 
beneficiaries attributed such positive income changes to the program interventions of market linkages, utilization 
of program’s warehouses that had reduced PH losses, reduction in transport costs, capacity building and equipment 
support. The program’s support to market linkages, for instance, has expanded markets for program’s beneficiaries, 
as confirmed by 40% of the surveyed wards which reported to have experienced improved market linkages to local 
and out of region markets. The PCR mission also met producers who have experienced increased access to export 
markets for processed breadfruit (producers in Pemba), and onions to Kenya and Uganda (producers in Karatu). 
The advances made on the development objectives of the program were gender sensitive as demonstrated by data 
presented in section B.5. The program also had gender perspective. For instance, through PEML, the program’s 
equally empowering men and women in group’s leadership. In addition, the Program’s infrastructures, such as the 
cold rooms’ in the Mombasa market in Zanzibar largely benefited women (About 50% of traders in that market are 
women). 

 

                                                           
5 Rural Finance Support Program. 



 

6 

2. Outcome reporting  
 

Outcome 
indicators (as 
per RLF; add 
more rows as 
needed) 

Baseli
ne 
value 
(Year) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
program 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per outcome) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Outcome 1: Improved access to agricultural markets for smallholder producers and traders  
 
Indicator 
1.1: 
Revenue 
from 
markets/ 
warehouses 
 

US$ 
3.0mi

llion 
p.a.  

 

  NA US$ 
6million 

p.a. by 
PY5. 

NA Deposit value of agricultural produce 
stored in 27 rehabilitated warehouses was 
TSh 3.2 billion (as of 30th June 2018).  
Revenue from selling 76.2% of the stored 
produce was TSh 4.5 billion. The gains 
from program’s markets and warehouses 
also included safe and clean trading 
environment, employment, and expanded 
space for auctions.  

 

Indicator 
1.2: 
Transport 
charges 
from farm 
to primary 
market. 
 

US$ 
6.4 
per 
ton. 

Reduced 
by 50% 

Reduced 
by 25% 

200% Transport charges along all rehabilitated 
roads fell between 20 to 50% of the 
previous charges (annex 2). E.G. transport 
charge for one sack of onions along the 
program rehabilitated road to Mang’ola 
market in Karatu went down from TSh 
3,000 to TSh 500. Crop transportation time 
fell by approximately 3 hrs from the 
previous overall mean of 3.5 hrs to 0.56 
hrs.  

 

Outcome 2:  Reduction of PH losses for key food crops 
 
Indicator 
2.1: % of 
PH losses 
for maize 
and rice. 
 

Maiz
e: 
22% 
 
Rice:  
13% 

NA Maize: 
14%  
 
Rice: 9% 

NA Use of program’s warehouses reduced the 
overall PH losses (all crops) from 57% to 
as low as 15%. Beneficiaries such as Meru 
dairy company reduced PH loss by almost 
85%. After the program’s supported cold 
room, the daily processing capacity 
increased from 400 to 2,200 litres (see 
annex 3 for further details).  

 

Outcome 3:  Increased income of producers and traders 
 
Indicator 
3.1: Mean 
per capita 
households 
monthly 
agricultural 
income 
 

TZS 
11,32
4 
(US$
8.0) 

Increase 
by 
223%6 

Increase 
by 25%. 

892% About 78% of the beneficiaries in the 
surveyed program’s wards acknowledged 
to have experienced improved households 
income, from a monthly average of Tsh 
95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in 
nominal terms) (see annex 4). The income 
increase is attributed to selling value-
added items, improved market access, 
improved productivity, use of improved 
technology including among others the use 
of System of Rice Intensification (SRI), 
improved seed and fertilizer use. and 
enhanced capacity to negotiate better 
prices (through farmer producer groups). 
In about 61% of the surveyed wards, 
capacity to negotiate better prices was 
rated as highly improved.  
 

 

                                                           
6 We used the reported figures from the outcome study (an increase from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 per 
month in 2017) rather than the baseline in the result framework. 



 

7 

Rating* (see 
IPR 
methodology) 

Narrative assessment  

 
4 

  
The program’s outcome study attributes most of the advances towards the program’s development 
objectives to the program’s interventions. Program’s warehouses have improved the overall 
marketing of crops through improved quality management of the agricultural produce, which in turn 
has reduced PH losses and extended marketing period. Extended marketing periods, for instance, 
facilitated farmer’s access to better prices and ultimately improved incomes (annex 5). The 
program’s rehabilitated roads have largely improved market access to distanced farmers as well as 
the improved volumes of crops reaching the markets and warehouses. In addition, transport charges 
and time have been on the decline, an outcome of roads improvement. The rehabilitated rural roads 
have also improved the supply of agricultural inputs (annex 6) which in turn has raised farm 
productivity. In some of the improved program roads, the time to reach markets declined from 3hrs 
to just 1hr. Farmers along the rehabilitated Mapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali district, for example, 
used to sell a bucket of paddy for Tsh 5,000 before the road was rehabilitated. The same bucket now 
fetches Tsh 10,000 after road improvement – simply because farmers can now easily take their 
produce to the market rather than selling to buyers who used to collect directly from individual 
farmers. New farming fields have also emerged because of the improved access to markets. An 
example is the paddy field in one of the wards along the Mwapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali which 
has expanded from 2,300 acres to 3,700 acres.  
 
Trainings in value addition, and the matching grant equipment have enhanced value addition and 
ultimately reduced PH losses. The program’s outcome study reports that the overall mean for the 
value-added produce in the surveyed program’s wards per season was 849 tonnes ranging from a 
minimum of 6.25 tonnes (in Isandula ward) to a maximum of 4,750 tonnes (in Dakawa ward). 
Through PEML, farmer producer and marketing groups have expanded in numbers and membership. 
Working in groups has enhanced farmers negotiations for better prices, market search including 
links to potential traders and off-takers. Working in groups did also improved farmer enabling 
environment by advancing the use of weighing scales and other measuring facilities (confirmed by 
60% of the surveyed farmers groups). Prior to program support farmers used to rely on volumes.  
 
The advances made on the program’s development objectives are attributed to many factors. They 
included: 1) rigorous backstopping to district staff 2) reliability of   Bank’s financial resources 3) 
flexibility of the Bank, the Government, and the program to take into account field realities 4) close 
supervision and reporting the program, the Government and the Bank 5) capacity development 
efforts 6) participatory approaches e.g. when selecting program sites (that considered the 
dimensions of value chains, presence of complementing interventions such as rural markets) 7) 
agriculture potentiality of the program areas 8) reviews of scope, available resources, and timelines 
of program’s activities to reflect actual situation 9) high level of awareness and relatively good sense 
of ownership of the program by local authorities and commmunities 10) close working relationship 
with partners including the private sector 11) competition for resources between districts has 
allowed the program to invest in best proposals thus ensuring value for money. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

8 

3. Output reporting 
 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Component 1. Marketing infrastructure and systems development 
 
Subcomponent 1: Marketing infrastructure 
 
Output 1. Rural markets and warehouses storage constructed /rehabilitated 
 
Indicator 1.1 
No. of new 
storage 
facilities 
 
 

29 29 100% Warehouses that have been handed over so far to district 
authorities are currently operational (see annex 7 and 8). 
Igurusi warehouse, for instance, was storing 2,600 bags of 
paddy at the time of PCR mission. District authorities are 
the owners of the infrastructures, with farmers groups 
engaged participatorily during program implementation 
manage the facilities.  

 

Indicator 1.2 
No. of 
renovated 
storage 
facilities. 

6 6 100% Renovation included added facilities (e.g. cold rooms). 
The Mombasa market in Unguja was installed with two 
cold rooms, for storing fish and vegetables. The cold 
rooms at Mombasa market also serve individuals outside 
the market users (meat traders). The program 
infrastructures are also the reason behind the declining 
storage charges as highlighted in annex 9. 

 

Indicator 1.3 
No. of rural 
markets 
constructed 
and 
maintained. 

16 16 100% The program’s livestock market in Longido has an average 
daily sale of between 3,000 and 6,000 animals. A total of 5 
program’s markets (4 in Zanzibar and 1 in the Mainland) 
were equipped with cold storage facilities for to serve 
perishable products. The facilities will support 
sustainable food production, food security, nutrition, and 
competitive producers’ prices.   

 

Indicator 1.4 
No. of local 
market 
infrastructure 

56 56 100% Complementarity of the program’s investment was 
prioritised by rehabilitating, for instance, rural roads that 
serve the program’s markets and warehouses. The 
successful Longido livestock market serves southern 
highlands, central and lake zone regions of Tanzania, and 
has turned into a regional market flooded with traders 
from Kenya. The markets have also significantly raised 
revenue collected by the district.  

 

Output 2: Feeder roads upgraded to all weather condition 
 
Indicator 2.1: 
km of roads 
constructed/ 
rehabilitated. 

1,079 1,000 108% Rehabilitated roads included the ones linking production 
areas to markets and storage facilities, as well as to main 
roads which have improved access to input supplies, 
increased productivity and reduced imports. For example, 
the improved domestic food supplies to Tibirinzi market 
in Pemba (due to the program’s road) has reduced 
dependency on imports from Tanga region.   

 

Output 3:  Governmental staff trained to be able to sustainably manage food marketing 
 
Output 3.1: 
Government 
staff trained 
to be able to 
sustainably 
manage food 
marketing 
infrastructure

720 720 
(40% 

women) 

100% Training themes ranged from planning, procurement to 
contract management of the Rural Markets Infrastructure 
(RMI). Regional and districts program personnel were 
also facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, 
computers and accessories etc.). The PCT also 
backstopped the program’s local officials to accelerate 

 



 

9 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

, of which are 
women (%). 

planning, surveys, engineering designs, procurement and 
supervision of the construction contracts.7 

Indicator 3.2 
No. and type 
of Local 
Market 
Infrastructur
e Committees 
(LMICs) 
trained and in 
operation 

56 
LMICs 

53 LMICs 
 
 

106% 
 

LMIC were formally established after training their 
prospective members. Operation and maintenance, 
branding and packaging, warehouse receipt system were 
I   mportant themes delivered at the trainings. The 
program went further by facilitating officials from 
important institutions such as TBS8 to enhance important 
capacities necessary for producers to apply for standard 
certifications.  
 

 

Subcomponent 2: Value addition 
 
Output 4: Post-harvest centres rehabilitated and equipped 
 
Indicator 4.1 
No of PH 
training 
centres 
rehabilitated 
and 
resourced. 

13 13 100% 10 centres were rehabilitated and equipped, with the 
remaining 3 centres only needed equipment. The centres 
will support transfer of PH management and value 
addition know-how to regions and districts. SIDO’s PH 
training centre in Moshi has already trained 60 Training 
of Trainers (ToT) who came from regional SIDO centres 
and from other organisations.  

 

Output 5: New technology disseminated for PH management 
 
Indicator 5.1 
No. of new 
technologies 
for PH 
management 
disseminated 

50 50 100% The value addition component supported regional PH 
management training centres, and trained processor 
groups on PH technologies. The program established 
close working relationship with private sector to improve 
access to technologies that advanced processing activities 
and reduce PH losses.  

 

Output 6: Business and technological skills for producers and processors 
 
Indicator 6.1 
No. of 
bankable 
value 
addition 
proposals 
 

37 35 106% Competition for program’s resources between districts 
led to investment in best proposals thus ensuring value 
for money. Value addition activities included milling, 
draying, grading, packaging, labelling, sorting, etc. A 
matching grant beneficiary in Pemba composed of 8 
women and 2 men expanded from producing 1 product 
type to 9 types and now exports breadfruit powder to the 
middle east.   

 

Output 7: On the job training for staff, farmers and processors groups 
 
Indicator 7.1 
Regional and 
district 
officials 
training*  

497 350 142% In addition to training, the program personnel were 
facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, computers 
and accessories etc.). The PCT also backstopped the 
program’s local officials to accelerate the planning, 
surveys, delivery of engineering designs, procurement 
and supervision of the construction contracts.9 

 

Indicator 7.2 
Community 
and 

2,394 2,262 106% Infrastructure management committees were established 
and trained - to effectively and efficiently take the 
responsibility of managing the program’s infrastructures. 
Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Agency (TARURA) has 

 

                                                           
7 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 
8 Tanzania Bureau of Standards.  
9 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 



 

10 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

councillors 
training* 

also delivered trainings to some of the program’s 
communities on collective management of rehabilitated 
rural roads.   

Indicator 8.2 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processor 
groups 
trained10 

350 
ToT 

 
37,500 
Traine

es  

350 ToT 
 

37,500 
Trainees 

100% 
 

100% 

Trainings were delivered on crop storage, drying, grading, 
sorting, moisture control and milling. Producers groups 
went on study tours to familiarise with best practices in 
garlic, paddy and sunflower value chains. The visits 
covered Kenya and Uganda to acquire knowledge on 
market operations and also look for potential avenues to 
export their produce.  

 

Indicator 8.3 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processors 
linked with 
services. 

26,964 5,000 534% End of program target was surpassed 5-fold. Processors 
were linked to technology and input suppliers (e.g. 
processing addictive and preservatives). Farmers 
organizations were facilitated to engage in formal 
contracts with buyers; to attend promotional events 
including Nane Nane, and SIDO’s entrepreneurship 
exhibitions, World Food Day, and the Dar es Salaam 
International Trade Fair (DITF). 

 

Indicator 8.4 
No. of groups 
receiving 
matching 
grants for 
agro-
processing 
equipment.  

35 25 140% Beneficiary groups paid 25% of equipment cost.  As of 
2017, the percentage change in amount of value added 
produced has improved to for instance71% in Itunundu 
ward. Some equipment were advanced that beneficiaries 
successfully utilised to advance quality and output prices. 
An example is the rice milling equipment at Kisongoni in 
Unguja, which is one of its kind in Zanzibar. 

 

Component 3: Program coordination 
 
Program 
Steering 
Committee 
(PSC) 
meetings* 

10 9 90% PSC11 membership included key public sector 
stakeholders from the Mainland and Zanzibar12, and 
private sector The PCT was responsible for coordinating 
program activities and reported to the Permanent 
Secretary, PMO who was actively engaged and regularly 
briefed by the program and the Bank.   

 

 

4. Development Objective (DO) Rating13 
 

DO rating 
(derived from 
updated IPR)* 

Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4  
 
(IPR is 
attached as 
annex 11) 

The overall physical implementation of the program is highly satisfactory as the program’s outputs were 
136% achieved (36% above targets). With regards to poverty reduction and food security, significant 
achievements were made reported to have increased 8-fold (in nominal terms) from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 
to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in nominal terms) (section B.2). Indirect benefits from the program’s markets 
increased farmers increased awareness of prices, and increased productivity that has largely contributed 
to the increased household income. An example is the increased productivity of onions in Karatu from an 
average of 30 sacks to 50 and 70 sacks.  Nevertheless, the markets have made it easier for traders to buy 
onions from the homes of individual farmers. The number of sellers and buyers have significantly increased 
after the commissioning of the new markets. At Kinyasini market (Unguja), the number of sellers increased 
from 150 (pre-program) to 350 (post-program). It is also worth mentioning that the structures of some of 
the program’s markets have been constructed with excess capacity to cater for possible future expansion 
(e.g. additional storeys).   

                                                           
10 Disaggregated by type of beneficiary group and gender 
11 Programme Steering Committee. 
12 PMO-RALG, MAFC, MITM, MW&I, MLDF, MID, MFEA, MOF, MANR and MoRASD-Zanzibar. 
13 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the DO rating for the PCR shall be 
calculated using the IPR methodology. 



 

11 

 
Rehabilitated roads have contributed to the observed progress on the income side (see the discussion in 
section B.1 and B.2). For example, program beneficiaries testified that the roads have largely improved the 
volumes of crops reaching intended markets. Specifically, the volumes of crops reaching the crop markets 
as a result of improved rural roads increased from an overall mean of 230.5 tonnes to 808.6 tonnes per 
season.  

 

5. Beneficiaries (add rows as needed) 
 

Actual (A) Planned 
(B) 

Progress 
towards target  
(% realized) (A/B) 

% of 
women 

Category (e.g. farmers, students) 

350 350 100 20 Government staff  
2,500 2,500 100 35 Farmer producer groups  

26,694 5,000 187 65 Processors linked to SPs  

 
6. Unanticipated or additional outcomes (add rows as needed) 
 

Description Type (e.g. 
gender, 
climate 
change, 
social, other) 

Positive 
or 
negative 

Impact on 
program 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 

Private sector has taken advantage of business opportunities created by the 
program’s infrastructures. An example is the livestock market in Longido where 
a private investor is currently constructing an abattoir with a daily capacity of 
processing 2,000 goats. The investment will further raise the volume of animals 
being traded in the market.  
 

Business Positive  High 

Ownership disputes of markets, e.g. the Longido livestock market where the 
ownership has moved from the district council to the Ministry of Livestock.  There 
were also few incidences of ownership disputes of the matching grant equipment 
- between farmers groups who contributed the 25% and LGAs who claimed to 
own the facilities (claiming the 75% came from the Bank’s loan as a public fund).  
 

Governance Negative Low 

Increased property values along the program’s rehabilitated roads. For example, 
a 400 square meters piece of land along the rehabilitated Karansi Tanki la Maji 
road in Siha district now fetches Tsh 4 million from Tsh 1 million pre-
rehabilitation.  In rural Tanzania, land constitutes 70-80% of asset endowment; 
and it is key to household wealth. In addition to rising property prices, 
Government investment in securing property rights will be a step toward further 
reduction in rural poverty. 
 

Business Positive  Medium  

Cooling chambers that were intended for fruit and vegetables have been utilised 
for other produce as well. An example is the use of the chambers to store ‘Mbege’, 
a traditional brew of the Chagga ethnic group in Kilimanjaro region. The brew is 
made up of ripe bananas and sprouted millet. 
 

Business Positive Medium 

Disputes on the user fees between district authorities and traders who have 
rented stalls inside the markets. The program advised the markets management 
committee and the district authorities to meet and reach an amicable solution. 
 

Management Negative Medium 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 



 

12 

7. Lessons learned related to effectiveness (add rows as needed) 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Matching 
grant scheme 

Matching grant scheme was relatively new to both LGAs and potential beneficiaries. It took 
almost three years of awareness campaigns before credible applications could be received. 
Late implementation was an outcome of potential beneficiaries delayed application waiting 
to see what happens to early adopters. Also, most equipment had to be sourced from 
abroad. Despite being a learning platform, the intervention was a success as some of the 
cooperatives went as far as taking loans to finance their 25% contribution. Lessons: 1) 
Matching grants scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring resources and time for 
awareness raising, capacity building and attitudinal change 2) Program coordination teams 
need to assist producers to identify appropriate technology and the scale of operation; and 
3) Early adopters motivate others to join in and commit the 25% contribution. 

 
The Bank, 
GoT, other 
DPs 

2. Sequencing 
of the 
interventions 

Few incidences of non-preparedness of communities to assume fully responsibility of the 
constructed infrastructure. One of the reasons behind such difficulties was the delayed 
efforts from the other donors in forming beneficiary groups at the time construction was 
well advanced. The program sustained its efforts to deliver training to the management 
committees – with an expectation that the district authorities will take over such 
responsibilities post program. Lessons: For effective operation of the infrastructure, 
awareness creation and capacity building of stakeholders need to precede construction and 
rehabilitation works.  

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Procurement 
rules 

One of the reasons for varying procurement capacities across districts was the staff 
turnover. The program engaged the new staff to be conversant with the Bank’s procurement 
rules through repeated trainings. Such interventions were inclusive and ensured that even 
if staff leaves the LGAs those remaining are well familiar with the program’s guidelines. 
Lessons: Training on Bank’s procurement rules to LGA is not a one-off activity. Continued 
effort is highly encouraged to get district staff well informed with guidelines.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT. 

4. 
Communication 

Quick proactive verbal and email interactions between the program and the Bank were very 
productive. The interactions were necessary to effect backstopping, guide, get buy-in and 
facilitate the Bank to be aware of the progress and timely resolve emerged hitches. Lessons: 
Informal interactions fast track decision making and minimise chances of Bank objections. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

 
C: Efficiency  

 

1.0 Timeliness 
 

Planned program duration – years (A) (as per 
the Project Appraisal Report (PAR)) 

Actual implementation 
time – years (B) (from 

effectiveness for 1st disb.) 

Ratio of planned and actual 
implementation time (A/B) 

Rating* 

5 6.6 0.76 2 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The loan agreement was signed in September 201114, with the program taking effects in March 2012. The program was 
initially expected to be conclude by December 2016 but was extended to 30 th September 2018. The extension was 
necessary for a number of reasons - as follows. The program was a complex infrastructural based intervention with 
several construction contracts and demanding engineering designs, and procurement. Some of the projects were new at 
the local level (e.g. cold rooms whose design component had to be outsourced). Nevertheless, the identification of 
potential program’s districts was a time-consuming exercise that could have been avoided if the districts were identified 
prior to loan application. Like in many other development programs, contract management at the lower level was a 
challenge which led to variations due to additional works that were left out at the design phase.  
 
Other reasons for the time overruns included: el Niño rains, community indecision on site selections, disputes between 
contractors, communities on areas to extract construction materials, delayed legal opinion on the draft loan agreement, 
the delayed disbursement of 5% counterpart fund, and the prolonged consultations with authorities in Zanzibar on the 
choices of procurement methods for works contracts. To accelerate implementation, the program intensified follow ups; 
terminated grossly underperformed contracts; reviewed workplans to address implementation gaps; and, gave special 
attention on procurements for some infrastructural designs immediately after delays were noted. The PMO was also 
helpful in resolving delays in the release of the counterpart funds from the program’s districts.  

 

                                                           
14 Implementation of IFAD-funded components started in July, 2011, about 13 months earlier. 



 

13 

2.0 Resource use efficiency 
 

Median % physical implementation 
of RLF outputs financed by all 

financiers (A) (see II.B.3) 

Commitment rate (%) (B)  
(See table 1.C – Total commitment 

rate of all financiers) 

Ratio of the median percentage 
physical implementation and 

commitment rate (A/B) 

Rating* 

100% 90% 1.1% 4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The program was financed by the Bank, IFAD, counterpart funding from beneficiary districts and in-kind contribution 
from communities. The Bank and the counterpart contributions financed the marketing infrastructure development and 
value addition aspects of the program’s Component 1 and part of Component 3; whereas IFAD resources financed the 
producer empowerment and market linkages activities of Component 1, all of Component 2 and part of Component 3 
(see the description of the components in section B.1). By the time of mission visit, the disbursement rates were as 
follows: The Bank (91%); IFAD (72%); and the counterpart LGA funding (77.9%). In absolute numbers, as of 30th 
November 2018, the Bank had disbursed UA 36,635,956.25; counterpart LGA funding USD 1.12million (UA 0.80 million) 
and IFAD USD 65.0 Million (46.43 million). All making a total spending at UA 83.87 million. 
 
Taking into account ground realities and other factors (e.g. rising contraction costs), the program’s targets in the result 
framework were revised at the MTR. For example, the target for rehabilitating rural roads was scaled down from the 
initial 1,550 km to 1,000 km due to escalating costs. Per unit cost of rehabilitation increased from US$ 19,500 estimated 
at the appraisal to about US$ 35,000. The construction target for the agricultural markets was also scaled down from 32 
(at appraisal) to 16 because of 1) increased per unit cost of rehabilitation from US$ 200,000 estimated at appraisal to 
US$ 450,000; and 2) decreased demand from districts. Despite the program delivered less outputs set at the approval, 
at the program end, the targets set for the output indicators at the MTR were achieved by an average of 136%. The 
computation of the resource use efficiency was based on the targets revised at the MTR.  

 

3.0 Cost benefit analysis 
 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 
(at appraisal) 

Updated Economic Rate of Return  
(at completion) 

Rating* 

ERR: 22.4% Net Present Value (NPV): Tsh 215.8 billion ERR: 31% NPV: Tsh 2.3 trillion  4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The cost benefit analysis is rated highly satisfactory as the ERR at the program end is higher than the ERR at the 
appraisal stage (31% versus 22%). This is despite the downward revision of some of the output targets during the 
Mid-Term Review (MTR). The economic analysis has been undertaken over a 20-year span in line with the projected 
economic life of the program. The analysis is on an estimation of program-wide benefits from 1) investments in rural 
roads and market infrastructure 2) incremental incomes resulting from increases in value of commodity sales; and 3) 
equipment support for value addition (see the key assumptions in annex 10). The EIRR computation is provided in 
annex 10.1. Sensitivity analysis shows the program is more sensitive to changes in benefits than costs. For instance, a 
20% increase in costs results into only 3.1%and 8% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively from the base scenario. A 
similar percentage decrease in benefits leads to 23.1% and 9% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively (ann ex 10.2). 
However, none of such changes has a dramatic impact on the NPV and ERR i.e. pushing the NPV towards zero. Given 
the consistent positive net benefits and ERR from the sensitivity analysis, and the difficulties in quantifying socio-
economic benefits (e.g. from the newly constructed/rehabilitated roads), the program has more benefits than what the 
NPV and EIRR figures suggest.  

 

4.0 Implementation Progress (IP)15 
 

IP Rating (derived 
from updated IPR) * 

Narrative comments (commenting specifically on those IP items that were rated unsatisfactory or highly 
unsatisfactory, as per last IPR). (indicative max length: 500 words) 

4 The latest IPR is dated May 2018. The IPR concluded that the overall physical implementation of the 
program was satisfactory bar intervention on bankable proposals for value addition which had 
physical implementation of only 74%. At the time of the IPR (May 2018), a total of 37 bankable 
proposals out of the planned 50 had been prepared, out of which, 19 proposals were funded by the  
program’s matching grant scheme, 7 remained eligible for the matching grant, with 10 proposals 
forwarded to the rural finance component for funding by Microfinance Institutions (MFI). 
 
By the end of the program the number of bankable proposals for value addition surpassed the target 
by 6% (106% achievement rate). As discussed in section A.3, the challenge with the matching grant 
component was the overstretched and limited financial capacity of some beneficiaries, as well as the 
tendency of some of potential beneficiaries to wait and observe what the early adopters would 

                                                           
15 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the IP ratings need to be converted from 
the 0-3 scale used in SAP to the 1-4 scale used in the IPR.     



 

14 

experience. Despite such challenges, the matching grant scheme was a success, not only because it 
surpassed its targets but also because even financially constrained beneficiaries managed to borrow 
from financial institutions and meet the 25% criteria. As discussed in section B.7, the key lessons 
from delivering the matching grant scheme included the need for extensive awareness and capacity 
development of the processor groups in agro-processing technology to stimulate demand for such 
grants. Programs should also assist groups in identifying appropriate technology, as well as scale of 
their operations to enable the groups to afford 25% contribution. 

 
5.0 Lessons learned related to efficiency 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. 
Maintenance 
of equipment 
supplied 
under the 
matching 
grants  

Most of the matching grant beneficiaries experienced positive outcomes (e.g. increased 
productivity) with the support they received from the program. Experiences gained 
from supporting processors to secure equipment included the risks for beneficiaries to 
order equipment that are too advanced to their environment; and the need for rigorous 
after-sale maintenance support from suppliers. Lesson: Programs need to be well 
resourced to support verification and selection of delivered equipment (such capacities 
are lacking at the local level).  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

2. Beneficiary 
contributions. 

The 5% beneficiary contribution for infrastructure programs (markets and warehouse) 
and 25% beneficiary contribution for the matching grant equipment was a challenging 
experience to some communities and local authorities. Delays in contributions from 
some of the program’s districts was among the main reasons for the delayed 
implementation of planned infrastructures. Rather than waiting for the districts to 
advance the 5% contribution, the program proceeded with procuring works contracts 
with districts allowed to advance partial payments. Lessons: 1) Capacity to meet 
counterpart contribution differed between local authorities because of differences in 
endowments 2) Context and nature of the interventions (or technologies to be acquired) 
should guide the choice of cash or in-kind contribution 3) Continuous follow up on 
districts to ensure that they meet their financial obligations including seeking support 
from higher authorities 4) mandatory contribution (matching grants) risks to deflect 
interventions from the targeted poor to the better-off. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

3. Group size The program experience shows that the small sized farmers groups are performing 
relatively better than large groups. Among the areas that separate the two groups, is the 
fact that the large groups are characterised by large sized committees which raises 
group management costs. Differences in members objectives, free riding and 
opportunistic behaviours is more prevalent with large groups. Lessons: Encourage and 
advocate for small sized farmer organisations as operators of program infrastructures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

4. Technology Some of the program’s storage facilities were installed with advanced technology (e.g. 
cold rooms, processing machineries) that were very new to most local authorities. As 
such, some local authorities struggled not only to be actively involvement in engineering 
designs but also on best practices when it comes to management and operation of such 
facilities. The latter challenge (engineering designs) was addressed by outsourcing 
designs to experienced entities. Lesson: Complementary TA is necessary to support and 
guide district authorities to establish ideal management and operationalisation models 
for the infrastructures. Overall, the infrastructure interventions need to be accompanied 
by intensive business support taking into account all aspects that would, for instance, 
advances the facilities as profitable business ventures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

5. Co-
financing 
arrangements 
and risks. 

The PAR identified IFAD and AGRA as co-financers of the program. However, only the 
Bank and IFAD proceeded with its co-financing commitment. Commonly to most co-
financing arrangements, co-financers have their own procedures and ways of doing 
business which at times affect the pace of implementation, timelines for supervision 
missions and synchronization of components from different financers. A case in point 
was the mismatch in pace between the Bank’s infrastructure component (‘the 
hardware’) and IFAD’s capacity building component (‘the software’) component. 
Consultations between co-financers helped in avoiding serious misalignments. Lessons: 
1) Flexibility by the Government and/or the Bank in stepping in when potential co-
financers do not fulfil their commitment 2) regular consultations to avoid serious 
misalignment between components being targeted by co-financers 3) Government is an 
important mediator when delays from one co-financer affects the delivery of 
components of the other co-financers. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 



 

15 

D:  Sustainability 

 

1.0 Financial sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To enhance sustainability, one of the key criteria to initiate program activities was the commercial prospects 
of projects to be financed by the program. To complement such efforts, the program linked the agro-processing 
to the marketing dimensions and access to financial services as well as investing in rehabilitating roads that 
linked beneficiary communities to the pre-existing and program’s rehabilitated markets and warehouses. Of 
recent, the Government has established TARURA, an agency that is tasked to oversee O&M of all rural roads 
including the ones rehabilitated by the program. Such institutional reform raises the likelihood that the 
program investments in rural roads will be sustained.  
 
Strong evidences of potential financial sustainability of the program investment are emerging. The revenue 
collected by the Longido district rose by 300% after the the launch of the program’s livestock market. In fact, 
the district was able to meet its 5% counterpart contribution from the revenue collected from the market. One 
of the program’s market in Zanzibar (Kinyasini market) which used to collect Tsh 1.5million pre-program, 
now collects an average of Tsh 7million – after the new market structure was launched. The milk processor in 
Zanzibar which obtained processing equipment from the program matching scheme used to sell a 175ml cup 
of yogurt for Tsh 500. They are currently fetching Tsh 1,000 for the same due to improved quality. 16 The 
business is now able to price compete with larger processors.  
 
Financial sustainability is also highly likely as some of the program’s markets have introduced additional 
revenue opportunities. The onion market in Karatu, for example, is collecting Tsh 5,000 from each truck 
collecting onions from the villages. Between July-November 2018, more than 1,950 trucks have paid the fee. 
The number of buyers and trucks coming to the market are on the rise due to the program’s rehabilitated 
roads going to the mentioned market. Serve the need for continuous support in strengthening business 
practices in managing the program’s markets and warehouses, revenues being generated from these 
infrastructures currently cover the operating costs.   

 
2.0 Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 The program’s effort in training management committees that foresaw the developed infrastructures was an 
important step to reinforce sustainability of the program interventions and ensuring continued use of the 
program’s roads, markets and warehouses. Other training beneficiaries included regional and district personnel 
from program’s region and districts (engineers, procurement, to environmental officers). In addition to the 
provision of training to the beneficiaries and staff the program was well integrated into government 
institutional structure to ensure ownership and sustainability (e.g. implemented by the PMO office with the 
infrastructural assets owned by the local authorities). The field interview shows that 66.7% of the surveyed 
wards have committees in place to ensure continued maintenance of the infrastructures. Moreover, about 
70.4%of the wards confirmed that the committees have a role to set penalties for improper use of the program’s 
infrastructures. Other roles given to the committees included security for the facilities, budgeting, records and 
controlling income from the facilities. In some wards, the committees were given the role of training other 
community members on the proper use of the program’s infrastructures.  
 
The good experiences on maintaining and managing program’s infrastructures from the exemplary districts 
(e.g. Siha district from Kilimanjaro region) have been shared to other districts through workshops and 
documentation for future guidance. Through PEML, the number of farmer producer groups and farmer 
marketing groups have expanded including membership with the groups equally empowering men and women 
in group’s leadership. Working in groups has enhanced producers’ empowerment in price negotiations, market 
search and linkages to potential traders and off-takers. The program also released more than six instruction 
manuals on PH handling of perishables.17 

 
 

 

                                                           
16 We cannot ignore the inflation factor as well.  
17 They included 1) horticultural, roots and tubers crop 2) small milling operations for cereals 3) rice grain PH 
management 4) spice and condiments processing 5) sunflower oil processing 6) packaging and labelling. 



 

16 

3.0 Ownership and sustainability of partnerships 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To raise the sense of ownership, groups the received matching grants for agro-processing equipment 
contributed 25% of the cost of buying equipment. Beneficiary districts also remitted 5% cash contributions 
for the market and warehouse facilities. Sustainability of these facilities is also highly likely as the maintenance 
and repairing of some of the equipment are currently fully financed by the beneficiary groups. The same with 
the roads. For example, the Government has invested in upgrading the program’s constructed Mkanyageni-
Kangagani (4.5km) feeder road in Pemba by adding one more layer of gravel. Beneficiaries districts have 
invested additional facilities after taking over the program’s infrastructures. For example, the district 
authority managing the Tibirinzi market in Pemba has installed 100 additional stalls in addition to 82 
program’s installed stalls.   
 
To optimise benefits from the program financed markets, district authorities, Longido for example, is 
consulting the Ministry of Livestock to connect the market to the ministry’s livestock marketing information 
system. District authorities in collaboration with beneficiary communities have also enacted bylaws to enforce 
sustainable use of the rehabilitated roads. In Siha district, for instance, a fine of Tsh 200,000 is imposed on 
livestock crossing the newly rehabilitated roads. Despite the district authorities owning the infrastructures, it 
is the beneficiaries’ committees which are tasked to operate the markets and storage facilities. The 
sustainability of such partnerships is highly likely given the management training that the program delivered 
to both parties. However, further clarification is necessary with regards to ownership, operational costs and 
revenue for some of the facilities.  

 
4.0 Environmental and social sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 Environmental sustainability: The program developed the Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) describing measures to mitigate impacts during the construction works. In addition, training was 
delivered to all district environmental officers focusing on EMSP planning, monitoring and reporting. In 
collaboration with the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC), an environmental checklist for 
monitoring rural marketing infrastructure programs was developed and shared to all participating districts. 
Other efforts which have positive impacts on environmental sustainability included: 1) sensitized 
communities to undertake responsible farming along the road alignments as a way of minimising damage to 
the constructed roads 2) provision of adequate drainage; mitre drains and cross drainages structures 3)  
enhanced capacities of communities close to constructed roads in enforcing bylaws  
 
Social sustainability: The program ensured that alignments of the new roads limit any involuntary 
resettlement of communities. Safety signs have been erected along the program’s rehabilitated roads (e.g. 
speed limit signs) – with the police force training motor cyclists to observe rules. The program team and 
district personnel were also sensitised on gender mainstreaming. By February 2015, 25% of the 1,094 
community members who attended training on operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure were 
women. Moreover, some of the cooperatives that benefited from the matching grant scheme are largely 
dominated by women. The Muwanda cooperative creameries, for example, is composed of 8 female members 
and 4 male members. These benefits will positively impact the lives of women who account for a significant 
proportion of the rural population engaging in agriculture.  



 

17 
 

5.0 Lessons learned related to sustainability 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Utilization 
of storage 
structures 
 

Some of the community-operated warehouses were not utilized to the same extent as 
the privately-owned warehouses. The private owned warehouses have incorporated 
broader agricultural value chain activities e.g. paddy and sunflower processing etc. 
Lessons: 1) Need for increased awareness to the beneficiary communities that the 
program support (e.g. warehouse) is just a motivation to trigger their own efforts to 
invest in broader agricultural value chain activities (e.g. agro-processing) 2) capacity 
of stakeholders to implement additional agricultural value chain activities needs to be 
enhanced and synchronised with infrastructure development. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

2. Access to 
standards and 
quality 
certifications 

Access to standards certification has been a time-consuming exercise for small 
processors – and of a high transaction cost given their small-scale operations. To 
address this challenge, the program established important contacts with the 
authorities to provide advisory services to processors in addition to inspection, and 
testing towards supporting their applications for certificates. Lessons: Support to 
processors to access standards and quality certification needs to be highly prioritised 
and be considered that is resource demanding similar to other program activities.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. Access to 
standards 
certifications 

As part of their contractual obligations, equipment suppliers delivered trainings to the 
matching grant beneficiaries. However, few processors enrolled only a single member 
in such trainings, limiting the spread of knowledge on expertise to maintain the 
equipment in case of breakdown.  Lessons: Encourage beneficiary groups to enrol 
more than one group member in the O&M training sessions.  

The Bank, 
beneficiaries.  

4. Market 
disruptions 

In some of the areas that the program invested new markets, traders and middlemen 
are exploiting farmers by directly collecting agricultural produce from homes. Efforts 
from district authorities are well acknowledged to have restored order to some extent. 
Nevertheless, the markets were new experiences in some of the program areas, and as 
a result some farmers tended to ‘wait and see’ before engaging with the markets. 
Lesson: Government intervention is necessary to ensure that the operations of the 
markets are not interrupted by opportunistic behaviours of traders and middlemen.  

The Bank, 
GoT, 
beneficiaries. 

 
III: Performance of stakeholders 

 

1.0 Bank performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment by the Borrower on the Bank’s performance, as well as any other aspects of the 
program (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 
words) 

 
4 The program was supervised bi-annually making a total of 14 supervision missions between 2012 and 

2018. The Bank’s missions were diversified in expertise by including financial, procurement and 
disbursement personnel as well as agricultural specialists. Keeping in view the infrastructures involved 
in the program, the Bank’s supervision team was also supported by an engineer. The supervision missions 
assisted the program and the executive agency to address managerial and technical aspects that impeded 
implementation. With more decision-making power devolved to field offices, the COTZ18, using both 
formal and informal means, closely monitored implementation and took prompt actions to resolve 
challenges. An example is the Bank’s interventions to restore the program’s coordinator in Zanzibar and 
the Bank’s procurement rules for works contracts.   
 
The Bank’s country office was involved, either through the supervision missions or outside such missions, 
to actively engage with the Government and co-financers in discussing progress and resolve 
implementation challenges. The MTR19 was carried out in June 2015 and helped to identify challenges and 
way forward including revising some of the program end-targets. The Bank also encouraged the program 
to undertake an internal PCR, a document that offered inputs to the Bank’s own PCR. The Bank also 
encouraged and motivated the program team to intensify monitoring, supervision and follow-up to ensure 
that all infrastructures were completed on time and are fully utilised by the intended beneficiaries.  

                                                           
18 Tanzania Field Office. 
19 Mid-Term Review. 



 

18 
 

Comments to be inserted by the Bank on its own performance (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on 
issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The Bank provided close and extensive program review missions throughout the period of the programme. Since 
inception, the Bank supervised the program 14 times including the MTR.  All the Bank’s missions aided the programme to 
address managerial and technical aspects that greatly helped to expedite implementation.  In all the supervision missions, 
field supervisions were conducted followed by an analysis and discussion of observations including debriefing sessions 
held with the GoT officials and selected members of the steering committee, whose details and strategies for improving 
the program were presented in the aide memoirs of the missions. Where necessary, the Bank supported and aided re-
allocations of funds to GoT’s preferred areas of greater interests. The intensified Bank supervision towards the final stages 
of the program accelerated implementation and helping in the improvement of revised work schedules and activities 
which turned around the slow pace of implementation experienced initially. 
Key issues (related to Bank performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
1. Future Bank’s supervision missions should maintain diversified 
personnel as appropriate with the aim of facilitating effective 
interactions and advices on various aspects related to program 
implementation.  

Maintain a team of diversified Bank experts in 
supervision missions as appropriate. 

2. In-kind contribution from beneficiaries were not monetised. To avoid 
understating counterpart contribution, the Bank can introduce a model 
were supervision and other costs incurred by beneficiary Governments 
are quantified, documented and ultimately included as part of the 
counterpart contributions.  

Introduce a model were counterpart in-kind 
contributions are monetised and 
acknowledged.  
 

3. Programs that support access to productive assets (equipment and 
infrastructures) need to invest heavily on business coaching to 
reinforce business mindsets and acumen on beneficiaries.  

Upgrade support to business coaching in 
programs that support access to productive 
assets.   

 

2.0 Borrower performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the Borrower performance to be inserted by the Bank (both quantitative and 
qualitative, depending on available information). See guidance note. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4 Both the central and local authorities worked closely with the program during implementation. Senior 
officials from the relevant Government ministries constituted the PSC providing an enabling environment in 
terms of policy guidelines and staff. The same with the regional secretariat and LGAs (regional engineers, 
district engineers, agriculture and irrigation and cooperative officer etc) who facilitated implementation in 
terms of designing, procurement, supervision and management. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) was very 
active in negotiating the loan and also in meeting the covenants for the effectiveness of the loan. With regards 
to counterpart contributions, the Government provided the required cash contribution in meeting the 
payroll requirements of the staff serving the program. Despite the delays, the Government supported the 
program in ensuring that districts honoured their counterpart funding obligations as well as ensuring that 
periodic roads maintenance are carried out adequately. A vivid example for the latter is the financing of 
additional culverts along the program’s Mwapogolo-Mbarino road. The culverts protected the road from 
being washed away by water streams, while the culverts also allowed farmers to tap the water flow for 
irrigation. District authorities also closely enforced bylaws that aimed at efficient use of the market 
infrastructures. An example is the introduction of permits for trucks collecting onions in Karatu, a move that 
advanced the use of the program’s market, and district’s awareness of the number of traders operating in 
the area.  

Key issues (related to Borrower performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
The central Government assisted in following up and reminding districts 
to remit counterpart funds. The efforts paid off as of April 2018, the 
program had collected Tsh 1.8 billion (76.1% out of the total planned 
counterpart contributions from the program districts). 

Timely submission of counterpart funds 
necessitates close follow up from local and 
central Government, and the program team. 

The program’s objectives and logical flow from outputs to outcomes and 
impact remain relevant. It is high likely that the program’s benefits will be 
sustained provided that the Government continue to capacitate 
communities and committing resources to maintain the rehabilitated 
roads and other program’s infrastructures.  

Continuous post-program Government 
follow up and support is necessary to 
sustain the program’s investments and 
benefits.  

Overall, the program team was found to prepare good quality progress 
reports and was up to date on the submission of periodic plans and annual 
external audit reports. Most program staff received relevant training in 
their respective fields such as program management; procurement; 
contract management; monitoring and evaluation, and Training of 
Trainers (ToT). 

A strong and well-resourced program team 
is necessary particularly for a complex and 
geographically wide spread program.  



 

19 
 

3.0 Performance of other stakeholders 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the performance of other stakeholders, including co-financiers, contractors 
and service providers. See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

3 Generally, the performance of contractors was good, serve for some isolated cases of low quality of 
works and engineering designs. To enhance quality delivery of infrastructure assets, the program team 
in collaboration with beneficiary districts and communities intensified supervision, and whenever 
faults were noted, the responsible contractors were made liable before the defect liability period lapses. 
Continued developing the capacity of the district teams, as well as possibility of seeking third party 
opinion for complex design issues e.g. designing of the bridges, is a lesson for future programs. Other 
institutions such as SIDO and the Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
(TAMESA) had good collaborations with the program’s districts, especially when they were requested 
to repair processing equipment that were financed by the program. 
 

Key issues (related to performance of other stakeholders, max 5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned (max 5) Target audience 
(for lessons learned) 

Service providers were capacitated and rendered services that 
impacted on overall productivity of rural producers. They assisted in 
supplying the required inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides 
intended for use by individual farmers, farmer producer groups, 
processors etc.  

Complementary 
services, e.g. input 
supplies are important 
targets for programs to 
reach their goals. 

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Beneficiary communities were actively involved in the entire business 
cycle from the planning to the implementation stages. This reduced 
the risks of resentment by communities and simplified ways to 
address disagreements on the selection of program sites.  

Community 
participation is 
necessary at all stages 
of the program cycle.  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Increasing bargaining power and better prices for farmers as a result 
of the market and storage facilities were well acknowledged by the 
interviewed beneficiaries. However, traders continue to exploit 
farmers through monopolised structures (e.g. onion market in 
Karatu).  

Government 
interventions and 
market promotion to 
break the monopolistic 
structure  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

 
 

IV: Summary of key lessons learned and recommendations 

 

1.0 Key lessons learned 
 

Key issues (max 
5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

Management of 
equipment and 
infrastructures 

Rural beneficiaries have limited business acumen to ensure profitable utilisation 
of equipment and infrastructures. As such, the design of the equipment and 
infrastructure support needs to embed a well-resourced component supporting 
business development services to further guarantee sustainable use of the 
equipment. 

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Matching grant 
scheme 

Matching grant scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring significant 
resources and time for awareness building, attitude change, and support to 
beneficiaries in identifying appropriate technology and the scale of operation. 

The Bank, 
and other DPs 
 

Standard and 
quality 
certification 

Access to standard and quality certification is necessary for expanding market 
penetration but also a time and resource costly activity to most small processors. 
Program component on supporting access to such certifications needs to be 
highly prioritised in program planning.  

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Opportunistic 
behaviours of 
some of the 
traders and 
middlemen.  

The new markets offered improved prices and motivate farmers to bring their 
produce to the markets. However, Government intervention is necessary to 
ensure that operations of the markets are not interrupted by the opportunistic 
behaviours of some of the traders and middlemen.  
 

GoT 

 
 
 
 
 



 

20 
 

2.0 Key recommendations (with particular emphasis on ensuring sustainability of program benefits) 
 

Key issue 
(max 10, add 
rows as 
needed) 

Key recommendation Responsible  

1.  
 

Market and warehouse infrastructures have generated several benefits as discussed in 
preceding sections. However, further interventions by the district, regional and central 
Governments are necessary to optimise benefits accruing to farmers. There is a need to 
break buyers’ monopoly; promote and attract increasing number of buyers to advance 
the competitiveness of the market; and, strengthen the existing efforts to enforce the 
established marketing rules.  
 

Central, 
regional and 
district 
authorities. 

2.  The implementation of the IFAD’s components has been extended to March 2020. It is 
recommended for the extended IFAD component of the program to further strengthen 
the utilisation of the market and storage infrastructures by supporting marketing, 
financial services and business acumen in managing rural infrastructures.  
 

 
IFAD, and 
GoT. 

3.  Beneficiaries need to be closely supported to develop transparent and well elaborated 
business, and O&M plans for the program infrastructures and equipment. They need to 
have a clear understanding that the facilities need to be operated in a manner that 
maintenance and replacement costs are well covered.   
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities.  

4.  The preparation phase of infrastructure program needs to consider planning for an 
implementation time of the program from 5 to 7 years. The first two to three years of the 
program are spent on program identification, engineering designs and procurement 
processes. Another possibility is for the Government to have in place engineering and 
feasibility studies well in advance of loan application.  
 

 
The Bank, 
GoT. 

5.  Fully integrate program’s investments in the district annual plans and budget for 
maintenance for prolonged use of the infrastructures. Capacitate and sensitize local 
authorities to enforce by-laws (e.g. axel load limits on roads).  
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

6.  Ensure clear understanding for all parties when it comes to ownership and operational 
modalities of the infrastructure. Though local authorities own the markets and 
warehouses, they need to be encouraged or provided with complementary TA to 
establish formal agreements with respect to the role of owners and operators of the 
facilities.  

 

 
The Bank, 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

7.  Ensure that all stakeholders are familiar with the Bank’s rules and program’s plans. 
Reference is made, for instance. Implementation delays are minimised if the Bank’s 
procurement rules are well understood. Procurement rules are among the rules that the 
Bank cannot change.  
 

GoT and 
district 
authorities 

8.  The initial ERR model (at the PAR stage) needs to be well documented at the PAR stage 
with the program’s M&E made responsible to regularly collect data necessary to update 
the ERR at the program closure stage.  
 

The Bank. 

9.  Intensify support to processors in quality and standards certification. Small processors 
cannot afford the high transaction costs and the time-consuming activity of following up 
certifications. The program approach in facilitating the standards organisations in 
assisting producers is one of the means to address the issue.  
 

The Bank  

10.  Government needs to intervene and clarify the few ownership disputes of some of the 
program’s markets and warehouses. Reference is made to the Longido livestock market, 
and the warehouses in Chato and Njombe.   
 

 
GoT 

 

 
 
 



 

21 
 

V: Overall PCR rating 

 
 

Dimensions and criteria Rating 
 

Dimension A: relevance 4 
Relevance of program development objective (II.A.1) 4 
Relevance of program design (II.A.2) 4 

Dimension B: effectiveness 4 
Development Objective (DO) (II.B.4) 4 

Dimension C: efficiency 3.5 
Timeliness (II.C.1) 2 
Resource use efficiency (II.C.2) 4 
Cost-benefit analysis (II.C.3) 4 
Implementation Progress (IP) (II.C.4) 4 

Dimension D: sustainability 4 
Financial sustainability (II.D.1) 4 
Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities (II.D.2) 4 
Ownership and sustainability of partnerships (II.D.3) 4 
Environmental and social sustainability (II.D.4) 4 

Overall program completion rating 3.9 
Highly satisfactory 

 
VI: Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 
AMSDP  - Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Programme 
ASDP II - Agricultural Sector Development Program 
CAADP - Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
CSPs  - Country Strategic Plan 
DPs  - Development Partners 
DITF - Dar es Salaam International Trade Fair 
EAC - East African Community 
ERR - Economic Rate of Return 
ESMP - Environmental and Social Management Plan 
GoT - Government of Tanzania 
IFAD  - International Fund for Agricultural Development 
LMIC - Local Market Infrastructure Committees 
MTR - Mid-Term Review 
MoF - Ministry of Finance 
MFI - Microfinance Institutions 
MIVARF  - Market Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance 
M&E  - Monitoring and Evaluation 
NPV  - Net Present Value 
NSGRP II - National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty 
O&M - Operation and Maintenance  
PMO - Prime Minister’s Office 
PY - Program Year 
PH  - Post-Harvest  
PHTC  - Post-Harvest Training Centre 
PAR - Project Appraisal Report 
PCR  - Program Completion Report 
RFSP - Rural Financial Services Program 
RMI - Rural Markets Infrastructure 



 

22 
 

SADC - Southern African Development Community 
SRI - System of Rice Intensification 
SIDO  - Small Industry Development Organisation 
TNA - Training Needs Assessment 
ToT  - Training of Trainers 
TAMESA - Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
TARURA - Tanzania Rural Roads Agency 

 



























































 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 

 

 

GHANA 

 

 

INCENTIVE-BASED RISK-SHARING SYSTEM FOR AGRICULTURAL 

LENDING (GIRSAL) PROJECT   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


September 2018 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

  
  

  
  

  
 

 

 

Loan information 

 

Client’s information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

RECIPIENT :       REPUBLIC OF GHANA (ROG) 

EXECUTING AGENCY :       GIRSAL LIMITED 

Financing plan 

Source 

 

Amount (million) 

 
Instrument 

UA USD 
African Development Fund (ADF) 10.00 14.16 Loan  to ROG 

RoG/MOF  34.64 49.09 Counterpart Equity 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 44.64 63.25 - 

 

ADF’s key financing information 

 
Loan currency UA 

Interest rate  100 Basis Points 

Tenure 30 Years 

Grace period   5 Years 

Commitment fee  50 Basis Points 

Service Charge                                                                                                      75 Basis Points 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Identification Mission      May, 2017 

Preparation Mission      August 2017 

Concept Note Approval      September, 2017 

Appraisal Mission      February,2018 

Programme approval 19 September, 2018 

Effectiveness 19 November, 2018 

Completion        November, 2023 

Last Disbursement         February, 2024 

 

  



 

iv 

 

Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) Project 

Result-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) 

 

                                                 
1 Over a 10 year period 

Country and Project name: Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) 

Purpose of the Project:  To create a medium-term facility that would provide; financing, technical assistance, risk management and management information systems that enhance objective pricing of agricultural 

credit.  

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2023) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Increased economic growth and reduction in 

poverty 

  Expanded commercial bank and financial institutions  

lending in agricultural value chains 

 

3.4% 6.8%1 BoG   statutory report / 

Ghana Bureau of Statistics 

Statutory Bank Lending 

Profiles/Afdb supervision  

Macroeconomic risks - slow economic growth 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will intensify the 

dialogue with the government to adopt supportive 

macroeconomic policies 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

OUTCOMES 

Outcome 1: Increased leveraging effect of 
public funding to incentivize private sector 

lending to Agribusiness 

1.1 Multiplier effect of credit guarantees for crowding-
in  commercial lending into Agriculture  

X1 X3 BoG Reports, GIRSAL 
Quarterly Performance Reports 

 
Risk: BoG increasing the base lending rate 

Mitigation: Ensuring Base + minimum % possible 

 

 

Outcome 2: Improved Financing Terms for 

Agribusiness  

2.1 Reduced  effective interest rates for agribusiness 

loans attached to GIRSAL credit guarantee scheme  

35% (as at July 2017) 30% or less Review of samples of signed 

term sheets 

 

2.2 Reduced Loan Processing Time  base lines studies  10% reduction Review of samples of signed 
term sheets 

 

2.3  Improved Loan Tenor Terms  transition from 

seasonal financing 

 towards term financing Review of samples of signed 

term sheets 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

OUTPUTS 

Component 1:  Promoting De-risking Instruments for the Agriculture Sector 

Establishment of: 

(i) Credit Guarantee Scheme 

(ii) Technical Assistance 
(iii) Insurance Facility 

(iv) Digital Finance Platform  for design and 

roll out of low cost distribution systems for 

Financial Services 

1.1 No of new Financial Institutions that commit to 

lending Agribusinesses  

3 6 Portfolio Management reports 

 

  

 

Risk: No Stakeholder interest 
Mitigation: FI stakeholder sessions organised to get 

buy in from all major commercial banks, MFIs and 

rural banks. 

 

1.2 No. of FIs with dedicated Agriculture 
Desk/Loan/Credit Officers to serve Agribusiness 

Portfolio 

3 6 



 

v 

 

 

1.3 No. of Agribusinesses with successful loan 

submissions  

(% of which are women and youth owned businesses); 

 

0 10% utilization in first year 

(Min 30% would be women 

and youth owned 

businesses) 

 

Commercial risks - sharp rise in supply of 

agricultural commodities  domestically and  globally 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will work closely 

with its Ghana based and global crop market experts 

to gather pricing data 

 

Productivity risks -  failure to achieve forecast crop 
and livestock yield 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will proactively 

support the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

 

Risk: Challenges with Interoperability 

Mitigation: GIRSAL ICT Experts to build integrated 

platform and run numerous tests prior to systems 
launch 

1.4 Increased volume of new Agribusiness Lending by 

select value chains:  

i) Rice; 

ii) Legume- Soybean/Maize; 

iii)  Sorghum 

iv) Horticulture 

0  5% p.a  

1.5 No. of Agribusinesses across the value chains paying 

insurance premiums (by product) 

1 (large processors) 5  Insurance Desk Reports 

1.6 Improved Quality of Agribusiness Portfolios in 

Participating FIs 

i) No. of NPLs reduced; 

9.8% of total NPLs 

(USAID Stats) 

Reduce by 1% p.a BoG/MOF/MOFA/GIRSAL 

Reports 

1.7  Integrated System accessible by: 

i)  Participating  FIs;  

ii) Insurers 

 

0 To register 100% of all 

GIRSAL 

actors/beneficiaries on the 

platform 

IT System Reports 

 

Component 2:    Program Management/ Monitoring & Evaluation  

1. Institutional set-up of GIRSAL 
2. Work plan and operations are 

implemented 

2.1 Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 

2.2 Development, implementation and monitoring of the 

ESMS 

0 

 

100% in all cases at the end 

of the programme 

 

Project Implementation 

Manuals  

GIRSAL Quarterly Progress 

Reports, Sustainability Plan 

delivered at Mid-Term Review 

Risk: Fiduciary risks related to the use of MOF 

systems. 

  

Mitigation: The Project resources would be ‘ring 

fenced’ and channelled through dedicated accounts, 

with designated signatories and subject to periodic 

external audits. 

3. Program activities monitored and 
information produced regularly 

3.1 No. of technical reports prepared 0 4 

3.2  No. of audit reports produced  

3.3 No. of monitoring visits conducted by BoG 

3.4 No. of Technical Committee meetings held 
3.5 No. of Board  meetings held 

0 

0 

0 
0 

5 

10 

16 
8 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS     SOURCES OF FINANCE 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 Component 1: Promoting De-risking Instruments for the Agriculture Sector 

Establishing credit guarantee scheme and reinsurance hedge; Developing Agribusiness Linkages and agribusinesses’ capacity to access finance; Technical Assistance for financial institutions to 

objectively appraise and manage agribusiness portfolios; Development of agriculture credit policies and guidelines for FIs; Technical Assistance for Facilitating Access to Agricultural 

Insurance; Development of Insurance Products; Risk-Return modelling (pairing and pricing insurance + guarantees); Technical Sessions on Insurance Regulation (Policy makers and Insurance 
regulators);  Development of GIRSAL Secure Web Applications (Guarantee Application Portal; GIRSAL Payment Portal; Knowledge and Innovation Centre Portal; Risk Scoring Engine; Data 

Warehouse)  

Total Project Cost  

(UA million) :            44.64 

ADF Loan     :            10.00 

Republic of  Ghana :  34.64 
 

Components: 

Component 1 :  42.37 

Component 2 :   2.27 
Component 2: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; development, implementation and monitoring of the ESMS; development of a results 

based framework for M&E; and procurement, disbursement and audit functions. 



 

vi 

 

Programme Timeframe 

Task Name 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

   2024 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 

Negotiations                                       
    

Board approval                                       
    

Signature of Loan Agreement                                       
    

Appointing remaining GIRSAL team members                                       
    

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and 

first disbursement 
                                      

    

Programme launch and market awareness building                                      
    

Finalization and validation of procedures manuals                                        
    

Conducting baseline studies                                       
    

Preparing, signing Master agreements  with PFIs                                       
    

Prepare, approve Bid docs and contract awards for 

Goods, Works & Services 
                                      

    

Contracts execution for Goods, Works and 

Services 
                                      

    

Quarterly reports submission                                       
    

Annual reports submission                                       
    

Programme Work plans and Budgets                                         
    

Board Meetings                                       
    

Bank’s supervision missions                                      
    

Audit                                       
    

Mid-term review                                       
    

Programme Completion Reporting                                        
    

Impact assessment and technical audit                                       
    



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS FOR THE PROPOSED ADF LOAN OF UA10 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC 

OF GHANA FOR THE FINANCING OF THE GIRSAL PROJECT 

 
Management submits the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan of UA10 million 

to support the guarantee book and working capital finance requirements of the Ghana Incentive-Based 

Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL). 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

 

1.1.  Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending Project (GIRSAL) 

is designed within the context of Ghana’s ongoing agricultural transformation including the Ghana 

Shared Growth and Development Agenda II” (GSGDA II). The underlying theme of the GSGDA 

II is socio-economic transformation, which involves a change in the structure and composition of the 

national output in ways that enhance broad-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. The role of 

GIRSAL is to help accelerate financing and interconnectedness of the agriculture sector to ensure that 

across its key components, it is functioning at optimal levels.  

1.1.2 GIRSAL is also guided by country’s Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy 

(FASDEP). Which has the following as its pillars: (i) Food Security and Emergency Preparedness; (ii) 

Increased Growth in Incomes and Reduced Income Variability; (iii) Increased Competitiveness and 

Enhanced Integration into Domestic and International Markets;  (iv) Sustainable Management of Land 

and Environment; (v) Science and Technology Applied in Food and Agriculture Development; and 

(vi) Improved Institutional Coordination. The FASDEP anchors on sub-sector policies including the 

Crop Development Policy; Cocoa Strategy; Livestock Development Policy; Fisheries Policy and 

Policies for Services Delivery (Extension. Irrigation, Plant Protection, Agricultural Mechanization). 

1.1.3 The Government has targeted enhancing agricultural productivity and production through its 

Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) Campaign. The major interventions under the PFJ are organized 

around the following five pillars: (i) Seed: The program will catalyse market-led production of 

adequate quantities of quality seeds by private enterprises; (ii) Fertilizer:  Private companies engaged 

in fertilizer production/blending and importation will be facilitated in meeting the fertilizer demands 

of the beneficiary farmers; (iii) Extension Services: In partnerships with the local governments and 

private inputs and service providers, the extension services will provide reliable and programmed 

technical assistance to beneficiaries; (iv) Marketing: It is envisaged that the facilitation of increased 

uptake of inputs will lead to increase in production of the targeted crops by the provision of storage 

warehouses; and (v) E-Agriculture: The PFJ Campaign will profile the beneficiaries by e-registering 

them and developing a state-of-art information and communication technology (ICT) platform. 

 

1.1.4 GIRSAL is structured to support agriculture across the nation. While certain financing 

priorities will be provided to the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone (NSEZ) under the proposed 

Savannah Initiative, GIRSAL intends to balance market demand, government priorities and donor 

activity in its national spread. GIRSAL views its national footprint as critical to providing support for 

Ghana’s balance of payments, macroeconomic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition security, 

job creation and poverty reduction.  

 

1.1.5 The Project is anchored in the Financial Sector Department of the Ministry of Finance, and 

draws support from the Ministry of Food and Agriculture as well as the Bank of Ghana. GIRSAL is 



 

2 

 

organized to focus on six pillars of intervention and thereby contribute to the High-5 priorities that are 

crucial for accelerating Africa’s economic transformation: Feed Africa; Industrialize Africa: and 

Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. It will particularly contribute to the Feed Africa 

priority that focuses on transformation, scaling up agriculture as a business through financing and 

catalysing of value addition. 

 

1.1.6 The Bank has a competitive advantage in supporting the financing and de-risking of agriculture 

value chains in Ghana. The Bank’s growing expertise in risk sharing and issuance of credit guarantees 

in agriculture is a key capability for the transaction. By supporting GIRSAL, the Bank will help reduce 

poverty, reduce food importation and improve living conditions across Ghana’s farming communities. 

This Project will achieve this by catalysing transactions designed to boost the scale up and 

competitiveness of various value-prioritized chains such as rice, maize, soybean and cocoa. The 

Project will also consolidate on the gains made through various previous Bank and third party 

interventions in agricultural finance2.   

 

1.1.7 GIRSAL’s catalytic role in mobilizing private sector financing for agriculture will be critical 

to the success of emerging Government of Ghana initiatives such as the One District One Factory 

(1D1F) initiative. The initiative promotes agro-industrialization that will provide massive employment 

and wealth through value addition activities. A key precursor for 1D1F is the production of agricultural 

raw materials. GIRSAL’s financing guarantees will be vital to securing the volumes of agricultural 

commodities produced locally, including foodstuff, agricultural commodities for industry and 

agricultural commodities for exports. GIRSAL’s support will also enable 1D1F to champion agro-

processing through promoting the setting up of factories or revamping underperforming factories in 

the communities. 

 

1.1.8 GIRSAL is aligned to 2012-2017 Ghana Country Strategy Paper3 (CSP) extended to end 2018. 

The objective of the CSP is economic transformation leading to inclusive and sustainable growth. The 

strategy has two pillar namely: (i) Agriculture Enhancing Inclusive Growth and Economic 

Development; and (ii) Support to Industrialization through Private Sector Development. Based on the 

challenges to the country’s development trajectory the two strategic areas of focus are investment in 

agriculture and energy. GIRSAL falls under Pillar (i) stated above. This Project is would allow the 

agriculture sector to be more inclusive through the leveraging of more finances for the various actors 

along the value chain.  

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The African Development Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy has identified innovative financing as 

critical to mobilizing resources to enable agricultural transformation. 

 

1.2.2 The Risk Sharing Financing Mechanism has been proposed as one of the flagships for the 

Feed Africa Strategy and is premised on developing de-risking instruments, technical assistance, 

integrated ICT platforms, performance management and incentives that would bridge the gaps between 

the agriculture and financing value chains. The GIRSAL therefore offers a packaged solution to: 

i. Fix agricultural value chains in order to provide a reliable platform for de-risking agricultural 
lending; 

ii. Mobilize financing for Ghanaian agribusiness by using credit guarantees to address the risk of 
default; 

                                                 
2 Technical Annex B1: Lessons learnt  
3 Dialogue on  the new CSP Pillars is ongoing 



 

3 

 

iii. Provide technical assistance through capacity building across the value chains; 
iv. Reduce the cost of borrowing by agricultural producers from commercial banks; 
v. To provide technical advice to agribusinesses 

 

1.2.3  While the concept of risk sharing for agriculture is relatively emerging, the Bank would profit 

from experiences of other donors e.g. USAID, AFD and NIRSAL experience to help in developing   

GIRSAL.  

 

1.2.4 The Project has a great potential in contributing to the twin objectives of the Bank’s 10-Year 

Strategy (TYS). GIRSAL will catalyse a wave of inclusive growth across agro-climatic zones and 

geographical locations, age and gender buckets. This will occur because the underlying agribusiness 

investments will take place across Ghana and involve regions with high levels of poverty e.g. the 

North, as well as youth and women agri-preneurs. Reducing poverty indicators among these three 

social groups will boost Ghana’s performance materially. 

1.2.5 The Project will enhance agriculture financing and sector transformation through increased 

capital inflows into critical value chains. That increased inflow will ensure appropriate supply of 

inputs, extension services, critical infrastructure, skilled labour and related services to raise the 

productivity of crops and livestock. GIRSAL will also leverage on the activities of the Savannah Zone 

Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAPIP)4 and link up with Transformation of the 

African Savannah Initiative (TASI)5 as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in agriculture. 

Furthermore, the Project will provide technical assistance, entrepreneurship and business management 

training to value chain actors to improve their business operations.  

1.3.  Private Sector Engagement  

1.3.1 The key private sector financing partners are primarily commercial banks (e.g. Ghana 

Commercial Bank, Agriculture Development Bank and Société Générale), microfinance institutions, 

private equity investors and specialized credit providers. Existing lender and investor activities centre 

primarily on provision of loans and lines of credit to value chain participants on a limited tenure basis. 

Projects financed include agricultural inputs, mechanization, production, processing, and logistics.  

 

1.3.2 Private sector alignment mechanisms include various industry groups at the value chain; 

segment and activity level e.g. Ghana Chamber of Commerce, Agriculture Sector. In adjacent markets 

– insurance – the Ghana Agriculture Insurance Pool (GAIP) is a club of underwriters who work 

together to provide insurance cover to the sector.  

 

1.3.3 Key on-going financing activities are extensive and vary by financial institution. Based on 

discussions with various partners, the pipeline of transaction opportunities exceeds tens of millions of 

USD. For example, the oil palm value chain, for one single bank (Access Bank), represents a potential 

lending portfolio of $8 - $10M/annum targeted to growers and processors only.  Limited coordination 

of private sector actors is required as the commercial process for originating and managing the 

agricultural investment pipeline is sufficiently well developed. 

 

 

                                                 
4 The SAPIP Project was approved by the AfDB in December 2017 aims at transforming agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job 
and wealth creation in the Northern Savannah Zone of Ghana. The Project main components: (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value Chains & 

Agribusiness Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development and will be implemented over a five-year period (2018 – 2023) at a total cost of UA 40.38 

million. 
  
5  



 

4 

 

 

1.4.  Donors’ coordination 

1.4.1 The key development partners that are active in the sector are: L'Agence française de 

développement (AFD); Department for International Development (DFID); Global Affairs Canada; 

European Union; German Dev. Co-op (KfW Development Bank and  GiZ); Netherlands Embassy; 

Australian High Commission; JICA; USAID and World Bank; UN Agencies (IFAD, FAO and WFP). 

Others are IFPRI, AGRA and international NGOs such as Engineers without Borders, SNV and 

Catholic Relief Services. Donor activities cuts across ranges mostly targets various commodity value 

chains development, productivity enhancement, agricultural production and processing infrastructure 

development, mechanization, irrigation, sustainable land management, climate change adaptation and 

mitigation, nutrition, food safety, MSE and agribusiness development, access to finance, access to land 

and ICT for agriculture.  

 

1.4.2 Donor coordination mechanisms for the Agriculture Sector in Ghana are effective. 

Coordination under the Agriculture Sector Working Group (ASWG) began in 2002 and provides a 

platform for sharing information on ongoing and planned future activities with the aim of harmonizing 

interventions. The group holds annual joint sector reviews where donors, Government, implementation 

partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private sector review the performance of the sector 

to inform planning and decision-making. The ASWG is an open group of donors; quasi donors; 

implementers including NGOs, CSOs, private sector, etc.; and Government Ministries.  

 

1.4.3 Key on-going/pipeline interventions by donors include a EUR160 million (UA133 million) 

support for productive investment for sustainable agriculture development capacity building of 

decentralized institutions and community development in the part of the Northern Development 

Authority Zone. The Government of Canada is also supporting the sector with a CAD125 million (UA 

83 million) facility for Modernizing Agriculture in Ghana (MAG). IFAD has provided USD71.60 

million (UA 51 million) as loan for sustainable rural poverty reduction in rural areas and a grant of 

USD10.0 million (UA7 million) to mitigate the effects of climate change. The Bank has successfully 

co-financed projects in the sector with other donors. Notable among these is the just ended Northern 

Rural Growth Program and the on-going Rural Enterprises Program, which were/are both co-financed 

with IFAD. A matrix of interventions by donors is presented in Annex A2 of the Technical Annexes. 

The coordination of aid through the ASWG is enhancing aid effectiveness through harmonization and 

alignment of development partner support.  

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1.  Project Details 

2.1.1  Project development goal:  

 

i. Reduce risk faced by commercial banks by providing guarantees to finance risk sharing 
arrangements; 

ii. Improve lending risk profiles by providing technical agricultural and business-related 
assistance to commercial banks and farmers; 

iii. Facilitate creation of appropriate insurance and other risk mitigation products; 
iv. Provide financial rewards to banks that are able to increase agricultural lending in a financially 

responsible manner6; 

                                                 
6
 This could be in the form of cash back or interest rebates to the participating commercial banks. On their end, they 

would be encouraged to extend the same to beneficiary firms that repay loans i.e. akin to an insurance policy without 

claim/loss. 



 

5 

 

v. Establish internationally credible and robust Bank-rating system; 
vi. Develop integrated systems for sharing information on credit behaviour of agribusinesses 

 

2.1.2  The integrated development objective of the Project is to transform access to finance and risk 

sharing across agricultural value chains. Doing so will boost food and nutrition security, job and wealth 

creation. The specific Project objective is : To increase formal sector lending to across the agricultural 

value chain especially the upstream, primary stages by sharing the risk of lending with financial 

institutions. Such increased lending backed by GIRSAL’s credit guarantee is expected to mobilize 

credit creation and strengthening of agribusinesses. That will in turn help to increase incomes of actors 

along selected value chains on a sustainable basis. 
 

2.2.  Project components 

2.2.1  The Project will have two Components. (i) Promoting de-risking for the Agriculture Sector; 

(ii) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 

        Component 1: Promoting de-risking for the agriculture sector:  
 

        The Project will utilize four instruments to reduce risks associated with lending to agribusinesses:  
 

● Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS): This would entail the provision of guarantees to participating 
commercial banks and other financial institutions on an individual or portfolio basis. All banks and 

other financial institutions which shall be eligible for guarantees under the CGS, are prohibited 

from financing items under the Bank Group’s Negative List. The Bank Group’s Negative List is 

included in Annex C of the appraisal report.  The CGS will provide differential risk coverage 

ranging from 50% - 80%; with the scheme providing greater risk coverage for upstream activities 

(production and primary processing) and lower coverage for downstream activities (value added 

processing, services, logistics and marketing). Associated risks would be covered on a partial loss 

arrangement with loan tenure depending on: the volume of lending; profitability of the value chain 

activities; the type of financial intermediary, experience and capacity for agricultural lending. 

GIRSAL has developed: A business plan and investment strategy for the Risk Sharing Facility 

(RSF); a Financial Model; term sheets & tailored products (Guarantees, Letter of Credit, debt, 

equipment leasing, warehouse receipt financing etc.); financing and operational guidelines for RSF 

transactions (origination, credit diligence, default and contract management, development of risk 

management framework (risk pricing) and agriculture value chain (AVC) selection and 

prioritization criteria. 
 

● Technical Assistance Facility (TAF): This would involve capacity building for both Financing 
Value Chain actors (supply side actors) and Agriculture Value Chain actors (demand-side actors).  

Capacity building targeting demand side actors (such as input suppliers, producers, aggregators, 

processors, trade & logistics) will include training to improve farm and financial management, 

value addition and marketing. GIRSAL will also provide coaching and advisory services targeting 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). GIRSAL will provide technical training through 

the Banking and Insurance Colleges of Ghana to enhance the capacity of financial intermediaries 

to assess and manage agricultural credit risk. Training modules and technical support will include: 

establishing agriculture desks, product development and distribution, risk management and 

improving credit information systems. It will also support development of knowledge and 

innovation centres. The TAF will focus on MFI’s given that as at end-December 2016, there were 

five hundred and sixty four (564) MFIs provide commercial credit to agribusinesses (71 money 

lending companies, 11 Financial NGOs and 482 microfinance companies). 
 

                                                 
 



 

6 

 

● Agriculture Insurance Facility (AIF): While insurance presents opportunities for managing 
upstream risks, the uptake of agriculture insurance in Ghana remains low. As part of efforts to 

reduce exposure, GIRSAL guidelines have made provisions for borrowers to purchase insurance 

policies (where the local market provides appropriate insurance at competitive prices). The pairing 

of guarantee and insurance products offers a more holistic de-risking solution and could have 

positive impact on risk-adjusted interest rates over the long run. GIRSAL will collaborate with 

Ghana Agriculture Insurance Pool; the insurance regulator to define the regulatory framework for 

agriculture insurance in Ghana. The GIRSAL implementation team has initiated discussions with 

re-insurers such as SwissRe and AfricaRe to share costs development and rollout new products. 

The feasibility studies identified need for area-yield index insurance for annual crops, index 

insurance for tree crops, livestock insurance to cover both commercial and smallholder farmers, 

aquaculture insurance to cover commercial aquaculture). During year 1 and year 2, the Project will 

need to define models for low-cost distribution of these products through the private sector. 
 

● Digital Finance Platform: GIRSAL’s Digital Finance Platform is a cloud-based platform that 
would facilitate GIRSAL reporting, and development of predictive models. The platform consists 

of 3 elements: 

(i) Secure web applications that support: a guarantee application portal; payments portal and a 
knowledge and innovations centre portal (KIC); 
 

(ii) A Risk scoring engine to be used by lenders in making credit guarantee applications decisions, 

and by GIRSAL to make guarantee approval decisions. The engine presents yet another 

innovative opportunity for automating loan risk assessment as well as profiling potential 

borrowers and 
 

(iii)A data warehouse that integrates information from numerous sources to build Know-Your-

Customer (KYC) data on production: transaction, insurance coverage, input purchases, sales 

and purchases. The portal will allow capability for integrating information from Credit 

Reference Bureaus, Academic Institutions, Mobile Money providers, utilities etc. 

Component 2: Project Co-ordination and Management Unit (PMU): 

 

The GIRSAL team will implement the PMU. They will be responsible for the day-to-day management 

of the Project. They will also be responsible for Institutional set-up of GIRSAL, Operations 

(origination, due diligence, structuring and approval) and Monitoring and Evaluation.  The summary 

of activities is in Table 2.1 below: 
 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 
Component  Est. Total Cost (UA million)/ % 

of Base costs 

Component Description  

Component 1: Promoting de-
risking for the Agriculture 

Sector  

42.37 

 

(94.9%) 

This component will prioritize implementation and rollout of key GIRSAL 

elements:  

- Design and implementation of the credit guarantee scheme 

- Design and rollout of technical assistance products, including 

negotiating with technical partners 

- Rollout of an insurance support program designed to raise the  

awareness and use of insurance products in agriculture 

- Design and roll out of the digital finance services platform 

Component 2: Project Co-
ordination and Management 
Unit (PMU): 
 

2.27 

 
(5.1%) 

The PMU will be responsible for:  

- The day-to-day management of the Project.  
- Due diligence 
- Operations  
- M&E 
- Gender empowerment/equity issues,  
- Implementation of the Project ESMP 



 

7 

 

2.3.  Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

2.3.1 Table 2.2 presents design options considered and reasons for their rejection. 

Table 2.2: Project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Instrument: Direct 

Lending 

Creation of a budget financed fund to 

provide on-lending support to Ghana’s 
agriculture sector lenders; BoG mechanism 

would secure funds at low interest rate and 

disburse at a moderate spread 

Approach replicates past instruments whose key weakness is the adverse 

selection problem, moral hazard, and lack of sufficient prudence;. GIRSAL has 
in place TA support for banks and farmer borrowers to enhance their 

performance & productivity. It require borrowers to subscribe to insurance 

before accessing loans under GIRSAL. GIRSAL would create special modules 
to facilitate low cost credit that can address gender issues and therefore “Direct 

Lending” would only be considered in this case. 

Instrument: Limited 
RSF 

Replication of existing RSFs akin to 
partnership between AGRA and 

commercial banks across Africa to provide 

first loss guarantee on targeted portfolios  

While attractive, approach has limited appeal due to its lack of scale, 
involvement of the entire financial system, and limited capacity to deliver  

technical change 

Instrument: Nigeria-
style Full Risk 

Sharing 

Risk sharing facility based on the Nigeria 
model i.e. NIRSAL 

GIRSAL will have a second evaluation on its Digital Platform (NIRSAL did not 
have it), of all approved bank loans to satisfy itself before a decision on 

guarantee would be taken 

 
2.4.  Project type:  

This is a lending Project financed with an ADF loan. 

2.5.  Project cost and financing arrangements 

2.5.1 The total cost of the Project is estimated at UA 44.64 million of which the ADF contribution 

is UA 10.00 million (net of taxes and based on 2018 prices). The financing structure attributes UA 

11.69 million (26.18%) of the total cost to foreign currency transactions, and UA 32.95 million 

(73.82%) to local costs.  

 

2.5.2 The total Project cost of UA 44.64 million will be financed by:  

 

i. An ADF loan of UA 10.00 million (22.4% of Project costs). The ADF loan would largely be 
channelled towards financing of the credit guarantee because this component provides the highest 

potential for income generation that would not only service the loan, but also allow GIRSAL to 

finance the non-income generating components of the scheme; 

 

ii. The Government of Ghana will contribute the equivalent of UA 34.64 million (77.6% of Project 
costs) to cover: capitalization of the credit guarantee, targeted technical assistance and agricultural 

insurance activities, digital platform, operating and capital expenditures associated with start-up 

and staffing costs; 

iii. As part of efforts to leverage GIRSAL financing and capitalize on existing Agricultural finance 
operations in Ghana, the GIRSAL implementation team has proposed creating a Technical 

Assistance consortium which will include donors active in the agricultural finance space and key 

project managers for government-financed agricultural finance operations. Technical assistance 

activities that contribute directly towards achievement of GIRSAL’s mandate have been identified 

with cost estimates simulated in Tables 2.4 and 2.6 of this report. The contribution of the Technical 

Assistance consortium is estimated to cover 1.3% of the Project costs and should be considered as 

in-kind contribution since resources will not be disbursed through GIRSAL but will remain tied to 

their respective projects. The modalities for the memorandum to govern activities of the Technical 

Assistance consortium will be prepared following effectiveness of this Project. Given the nature of 

the Project, (no works involved) and discussions with Government of Ghana, there will be no 

provisions made for physical and price contingencies.  

 



 

8 

 

2.5.3 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The ADF loan will finance 25.41% of GIRSAL’s 

financing. At least 50% of GIRSAL’s seed capital would be invested in local treasury bills to generate 

interest income for re-investment and to cover recurrent costs. At least 0.06% of the ADF loan 

resources will be dedicated to carrying out Project Management activities that ensure proper fiduciary 

management of the Project. Given the significant human resource capacity in Ghana, it is likely that 

various technical assistance assignments would be locally sourced. The GoG has approached the Bank 

to support the financing gap given the focus the bank has on the Feed Africa Strategy. The summary 

of estimated costs by component, expenditure category, sources of financing as well as an expenditure 

schedule are presented in the tables below:  

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD/UA) 

COMPONENTS 

(USD '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Base 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 
Total Cost Local Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total 

Cost 
Cost Costs 

Component 1: Promoting de-

risking for the agriculture sector 
43,560.21 16,467.09 60,027.29 30,744.85 11,622.49 42,367.35 99.4% 94.9% 

Component 2: Project Co-

ordination and Management 
Unit  

3,125.99 92.05 3,218.04 2,206.33 64.97 2,271.29 0.6% 5.1% 

TOTAL BASELINE 

PROJECT COSTS 
46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.0% 100.0% 

PRICE CONTIGENCIES - - - - - - - - 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100% 100% 

 

  



 

9 

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (USD/UA) 

CATEGORY 
(USD '000) (UA '000) %Foreign 

% Total 

Base 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Costs Costs 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS 

  A. WORKS - - - - - - - - 

  B. GOODS 

  1.EQUIPMENT & 

MATERIALS 
                

         Projected CAPEX 1,449.71 - 1,449.71 1,023.21 - 1,023.21 0.00% 2.29% 

         ICT Hardware/ 

         Digital Finance Platform 
213.10 - 213.10 150.41 - 150.41 0.00% 0.34% 

Sub-Total, Goods 1,662.82 - 1,662.82 1,173.62 - 1,173.62 0.00% 2.63% 

C. SERVICES 

1.GUARANTEE 

CAPITALIZATION 
41,349.55 14,082.82 55,432.37 29,184.57 9,939.67 39,124.24 85.05% 87.65% 

 2. AGRIC. INSURANCE         

Climate data + Risk Modelling 12.57 - 12.57 8.87 - 8.87 0.00% 0.02% 

3. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT         

Product Development  - 1,257.21 1,257.21 - 887.34 887.34 7.59% 1.99% 

 Regulatory Framework 4.45 - 4.45 3.14 - 3.14 0.00% 0.01% 

 Training for Policy Makers, 
Insurers, Bankers 

25.14 - 25.14 17.75 - 17.75 0.00% 0.04% 

4.TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE          

 Agribusiness Linkages, A2F - 827.06 827.06 - 583.74 583.74 4.99% 1.31% 

FIs (lenders + Insurers) 821.23 - 821.23 579.63 - 579.63 0.00% 1.30% 

Access to Insurance 518.85 - 518.85 366.20 - 366.20 0.00% 0.82% 

Digital Finance Platform - 300.00 300.00 - 211.74 211.74 1.81% 0.47% 

5. PMU         

ESMS - 23.01 23.01 - 16.24 16.24 0.14% 0.04% 

Audit - 49.31 49.31 - 34.80 34.80 0.30% 0.08% 

M&E, MTR, PCR - 19.73 19.73 - 13.92 13.92 0.12% 0.03% 

Sub-Total, Services 42,731.80 16,559.14 59,290.94 30,160.16 11,687.46 41,847.63 100.00% 93.75% 

TOTAL INVESTMENT COSTS 44,394.62 16,559.14 60,953.76 31,333.78 11,687.46 43,021.24 100.00% 96.38% 

II. RECURRENT COSTS 

 A. AGRIC INSURANCE          

Re-insurance Premium 615.30 - 615.30 434.28 - 434.28 0.00% 0.97% 

 Projected OPEX  1,676.27 - 1,676.27 1,183.12 - 1,183.12 0.00% 2.65% 

TOTAL RECURRENT COSTS 2,291.57 - 2,291.57 1,617.40 - 1,617.40 0.00% 3.62% 

TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.00% 100.00% 

 Price Contingencies - - - - - - 0.00% 0.00% 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 46,682.90 16,562.43 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.00% 100.00% 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA ‘000) 

COMPONENTS 
Totals in  UA ('000) 

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total 

Component 1: Promoting De-Risking For The Agriculture Sector 40,489.00 565.18 488.71 488.71 335.75 42,367.35 

Component 2: Project Co-ordination and Management Unit 1,244.29 225.95 247.30 270.96 282.79 2,271.29 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 41,733.29 791.14 736.00 759.67 618.54 44,638.64 

 

  



 

10 

 

Table 2.6 Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (UA ‘000) 

Expenditure Category ADF Loan GoG Total 

ADF: Total 

Expenditure 

(%) 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS     

     A. WORKS - - - 0.0% 

     B. GOODS     

          1. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS     

 Projected CAPEX - 1,023.21 1,023.21 0.0% 

IT Hardware - Digital Finance Platform - 150.41 150.41 0.0% 

Sub-Total, Goods - 1,173.62 1,173.62 0.0% 

     C. SERVICES     

1. GUARANTEE CAPITALIZATION 9,939.67 29,184.57 39,124.24 22.3% 

 2. AGRIC. INSURANCE     

Climate data + Risk Modelling - 8.87 8.87 0.0% 

 3. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT     

Product Development  - 887.34 887.34 0.0% 

 Regulatory Framework - 3.14 3.14 0.0% 

Training for Policy Makers, Insurers, Bankers - 17.75 17.75 0.0% 

 4. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE      

 Agribusiness Linkages, A2F - 583.74 583.74 0.0% 

 FIs (lenders + Insurers) - 579.63 579.63 0.0% 

Access to Insurance - 366.20 366.20 0.0% 

Digital Finance Platform - 211.74 211.74 0.0% 

 ESMS 11.60 4.64 16.24 0.0% 

Audit 34.80 - 34.80 0.1% 

 M&E, MTR, PCR 13.92 - 13.92 0.0% 

Sub-Total, Services 10,000.00 31,847.62 43,021.24 22.4% 

TOTAL INVESTMENT COSTS 

 
10,000.00 31,847.62 43,021.24 22.4% 

II. RECURRENT COSTS     

A. AGRIC INSURANCE      

Re-insurance Premium - 434.28 434.28 0.0% 

 Projected OPEX  - 1,183.12 1,183.12 0.0% 

TOTAL RECURRENT COSTS - 1,617.40 1,617.40 0.0% 

TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 10,000.00 34,638.64 44,638.64 22.4% 

Price Contingencies - - - - 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS         10,000.00  34,638.64         44,638.64  22.4% 

 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (UA ‘000) 

SOURCES OF FINANCE Foreign Cost Local Cost Total Cost % of Total Cost % of Foreign Cost 

 ADF Loan 10,000.00 - 10,000.00 22.5% 85.6% 

 GOG 1,687.46 32,951.18 34,638.64 77.5% 14.4% 

Total 11,687.46 32,951.18 44,638.64 100.0% 100.0% 



 

11 

 

 

2.6.  Project’s target area and population 

2.6.1  The Project is designed to be implemented across Ghana as a national intervention targeting 

selected agribusiness ecosystem7. GIRSAL will have two levels of beneficiaries: 

 

Type 1: Direct Beneficiaries 
 

 This consists of financial institutions and intermediaries who sign Master Agreements with 
GIRSAL to retail guarantees to agribusiness market participants. These will initially be commercial 

and universal banks primarily. Overtime, the mix will also come to include specialized lenders, 

microfinance companies, private equity investors and other types of sector focused sources of risk 

capital; 

 Benefits will be delivered in a number of forms inclusive but not limited to the following: 

 Protection for downside risks to their loan and financing portfolio i.e. up to 80% reduction in loss 
risk subject to the terms of individual contracts purchased; 

 Improved quality of data and market insights regarding agribusiness lending and default 
likelihoods. Data sharing provided by GIRSAL (on a blinded basis) would be  able to show at a 

high level key shifts in the agribusiness financing landscape;and 

 Commercial intelligence related to what investment type and region is attractive versus others. 
 

Type 2: Indirect Beneficiaries 

 

 Group includes the majority of Ghana’s non-subsistence farmers i.e. commercial farmers of all 
sizes, input suppliers, logistics service providers, processors and retailers; 

 Benefits will be delivered in a number of forms inclusive but not limited to the following: 
Reduction in implied risk premium demanded by lenders to finance agriculture; use of credit 

guarantees will likely trigger a decline in the need for collateral in agricultural lending; 

 Improve overall commercial, agronomic and financial capabilities across the agribusiness 
ecosystem as the impact of technical assistance investments start to kick-in; 

 Improvement in business environment and confidence on agriculture, setting up potential for a 
virtuous shift in attitudes towards agriculture lending and investments; 

 Given that the mix of direct and indirect beneficiaries will largely map to current economic and 
demographic structures, the Bank anticipates that women and youth will be critical beneficiaries 

of the proposed intervention. Women and youths are important participants at most stages of value 

chains e.g. primary production, storage and processing. Therefore, in the absence of special 

interventions, we expect proportionate representation in GIRSAL’s guarantee and technical 

assistance footprint. 

 

2.7.  Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation 

2.7.1  The preparation mission had a general consultation and technical working sessions with 

Government personnel and key stakeholder groups in agriculture including development partners. The 

outcome of the discussions was the development of a logical framework for the Project and the 

preparation report that is forming the basis for the appraisal report.  

                                                 
7 Value chain prioritization is based on export potential (cocoa, vegetables, rubber, cashew & pineapples) and import 
substitution (soybean, maize, rice, cassava, fisheries & sorghum). The Value chain actors will vary depending on the 

commodity and would include input suppliers, farmers, aggregators, quality control, private haulers (transporters), 

warehousing, marketers and processors. 
  



 

12 

 

 

2.7.2  A GIRSAL- Financial Institutions workshop was held on the 15th March 2017, with multiple 

attendees (45) drawn from Ghana’s commercial banks and related financial institutions and  Bank of 

Ghana..  

  

2.8.  Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the Project design 

2.8.1 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in Ghana and in its recent work on credit guarantee 

systems country has enhanced Project design for implementation efficiency and sustainability. For 

example, the CSPE (2002-2015) indicated that project design flaws limited the sustainability of 

agriculture sector projects, particularly the lack of clear management plans for the maintenance of key 

assets such as pack houses and markets. This flaw has been addressed in this Project by the new 

approaches, which considers intervening to fill the gaps in the operations of actors along the value 

chains of interest as against the concentration of the activities supported by the Project around just the 

farmers. Thus, GIRSAL’s design has a more robust approach to technical assistance than previous 

Bank projects have had. In addition, the Bank’s lessons from its engagement with Sovereign and Non-

Sovereign borrowers including Private Equity firms have shaped the design. These lessons include 

considerations related to the importance of governance, optimizing donor network investments, use of 

investment committees and management of potential conflicts of interest.  

 

2.9.  Key performance indicators 

The overall impact of GIRSAL is to increase the proportion of lending to agriculture from the 3.4% 

total lending at the end of 2015 to a minimum of 6.8% at the end of the ten-year period. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 

3.1. Financial and economic performance 

3.1.1 The viability of GIRSAL has been evaluated through the income model, potential scenarios for 

guarantee payouts and operating expenses. This in turn informed determination of the fund size. The 

following perspectives of capital have been identified as being critical to GIRSAL’s stability: 

 The size of capital; 

 Timing of Capitalization; 

 Cost of capital and prevailing market prices; 

 Securing a fall-back guarantee cover for the capital. 
 

3.1.2 GIRSAL’s seed capital will be GHS 250 million to be secured at the beginning of year 1, with 

additional capital investments envisaged over GIRSAL’s 10-year life. The key assumptions underlying 

the analyses include: (i) Active participation of at least 10 financial intermediaries/digital financial 

services providers with universal coverage in Ghana8; (ii) a leveraging effect of at least 3 times as a 

result of use of the GIRSAL credit guarantees to crowd-in  commercial lending into Agriculture; (iii) 

financial institutions would increase their risk appetite as a result of their improved assessment of 

agricultural financing risks; (iv) AVC borrowers would improve their farm management and financial 

                                                 
8 In March 2018, the GIRSAL implementation team held a technical session with Financial Intermediaries in Ghana to 

validate the assumptions for the Master Agreement. This agreement would define the terms of engagement between 

GIRSAL and the Financial Intermediaries. Chief Risk Officers attended the session from 18 Financial Intermediaries; 

two of which account for 66% of commercial lending to agribusinesses in Ghana. Based on continued negotiations, 

GIRSAL’s implementation team envisions active participation of at least 6 FIs by 2023. 

 



 

13 

 

management as a result of TAF consortium and GIRSAL interventions. For the economic analysis, (i) 

incremental benefits from the Project are realized over a 10-year time period; (ii) the applicable 

discount rate is estimated at 20%. The summary of financial and economic analysis is included in 

Technical Annex B6 of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.3  Financial analysis: Three capitalization scenarios were considered (capitalization of GHS 

600 million/ GHS 400 million/ GHS 250 million). Fund mobilization for GIRSAL is currently secured 

at GHS 263 million (for capitalization, OPEX and CAPEX), which informed the decision to initiate 

GIRSAL using a capitalization baseline of GHS 250 million. The FIRR analysis generated Net Present 

Value (NPV) of GHS 393,503,981 over the first 5 years. This capitalization scenario presents a break 

even IRR. 

 

3.1.4  Economic analysis: The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the 

financial analysis. Economic analysis yielded an NPV of GHS 731,137,197 over the 10-year horizon 

and IRR of 6%. While the IRR projections for GIRSAL are modest, they are likely to increase if: (i) 

there is additional capitalization of GIRSAL over the 10-year horizon. Simulations project an IRR of 

10% at an increased capitalization of GHS 400 million and 12% at an increased capitalization of GHS 

600 million. 
 
 Table 3.1: key economic and financial figures 

 

3.2.  Environmental and social impacts 

3.2.1  Environment:  

 

3.2.1.1 Given its magnitude and the expected minimal environmental and social impacts, the Project 

is classified as a Category 4 FI-C for which no ESA studies are required. This is because the Project 

will support FIs through promotion of agriculture sector de-risking credit guarantee schemes, 

promoting incentives and enablers of agricultural financing and project management. Some of the 

financing will go towards, project management. However, GIRSAL will be required to develop an 

ESMS Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that will allow it to apply the 

requirements of the Bank’s ISS requirements – in a manner appropriate to the scale and nature of 

GIRSAL operations. GIRSAL will be required to apply the Bank’s Negative and Exclusion list; Bank’s 

ISS requirements; and to comply with applicable national environmental and social regulations 

including labour laws. The Project has integrated E & S risk management procedures within the 

GIRSAL Risk Management procedures and will develop an ESMS and finalise by 31st December 

2018. The ESMS will be reviewed and cleared by AfDB and the ESMS will be disclosed in the 

GIRSAL’s website in compliance with AfDB requirements for Category 4 projects. The Project will 

have the following positive impacts: it will fill the gap in agricultural lending and increase financial 

inclusion especially of youth and women involved in agribusinesses; thereby enhancing the incomes 

of farmers and vendors including women and the youth, and increasing employment opportunities.  

 

3.2.1.2 As a commitment to ensuring implementation of the ESMS, the Project Management 

Component has budgeted for:  ESMS development and training of GIRSAL Staff by a consultant 

(USD20, 000); ESMS implementation and monitoring (USD5, 000 – USD10, 000 per year for five 

years); and capacity building and institutional strengthening resources for GIRSAL staff on ESMS 

implementation within the Technical Assistance Component (USD30, 000).  

 

FIRR : 0%    NPV (base case) is GHS 393,503,981  

EIRR : 6%    NPV (base case)  is GHS 731,137,197  



 

14 

 

3.2.2  Assessment of Institutional Capacity:  

 

In line with the Fund’s requirements, GIRSAL will have to have adequate human, technical and 

financial resources for effective implementation of the ESMS. To ensure the commitment and effective 

implementation of the ESMS, GIRSAL higher management levels will be involved in ESMS 

development and implementation. The Chief Risk Officer will be the focal point in GIRSAL for ESMS 

development and implementation and he/she will provide oversight for E&S risk management within 

GIRSAL. The proposed ESMS Implementation Task force will comprise of GIRSAL staff from the 

following departments/sections: risk management; agricultural insurance and technical assistance. The 

Project-staffing plan includes Credit Risk Officers within GIRSAL and all participating Financial 

Institutions would be staffed with credit risk officers and these will trained to assess and manage E&S 

Risks.  Currently GIRSAL does not have the adequate capacity and its will be strengthened through 

technical capacity building to ensure effective implementation of the ESMS and this has been reflected 

in the Project cost. The overall responsibility of environmental and social risk monitoring as well as 

reporting on Project E & S performance will lie with GIRSAL as part of the overall Project monitoring 

and reporting arrangements.   

 

3.2.3  Climate risks:  

 

Ghanaian agriculture and food systems are climate dependent and the sector is recognized as one of 

the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. The proposed programme will have to take into account 

climate risks that may affect the risk sharing for agricultural lending activities. The Project will also 

support use of improved seeds and climate smart agriculture technologies to support resilience to 

climatic shocks. The bundling of financing with derisking instruments would adequately protect 

agribusiness borrowers from losses resulting from climate events and would provide indemnity for 

financial institutions that extend debt to these agribusinesses. GIRSAL will deploy technical assistance 

to support both agribusinesses and financial institutions to mitigate/manage risks. In addition, the 

facility would also leverage the use of ICT based services to enhance climate and market information. 

 

3.2.4  Gender Aspects 

 

3.2.4.1  In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the national Agricultural labour force and contribute 46% 

to the total GDP and produce 70% of subsistence crops (MOFA, 2002). Women play a major role in 

the agriculture value chain, from farming to food processing and marketing.  However, women 

experience more constraints in accessing agricultural productive resources, compared to men. 

According to FAO, such limitations involve several dimensions such as: (i) ownership of land, 

livestock or other agricultural resources; (ii) management of agricultural resources; (iii) use of financial 

services and other inputs for agriculture (FAO, 2011). As the study mentions, access to credit and other 

financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in the agriculture sector especially the 

smallholder farmers, who are mostly women, for whom funding from the banks is simply out of reach.  

3.2.4.2 The obstacles of women to access funding for agribusinesses are mainly:  limited access and 

ownership of land, as an essential collateral, limited knowledge and capacity in elaborating bankable 

business plans, limited access to information on how and where to access finance, lack of guarantee 

for climate change related risks, mind-sets about the agriculture; considered as for households needs;  

etc.    The available data in Ghana are not gender disaggregated to indicate the number of female-

owned agribusinesses borrowing for agricultural production, but based on the qualitative information 

and estimates, women are poorly involved in the sector, due essentially to the mind-sets and 

perceptions of agriculture: cultivating for households needs and not for businesses.   In most financial 

institutions, women generally receive smaller loans than men, even for the same activities. Female-led 



 

15 

 

agribusinesses largely source financing from microfinance institutions, small savings and credit 

services and some types of micro insurance, for food processing and marketing. Women are 

underrepresented as borrowers and members in many rural and urban finance programs and 

cooperatives that tend to favour larger agricultural production loans.  

3.2.4.3 To address these challenges of women in agricultural financing and increase the number of 

women owned businesses in the agriculture sector, the GIRSAL Project intends to put in place the 

following actions & measures: (i)propose a Gender policy, including for the key affiliated institutions;  

(ii) The selected PFIs may elaborate or review their credit policy to reflect their commitment to 

advancing the empowerment of women;(iii) Create a networking platform for women entrepreneurs 

in the agriculture sector to foster peer-to-peer learning, mentoring and the sharing of information and 

knowledge within communities, and enhance their ability to elaborate the Bankable projects (through 

the TAF) (iv)  Provide incentives to PFIs lending to women; v) Develop and provide innovative bank’s 

products specific to the needs and interest of women; vi) Organise the sensitization campaigns to uplift 

the level of consideration of agriculture’s sector among the population.  The budget allocated to 

implement specific activities and measures for gender equality and women’s empowerment is 

equivalent to 0, 5million UA.  

 

3.2.5  Involuntary Resettlement 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of property, 

sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the Project activities.  

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1.  Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1   The GoG, through the Ministry of Finance (MoF) will be the borrower of the loan. GIRSAL 

Limited (also the Company) will be the executing agency. The loan proceeds will be on lent by MoF 

to the Company (an autonomous, specialized limited liability company focused on enabling the 

acceleration of access to risk adjusted credit in Ghanaian agriculture), by signing a subsidiary loan 

agreement (on-lending) on terms and conditions acceptable to the Fund. . The Company will operate 

independently of BoG, and other agents and institutions of the Government of Ghana. Its structural 

and operational designs were arrived at after close collaboration with various stakeholders including 

farmer groups, financial institutions (FIs), Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), other 

agribusiness ecosystem participants, donor partners and financial services providers.  

 

4.1.2 The National Insurance Commission (NIC) and Bank of Ghana (BoG) will regulate the 

Company. The CEO will be in charge of the day-to-day operation supported by the Chief Operating 

Officer (COO) and Credit Risk Officer (CRO). The various functional units including the Treasury, 

Financial Control, and Administration will report to the CRO whilst Agriculture Insurance, Technical 

Assistance, Marketing and DFS report to the COO.  The Board of Directors shall provide overall 

governance of the Company whose operational guidelines would follow the Basel Guidelines on 

Corporate governance principles. The Board shall also have the overall responsibility for approving 

and overseeing management’s implementation of the entity’s strategic objectives, governance 

framework and corporate culture. To enhance control, there shall be an internal audit function, which 

will carry out periodic reviews of the Company’s operations and report to the audit committee of the 

Board. Internal Audit will also monitor implementation of external audit recommendations. 

 

4.1.3 The Company will have the full complement of staffing with the requisite qualifications and 

experiences to ensure that it operates effectively. External recruitment will complement the initial staff 



 

16 

 

who may be seconded from Bank of Ghana (bound with an MOU signed for return at the end of 2 

years) to ensure that the Company operates efficiently from the onset.  

 

 Financial Management 

 

4.1.4  The overall financial management of the Company including the Fund’s funding will be 

handled by the Finance and Administration Manager (competitively recruited), who shall be a 

seasoned chartered accountant with hands-on experience in the application of International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the banking and insurance environments, with some knowledge of 

agricultural products and multilateral projects. He will be assisted by an experienced Accounts Officer, 

who would also be chartered accountant (to be hired) with reasonable experience in the application of 

IFRS and knowledgeable in financial services, insurance, agricultural financing and donor funded 

projects.  An accounting software (ERP) would be procured and used for accounting entries and 

financial reporting. An accounting policies procedures manual (in draft) that has been customised from 

BoG’s existing finance Manual and will be implemented to ensure unified financial management 

practices within GIRSAL Limited. The Finance and Administration Manager will use the accounting 

software to produce monthly, quarterly and annual reports. Quarterly interim unaudited financial 

reports must be shared with the Bank within 30 days of the end of each calendar quarter reported on, 

while the annual financial statements must be audited in accordance with terms of reference approved 

by the Bank, and submitted to the Bank within six months of the end of the year audited. 

4.1.5 Other key draft manuals customised from existing BoG’s manuals including: (i) Human 

resources policy; (ii) Internal Audit Procedures; (iii) Information Security Policy; (iv) 

Communications Policy;, and (v) Procurement Manuals will be finalised in time to ensure a smooth 

start to operations. 

  

4.1.6     Disbursement: Three (3) of the Bank’s four disbursement methods shall be used in disbursing 

funds from the Bank to GIRSAL namely: (i) Reimbursement; (ii) Direct payments; and (iii) Payments 

through Special Account (SA). All payments relating to consultancies will be made through direct 

payments based on milestones achieved, as verified by GIRSAL Limited’s management. The ADF 

resources to fund the risk sharing facility (RSF) will be advanced in a single tranche to a segregated 

USD denominated Special Account (approved by the Minister of Finance), opened at the Bank of 

Ghana (BoG) for GIRSAL. A second local currency investment account will be opened at BoG, for 

investing all GIRSAL RSF funds (in less risky instruments) and drawdowns made as and when the 

guarantee is called upon. All disbursements under the Project will follow the disbursements procedures 

outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. 

  
4.1.7    External audit arrangements: An external audit firm will audit the Company in full compliance 

with the country’s practices for limited liability companies. In fulfilment of the Ghana’s Companies 

act,1963 (Act 179) and registration, GIRSAL has appointed PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) as its 

external auditor, whose  appointment shall be renewed annually based on satisfactory performance for 

a maximum of 5 years. PwC is experienced in the Bank’s auditing requirements and the audit ToR 

must be agreed with the Bank before commencement of the audit. The audited financial statements 

and the accompanying management letter must be submitted to the Bank within 6 months after each 

financial year.  As neither the financial management staff, nor the proposed system is in place, the 

overall financial management risk at appraisal is deemed substantial. To mitigate the risk, the GIRSAL  

team will need to ensure appropriately qualified and experienced staff are brought on board at the 

earliest, and further actions as listed in the FM action plan are implemented. 

  



 

17 

 

4.1.8  Procurement arrangements: “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), 

and the acquisition of consulting services” financed by the Fund for the Project, will be carried out in 

accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” 

(BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, procurement would be carried out as follows: 

 

i. Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant 

Bank Standard Solicitation Documents (SDDs), will be used for International Competitive 

Bidding (ICB), and National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures for contracts of goods, 

while the procurement process for the acquisition of Consulting Services will be undertaken 

through shortlists as indicated in the Technical Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2.  
 

ii. Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): The assessment of procurement risks at 

the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency 

(EA), were undertaken9 for the Project and the output have informed the decisions on the 

procurement regimes (Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar 

transactions under the Project. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included 

in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. 5.3.8. 
 

4.2.  Monitoring 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall Project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the logical 

framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual (POM) which will 

be prepared by the PMU within GIRSAL Limited shortly after Project loan approval. MOF will have 

an oversight role and monitor all operations for planning and facilitation purposes. The PMU will 

monitor and evaluate overall impact of the Project including environmental and social compliance and 

performance and compile the Project’s half year (first year and quarterly thereafter) and annual reports 

for dissemination to the Bank Group, MOF, and relevant line ministries. A mid-term review (MTR) 

will be undertaken two years after Project start to review the Project’s achievements and constraints. 

Similarly, upon completion of project investments at the end of program year four, the PMU will 

prepare a Borrower’s project completion report.  

 

4.2.2  The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Ghana Statistical 

Service leads the efficient production and management of quality official statistics based on 

international standards, and will be used to assess the contribution of the Project towards the country 

and regional development goals and objectives as defined in the relevant development plans. In using 

the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-based framework, Project implementers 

tracking progress towards Project results are expected to take special note of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing monitoring 

and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated along gender lines. The key functions of the M&E 

Officer in the PMU will be to ensure quality and accountability of monitoring; information 

management; facilitation of knowledge building; and knowledge sharing on monitoring and 

evaluation. 
 

4.3.  Governance 

4.3.1 Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Ghana, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of GISAL requires 

                                                 
9 See Technical Annexes for details 



 

18 

 

excellent governance across multiple layers of the agriculture ecosystem and within multiple value 

chains. This is in relation to better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the 

use of resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, 

and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  
 

4.4.  Sustainability 

4.4.1  The ownership and sustainability of the Project is enhanced by the roles that various 

stakeholders played during formulation and preparation of the Project. Leading the process on behalf 

of the Government of Ghana was the BoG. The BoG chaired a systematic review, consultation and 

design process that has since resulted in the formation of the Company. On a day-to-day basis, the 

BoG Team Leader worked with and consulted parties from inside the Government including the 

Ministry of Food and Agriculture and Ministry of Finance. The BoG chaired process acted as a 

technical review team of experts with respect to the various reports and recommendations produced 

by PwC.  

 

4.4.2  Post-launch, the Company has been transferred to the MOF and will function as an 

autonomous and independent legal entity for accelerating growth in Ghana’s agribusiness sector. That 

structure is important in order to avoid any conflicts of interest between BoG’s role as a financial 

systems regulator and GIRSAL Limited’s role that also participants in the agriculture financial sector.  

 

4.4.3  A key part of that crystallization will be achieved by ensuring that GIRSAL Limited is 

launched with a start-up operating budget that would be sufficient to fund its annual recurrent budget. 

It is anticipated that within 3 to 5 years of launch, GIRSAL Limited will be able to self-fund itself 

using a combination of its fee income and drawdowns from its investment portfolio.  
 

4.5.  Risk management 

4.5.1 The current agricultural finance policy and sectoral strategies of Ghana have been developed in 

a consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stakeholders. The Bank Group will 

engage in continuous policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding (particularly 

public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and development. 

Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-sensitive approaches and ensuring that the 

poor are not excluded from Project benefits. GIRSAL is expected to be classified as a Category 4-FI 

C because the Project activities are expected to have environmental and social impacts that can be 

avoided and minimised since they will mostly be transaction-specific. Direct impact on climate change 

is expected to be immaterial to limited; hence, climate screening was approached with a degree of 

flexibility. The following are the main risks identified and with mitigation measures.  

 
Risks  Mitigation measures 

Macroeconomic risks - High probability: slow 

economic growth and deterioration of the country’s 
creditworthiness due to fall in cocoa and other 

commodity prices.  

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will intensify the dialogue with the government to adopt 

supportive macroeconomic policies to rationalize fiscal expenditure, protect exchange rate 
flexibility, strengthen the banking system to prevent systemic crisis, and implement structural 

reforms for economic diversification. 

Productivity risks - Moderate to High probability: 
failure to achieve forecast crop and livestock yields 
due to soil conditions, inadequate access to extension 

workers, delays in rainfall, and inability to eradicate 

biological threats such as locusts 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will proactively support the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

to ensure that deep collaboration occurs between GIRSAL and itself, to ensure that critical 

productivity enablers are mobilized on schedule and at scale. Such support may occur in the 
context of normal technical assistance, or in addition to it 

Commercial risks - High probability: sharp rise in 
supply of agricultural commodities  domestically and  

globally, exerting downward pressure on prices, 

resulting in lower than planned price realization for 

farmers and other ecosystem participants  

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will work closely with its Ghana based and global crop market 

experts to gather pricing data as well as monitor early warning systems issued by 3rd parties 
e.g. US Dept. of Agriculture price forecasts for rice, corn, etc. If additional action is necessary 

based on the anticipated pathway for crop prices, then the Bank will work with GIRSAL to 

provide support to lenders on how to best communicate the shift, as well as prepare them for 

potential events of default. In addition, as appropriate, the Bank will support GIRSAL as it 

seeks out potential price hedging solutions and innovative tools to protect farmer earnings. 



 

19 

 

Environmental, Social and Climate Risk – 

Medium probability: The Project activities are 

anticipated to have transaction and site specific 

environmental and social risks. The proposed Project 
area (all of Ghana) is likely subject to climate change 

impacts, with impact zones more intensive in 

northern Ghana. 

Mitigation measures: An ESMS will be developed for the Project and the Project will 

undergo climate screening and categorisation as appropriate. During project implementation, 

if required - and it is unlikely to be the case given the Project type - transaction site specific 

ESMPs will incorporate integrated pest management plans and climate risk mitigation and 

adaptation measures. As specific transactions warrant it, ESMP development and 
implementation will be part of the monitoring and reporting of the Project activities.  

 

4.6.  Knowledge Building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach in 

agricultural value chain finance, the results of the Project will be monitored closely. Knowledge will 

be built on the evolving concept of risk sharing systems; the likelihood of reducing default probabilities 

by deploying technical assistance; the impact on interest costs; the role of value chain actors including 

farmers and farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. 

Knowledge will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, 

and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside the 

production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated using GIRSAL’s knowledge portal 

and the Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank website, etc.). For the 

purposes of publicity and sharing of Project results, the Project may recruit a local firm as and when 

the need be. The Technical Assistance projects will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and 

information sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train 

their peers, share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public 

extension agents. This will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access 

to the disseminated knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports will introduce and 

consolidate knowledge and skills, and facilitate technology and skills transfer at both the community 

and national levels.  

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance this operation is an ADF loan agreement for UA 10 million 

between the Republic of Ghana and the Fund. 

  

5.2.  Conditions associated with the ADF intervention  

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

5.2.1 The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Fund applicable to Loan Agreements 

and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

A. Conditions precedent to first disbursement:  
 

5.2.2 The obligation of the Fund to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfilment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Fund, of the following conditions: 

  

(i) Submission of certified copies of GIRSAL Limited’s: (i) constitutional document or bylaws; 
(ii) certificate of registration; and (iii) applicable operating licenses; 

 

(ii) The execution and delivery of the Project Agreement between the Fund and GIRSAL Limited 

in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund;  

 



 

20 

 

(iii) The execution and delivery of a Subsidiary Agreement between the Borrower and GIRSAL 

Limited in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund;  

 

(iv) Submission of evidence of the deposit of the Borrower’s counterpart contribution to the Project 

in the amount of Two Hundred Million Ghana Cedis (GHS  200,000,000) in a bank account 

acceptable to the Fund; and 

  

(v) Provision of evidence of the competitive recruitment or secondment of key staff of GIRSAL 
Limited, with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund, as follows: (a) a 

chief executive officer; (b) a chief risk officer; (c) a chief operating officer; (d) a finance and 

administration manager; and (e) a procurement officer.  

 

B. Other Conditions:  
 

The Borrower shall provide evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, of the fulfilment 

of the following conditions: 

 

(i) Prior to disbursement, the opening of a foreign currency denominated account in the name of 
GIRSAL Limited at the Bank of Ghana into which Loan proceeds towards the Credit Guarantee 

Scheme (CGS) will be deposited by the Borrower; 

(ii) Prior to disbursement, the opening of an additional foreign currency denominated Special 
Account and a local currency account in the name of GIRSAL Limited at the Bank of Ghana 

for operational purposes; 

(iii) The establishment of Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Fund, within three (3) months of Loan disbursement; 

(iv) The appointment of a Board of Directors of GIRSAL Limited with a mandate and 
responsibilities satisfactory to the Fund, within six (6) months of Loan disbursement; and 

(v) Development of a risk management framework and procedures (including but not limited to 
risk pricing and AVC prioritization criteria), within six (6) months of Loan disbursement.   

 

C. Undertakings: 
 

The Borrower undertakes the following under the Loan Agreement: 

  

(i) To deliver to the Fund, Project half year during the first year, and thereafter quarterly and 
annual reports in form and substance acceptable to the Fund, setting out the Borrower’s 

implementation of the ESMS (including but not limited to any implementation failures and 

related remedies, if any);  

(ii) To submit to the Fund updated lists of PFIs which would from time to time sign the Master 
Agreement with GIRSAL Limited; 

(iii) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Loan proceeds shall 
not be used to guarantee or otherwise finance any of the activities under the Bank Group’s 

Negative List; 

(iv) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Loan proceeds shall 
not be used to guarantee banks, financial institutions or other, or otherwise to finance projects, 

involving predatory lending or other forms of financial exploitation; 

(v) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that no transfer of shares in 
GIRSAL Limited held by the Ministry of Finance or otherwise in excess of five percent (5%) 



 

21 

 

of the total issued share capital, either individually or cumulatively, is made unless with prior 

written approval of the Fund; 

(vi) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Executing Agency 
shall not use the Loan proceeds to guarantee loans or portfolios of loans contracted prior to 

signature of the Loan Agreement between the Fund and the Borrower; and  

(vii) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Executing Agency 
shall use the Loan proceeds to provide guarantees to PFIs pursuant to sound banking principles, 

including but not limited to the ability of the borrowers to repay the guaranteed PFIs.   

 

5.3.  Compliance with Bank Policies 

● This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
● Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

 
Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF loan of UA10 million to the 

Republic of Ghana for the purposes of the activities in the proposed Project and subject to the 

conditions stipulated in the present report.  

 

















































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 
 

 
 

 

GUINEA  

 

 SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE TRANSFORMATION OF GUINEAN 
AGRICULTURE AND YOUTH AGRICULTURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP 


 
November 2018 

 
 

 
 
 
Project Information Sheet  
Client Information 
 
BORROWER/DONEE: Republic of Guinea  
 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture (MA) 
 
Financing Plan (TSF Supplemental Support Window)  

Source  Amount  Instrument 

TSF (Pillar I)  UA 3.240 million   UA 4.630 million 
Grant 
Loan 

Government  UA 0.897 million - 
Beneficiaries   UA 0.220 million - 
TOTAL COST  UA 8.987 million  

  
Key TSF Financing Information  
 

TSF grant currency  
TSF loan currency  

UA 
UA 

  
Service fee  0.75% 
Commitment fee  0.50% 
Loan maturity  40 years 
Grace period  10 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) 
ERR (baseline scenario) 
NPV 

 
12.7% 
18.8% 
UA 5.688 million  

Framework – Main Milestone (expected) 
  
Concept Note Approval 10 September 2018 
Project Approval  16 November 2018 
Effectiveness  January 2019 
Completion Date  31 December 2022 
Closing of Loan and Grant  30 June 2023 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

v 

Executive Summary 

Project Overview: In Guinea, agriculture remains at the core of development policies and the main source of 
income for 631%  of people living in rural areas, and generates 80% of the country's jobs. It contributes about 
25% to GDP and employs nearly 80% of the Guinean population. Rice is the dominant food crop, accounting for 
67% of the area cultivated, 65% of the country's cereal requirements, 37% of the workforce, 80% of farmers, 
23% of primary GDP and 6% of national GDP. On average, rice represents 20% of the population's consumption 
budget. To compensate for the food deficit, around 600 000 tonnes of rice are imported yearly. The Support 
Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ) 
was designed as part of a participatory and inclusive approach involving all stakeholders – farmers’ organisations, 
local communities and devolved technical services. The discussions and studies conducted with the PATAG EAJ 
Project Preparation Facility (PPF) in 2018 led to a thorough assessment of the situation and to identify not only 
the investments needed for the transformation of Guinea’s agriculture through promotion of the rice and market 
gardening value chains, but also the implementation modalities most appropriate for the Boké and Boffa 
Prefectures. In formulating PATAG EAJ, account was also taken of the country’s fragile context, lessons from 
Bank projects and those of other partners in Guinea, and the need to develop synergies and complementarities. 
In view of the Bank’s strategic orientations for the country, the project was designed with special emphasis on 
the following: (i) irrigation and market access infrastructure; (ii) value chain development; (iii) decent youth 
employment, empowerment of women and promotion of women’s leadership; and (iv) improvement of resilience 
and adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 

The specific goal of the proposed project, which is expected to cost UA 8.987 million and span a four-
year implementation period, is to ensure the development of climate-smart agricultural value chains and the 
promotion of youth entrepreneurship through the sustainable revival of rice production and market gardening 
value chains in the Boké and Boffa Prefectures. In addition to the basic transformative infrastructure that will 
result from the project (development of 237 ha of lowlands comprising 25 ha for off-season market gardening 
based on the use of shallow wells, 50 ha for seed production, 15 ha for women's gardening activities and 31 ha 
for youth-run modern market gardening activities; 65.5 km of access roads, 1 weekly market/consolidation centre, 
2 markets (stalls), and 6 stores and 2 input shops.), the project will support 20 agricultural processing units and 
contribute to the dissemination of 25 innovative techniques for increasing productivity (TAAT), improving 
storage and promoting food processing. These activities will be accompanied by local and organisational capacity 
building, and special attention will be paid to the creation of value added, youth employment and 
entrepreneurship, and to women's empowerment. PATAG EAJ will target at least 1 000 young people and 
women, 5 000 producers, 200 seed companies, 100 groups and 20 women’s and youth unions. It will affect a 
total 39 252 direct beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries through its various activities. The project will 
eventually increase rice production by about 1 030 tonnes, including 210 tonnes of certified seeds, and market 
gardening production by about 2 000 tonnes, generating a 19% boost in income. It will create 3 526 direct decent 
jobs, including 147 jobs generated by agricultural development works, 2 780 jobs by strengthening 
entrepreneurship and SMEs, and 600 temporary jobs. 

Needs Assessment: The project area covers two prefectures - Boké and Boffa - located in agricultural 
development hubs A and D, whose hydro-agricultural and socioeconomic potential requires the establishment of 
a rehabilitation and upgrading mechanism, in light of several factors: (i) the existence of high development 
potential (rice farming and market gardening); (ii) the proximity of consumption areas (Boké, Kamsar, Sangarédi, 
Fria Kindia, Boffa, Dubréka, Conakry, etc.); and (iii) current and future Bank interventions (the Forécariah road, 
the Boké-Quebo road and the future Boké agricultural hub). The project is based on the geographic concentration 
of operations at sector, village and priority site level, designed to maximise impact on target groups and to 
guarantee the sustainability and visibility of activities. 

In line with the country's strategic orientations, PATAG EAJ will contribute to the improvement of productivity 
and production in priority sectors by transforming Guinean agriculture and improving food and nutritional 
security through rice production and market gardening. The country has an annual rice deficit of more than 600 
000 tonnes. The project will also develop market gardening, whose current production covers only 53% of needs. 
This activity will help to improve the nutritional status of the beneficiaries, contribute to women’s empowerment 
and develop youth entrepreneurship. Therefore, the project will serve as a catalyst for agricultural expansion in 
the area by facilitating water control and the development of abundant quality natural resources (water, soil and 
solar energy), strengthening agricultural infrastructure, promoting sustainable, resilient and smart production, 

                                                 
1 PNIASAN 2018 – 2025 Republic of Guinea 



 

vi 

packaging and processing technologies, and facilitating access to product markets by supporting the growth of 
the two strategic sectors, i.e. rice production and market gardening.  

Value-added for the African Development Bank: Agriculture remains at the core of development policies 
and the main source of employment. The Bank financed the Nerica Rice Development Project, the Upper Guinea 
Rural Development Support Project (PADER-HG) and the Beyla-Kérouané Agro-Pastoral Development Project 
(PRODABEK), etc. These operations made it possible to develop certain specific expertise and provide new 
insights into key areas (irrigation, seed production and control, processing, etc.). To consolidate these gains, the 
Bank will support the Government in financing the Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean 
Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ), in an effort to encourage the emergence of 
production hubs. By supporting the development of infrastructure in areas that are economically and socially 
disadvantaged, but endowed with huge irrigated agriculture potential, the Bank will contribute to reducing 
poverty, promoting decent employment for young people and women, strengthening adaptation to climate change 
and increasing the resilience of people vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity. 

Knowledge Building: PATAG EAJ will help to train producers and consolidate their expertise. In an inclusive 
way, it will enable young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial capacity by accessing 
modern factors of farming, and will promote the emergence of leadership. In terms of resilience to climate change, 
it will develop and disseminate innovative technologies in the agricultural sector for the production, storage and 
processing of agricultural products, while enhancing local knowledge. PATAG EAJ will support the development 
of expertise in drip irrigation and solar pumping techniques, as well as in new processing technologies. In 
addition, support for quality improvement and labelling/certification will help to ensure compliance with norms 
and standards that promote access to new markets. Knowledge building will also be carried out through 
mechanisms for the communication and capitalisation of project results and best practice, and generation of 
endogenous value for the benefit of vulnerable groups via value chain development. Therefore, this project will 
contribute greatly to improving the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for private enterprise and youth 
employability. 



 

vii 

                                                               RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 

Country and Project Name: GUINEA –  Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ)  
Project Goal: Contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural chain and the promotion of youth agricultural entrepreneurship  

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline  Target  2022  

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Climate-smart agricultural and agribusiness value chains are 
developed 

Agriculture's contribution to GDP 23% (2016) 27%  

-INS/PNDES 
-CILSS 
- Reports by institutions (FAO, 
UNICEF, MS, etc. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

The volume of rice and market gardening production is increased 
in the Boké region (the Boké and Boffa Prefectures) 

Increase in rice yield per hectare (ha)  
Increase in market gardening yield per ha 
Volume of rice production 
Volume of market gardening production 

1 T/ha (2018) 
8 T/ha 

106 T (2018) 
150 T of market gardening  

produce (2018) 

3 T/ha 
18 T/ha 
1138 T  
2075 T  

-Annual report, agricultural 
statistics  
 
-Periodic monitoring reports  
 
- Midterm review reports and 
project completion report  
 
 

Risks:  
- Political instability coupled with a difficult 
economic situation 
- Poor ownership of the project (technical 
management, works implementation, etc.) 
 
Mitigation Measures:  
- Contribution to the improvement of 
socioeconomic and environmental resilience for 
better stability  
- Involvement and participation of beneficiaries 
in all stages and capacity building (producers, 
Ministry of Agriculture) 
- Involvement of actors in the external 
communication of the project 
- Continuous participatory monitoring and 
evaluation 

 
Rural producers in both regions generate higher additional income  
 
 
 
Jobs created for of young people and women 

 
Average annual income of rice-farming  
households (including women) 
 
Average annual income of market garden 
households 
 

Jobs created 

 
GNF 4 800 000 (2018) 

 
 

GNF 975 000 (2018) 
 
 

0 

 
GNF 10 000 000  

 
 

GNF 1 625 000 /farmer  
 
 

35262 (50% women, 60% youths) 

1. Modernisation and Development of Agricultural Infrastructure 
 
Rehabilitation/development of rice farming facilities 

1.1 Development of lowlands 
1.2 Development of seed-producing areas  
 
Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas 
1.3 Women's market gardening with solar energy (BF) 
1.4 Women's market gardening areas 
1.5 Farms for young entrepreneurs 

Agricultural infrastructure 
1.6 Development of access roads  
1.7 Rehabilitation/revitalisation of markets 
1.8 Construction of warehouses and input shops 
1.9 Construction of agricultural product processing centres 
  

 

 
 
 
1.1 Areas of lowlands developed 
1.2  Size of seed-producing area rehabilitated  
 
 1.3 Developed area with wells and pumps  
1.4 Area with drip equipment and solar panels   
1.5  Farms with drip equipment and solar panels   
 
1.6     Length of access roads rehabilitated 
1.7 Number of markets rehabilitated  
1.8 Number of input shops opened  
1.9  Number of processing centres built  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Area  
 
 
1.1 0 
1.2 0 
 
 
1.3 0 
1.4 0  
1.5  0 

 
  

1.10  0 
1.11 0 
1.12 0 

  1.9      0       
   

 

Project Area  
 
 
 

1.1 237 ha (30% W) 
1.2 50 ha 
 
 
1.3 25 ha (100% W, 50% Girls),  
1.4 15 ha (80% W, 50% of them 

G) 
1.5 31 ha (100% Youths, 30%  

of them 30% Girls)   
 

1.6 65.5 km 
1.7 1 market 
1.8 6 stores and 2 shops  
1.9 6 centres (80% W) 

 
 

- Progress reports of technical 
services in charge of 
monitoring  
- Contracts signed with 
contractors 
- Reports of control bureaux  
 
- Project progress reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Risks 
 - Land conflicts and conflicts of interest  
 - Procurement bureaucracy, weak capacity of 
technical services  
- Weak capacity of contractors  
 
Mitigation Measures  
- Identification of prior beneficiaries and 
establishment of an adequate management 
mechanism 
- Preparation of priority BDs  
- Use of specialised NGOs and private 
companies 
- Central State departments supported to play 
their sovereign role 
 - Raising of community awareness on land 
tenure issues and management of processing 
units 
 
 

                                                 
2 Annex B7 – The economic and financial rates of return present the detailed estimated impacts on job creation.  



 

viii 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

  2. Development of Youth Entrepreneurship Value Chains  

 Agricultural extension, structuring and organisation of FO, and 
improvement of access to inputs and improved seeds 

2.4 Training of groups on resilient and smart TAATs  
2.1 Demonstration units (DU) put in place 
2.2 Young seed-producing groups monitored and strengthened 
2.3 Supervision, advice on technical matters and producer 
management  
2.4 Group training on resilient and smart TAATs 
2.5 Developed sites secured in terms of land tenure requirements 
 
Access to production and processing 
 
2.6 Setting up a revolving fund for inputs 
2.7 Input stores operationalised  
2.8 Operators of farm machinery and craftsmen trained and supported  
2.9 Post-harvest equipment provided to FOs 
2.10 Women’s EIG for processing set up 
2.11 Parboilers provided to women's groups 

  Agricultural entrepreneurship and nutrition 

2.12 Training  of young people and FOs on agricultural entrepreneurship 
2.13 Development  and financing of business plans for youths and FOs 
2.14 Customised training (refresher courses for youths in activity) 
2.15 Setting up of SMEs for maintenance and servicing 
2.16 Pilot school canteens supported 

 

 

 

2.1 Number of DUs put in place  
2.2 Number of seed-producing groups 
2.3 Number of producers supervised 
2.4 Number of groups trained  
2.5 Number of sites secured   
 
 
2.6       Number of beneficiaries  
2.7      Number of shops operational  
2.8      Number of beneficiaries trained and 

supported  
2.9   Number of pieces of equipment 
 provided to FOs  
2.10 Number of women’s EIGs set up  
2.11 Number of parboilers provided  
 
2.12  Number of persons trained  
2.13  Number of business plans developed and 

financed  
2.14  Number of youths trained 
2.15   Number of SMEs set up  
2.16  Number of school canteens supported  

 

 

 
2.1         0 

2.2 0 
2.3 0 
2.4 0 
2.5 0 
 
 

2.6    0 
2.7    0 
2.8    0  
2.9    0 
 
2.10  0 
2.11  0 

 
 

2.12. 0 
2.13  0 
 
 
2.14  0 
2.15   0 
2.16  0 

 

 

2.1       51 units (17 for rice and 34
for market gardening) (50% W) 
2.2 10 (100% Y) 
2.3 900 (40% W and 30% Y) 
2.4 15 (50% W) 
2.5 25 sites (50% W and Y) 
 
 
2.6      100 producers 
2.7       2 shops (100% Y, 50% W) 
2.8       10 (100% J, 40% W) 
2.9 10 kits (80% W) 
2.10 5 EIGs (80% W) 
2.11 20 parboilers (100% W) 
 
 
2.12      600 youths trained (50% W) 
2.13      50 business plans (40% W) 
 
 
2.14      30 youths trained (40% W) 
2.15      4 SMEs (100% Y, 25%W) 
2.16      3 canteens  

- Project progress reports  
 
- Pest and pesticide 
management policy  
 
- Bank supervision reports  
 
 
- Government’s external 
monitoring reports  
 
Monitoring and evaluation 

reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Risks  
- Mobilisation of counterpart funding  
- Limited ownership and management of 
infrastructure 
- Conflicts between farmers and herdsmen  
- Limited own financial resources   
- Need for start-up capital  
- Environmental risks  
 
Mitigation Measures  
- Counterpart funding resources limited to 
taxes and subsidies for fertilisers and inputs  

 - Participatory approach adopted and 
awareness-raising among/involvement of 
various stakeholders  
- Business plan selection and evaluation 
committee, programme contracts  
- Preparation of environmental notices for 
business plans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
      
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3. Project Management  

3.1 Procurement activities carried out  
3.2 Project activities conducted  
3.3 Financial management performed  
3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 
3.5 Communication ensured 

 
 
3.1  PP kept and followed  
3.2  Compliant disbursement rate  
3.3  Audit reports produced  
 
3.4   M&E system operational  
3.5  Communication plan implemented  

 
 
3.1 PP developed (end-2018) 
3.2 0% (December 2018) 
3.3   Consulting firm recruited 
(January 2019) 
3.4  Set up  (Q1 2019) 
3.5  Plan developed (2018) 

 
3.1 PP updated at least once a year  
3.2 20% per year, on average  
3.3  4 Annual  audit reports validated  
3.4 Midterm and final M&E reports 
produced  
3.5  Communication tools 
disseminated  

 
Procurement Plan (PP) 
Early warning system (EWS)  
Audit reports  
M&E progress reports   
Brochures, web site, films, etc. 

Risks 

- Weak capacity  
 
Mitigation Measures 

Recruitment through calls for candidature after 
appraisal, performance contracts, capacity 
building  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S 

 

COMPONENTS  RESOURCES 

Component A:  Modernisation and Development of Agricultural Infrastructure 
      Studies, construction and control of works (lowlands, market gardening irrigated areas, farm-to-market roads, markets, 
shops and stores, etc.), etc. 

.  
Component B:   Development of Value Chains and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship 

Advisory support, structuring, land tenure security, access to seeds and fertilisers, support for mechanisation purposes, training 
and installation of young people, support for women, nutrition support, institutional support, etc. 
 

Component C: Project Management  
Coordination, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, financial management, audit, communication, leadership, etc. 
 
Component D:   PPF 
 
 

Components:  Sources of Financing: 
Component A          : UA 4.846 million (53.9%) TSF Loan    : UA 4.630 million (51.5%) 
Component B          : UA 2.189 million (24.4%) TSF Grant                  : UA 3.240 million (36.0%) 
Component C          : UA 0.963 million (10.7%)  Govt.    : UA 0.897 million (10.0%)  
Component D PPF   : UA 0.990 million (11.0%) Beneficiaries     : UA 0.220 million (2.4 %) 
  

 
Remark: CSI refers to the Bank’s key sector indicators  

  



 

ix 

                                                                                                Project Implementation Schedule 

 

 Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
 Quarter Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                      
 

 PATAG EAJ financing negotiations                       
 ADF approval                        
 Signing of financing agreements                       
 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to first disbursement                       

 
Publication of the General Procurement Notice 
Development of management and M&E tools  (PATAG EAJ PPF) 

                     
 
 

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                        

 PMU staff confirmation                        
 Preparation of priority procurement agreements and BDs                       
 PATAG EAJ launching mission                       
 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, IT, etc.)                       
 Signing of agreements with partner entities                       
3 AGRIC. INFRASTRUCTURE MODERNISATION AND DEVELOPMENT                        
 Preparation of documents on priority infrastructure and projects                       
 Procurement for priority infrastructure and structures                       
 Studies on complementary hydro-agricultural infrastructure, roads and buildings                       
 Irrigation and road works                       
 Marketing and processing infrastructure                       
 Implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plan                       

4 DEVELOPMENT OF VALUE CHAINS AND YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR  
                 

     

 
Conduct of agricultural extension activities and improvement of access to inputs 
and improved seeds 

                 
     

 Agricultural advisory support, FO structuring and organisation                       
 Support for product conservation, processing and marketing                       
 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship                        
 Nutrition support                       
 Institutional support and capacity building                        
5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT                       
 Updating management and monitoring/evaluation tools                       
 Baseline situation and implementation of the monitoring and evaluation system                       
 Coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation and communication activities                       
 Annual accounts audit                       
 Midterm review                        
 TSF and Government Completion Report                       



 

1 

GUINEA: SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE TRANSFORMATION OF GUINEAN 
AGRICULTURE AND YOUTH AGRICULTURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP (PATAG EAJ) 

 
Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend a UA 
4.63 million loan and award a UA 3.24 million grant from the Transition Support Facility (TSF) to 
the Republic of Guinea to finance the Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture 
and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ). 

I- Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1. Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 In Guinea, agriculture remains at the core of development policies and the main source of income 
for 57% of people living in rural areas, and creates 80% of the country's jobs. It contributes about 23% to 
GDP and employs nearly 80% of the Guinean workforce. In the medium term, it will remain the engine of 
growth and the source of jobs, and an indispensable sector for achieving the objectives of poverty reduction 
and food security in Guinea. Rice is the dominant food crop, accounting for 67% of the area cultivated, 
65% of the country's cereal requirements, 37% of the workforce, 80% of farmers, 23% of primary GDP 
and 6% of national GDP. On average, rice represents 20% of the population's consumption budget. To 
compensate for the food deficit, around 600 000 tonnes of rice are imported yearly, representing about 15% 
of requirements. The rate of coverage of market gardening was 53% in 2015. 

1.1.2 In addition to occupying the 12th place among the most fragile countries, Guinea ranked 183rd out 
of 188 countries in the 2017 Human Development Report. The level of poverty has remained high, with 
the incidence of poverty rising from 41.9% in 2002 to 55.2% in 2012. About 80% of Guineans live in rural 
areas, where poverty is exacerbated by the lack of production infrastructure, basic social services and access 
to markets. The sector's contribution to economic growth was only 0.99% in 2015. The agricultural 
subsector is the driver of growth in the primary sector, but its contribution to the growth of the rural sector 
remains considerable, and stood at 4.1% in 2015.  The sector’s performance has been weak in terms of: (i) 
the cereal balance sheet; (ii) the productivity and processing level; and (iii) entrepreneurial capacity. The 
lack of infrastructure for improved access, production with poor water management and processing stifles 
the development of value chains, product competitiveness and improvement of the living conditions of 
Guineans. The principal challenge is to strengthen institutional, economic and social resilience while 
building the capacity of actors and reducing disparities between men and women, and to support the 
country's structural transformation by setting up key infrastructure for inclusive and green growth. The 
transformation of agriculture through the development of value chains, the promotion of youth employment 
and agricultural entrepreneurship, gender mainstreaming and increased involvement of non-State actors 
(including civil society and the private sector), will help to strengthen the resilience and mitigate the 
economic, socio-demographic and environmental dimensions of the country's fragility.  

1.1.3 In pursuing its objective to develop agricultural value chains, PATAG EAJ will help in increasing 
the sector’s contribution to GDP and in creating jobs and business opportunities by promoting the rice and 
market gardening sectors in targeted areas. It is an essential response for supporting production and 
processing activities, and contributing to the improvement of the people's living conditions by promoting 
value chains and creating entrepreneurship opportunities for young people and women. Therefore, it will 
contribute to the operationalisation of the National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) 
2016-2020, which is in line with the 2040 forward-looking vision for a prosperous and emerging Guinea 
reliant on the agricultural sector to ensure that: (i) the productivity of the primary sector is doubled between 
2014 and 2020; (ii) food security is assured (reducing the incidence of food poverty from 18.2% in 2012 
to 9.1% in 2020); and (iii) sustainable agriculture is promoted. PATAG EAJ aligns squarely with the four 
PNDES pillars: (i) promotion of good governance for sustainable development; (ii) sustainable and 
inclusive economic transformation; (iii) inclusive human capital development; and (iv) sustainable natural 
capital management. This project is also in synergy with the various existing strategies, including the 
revised National Agricultural Development Policy (PNDA 2016-2025), the overall objective of which will 



 

2 

be to increase the contribution of the agricultural sector to food security, nutrition and reduction of poverty 
among Guineans by boosting growth and agricultural trade through: (a) increased productivity; (b) 
improved access to promising markets; and (c) improved governance of the agricultural sector. PATAG 
EAJ also concords seamlessly with: (1) the National Agricultural Investment and Food and Nutrition 
Security Plan (PNIASAN); (2) the Accelerated Programme of Food and Nutrition Security and Sustainable 
Agricultural Development (PASANDAD), the precursor to the implementation of PNIASAN through four 
components: (i) promotion of a favourable environment for sector development (promotion of 
transformative investments and the institutional framework); (ii) strengthening agricultural chains 
(structuring of actors and improving the performance of agricultural chains); (iii) promoting nutrition and 
gender; and (iv) sustainable natural resource management. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.2.1 Despite having many assets (fertile soils, water resources, fishery resources, etc.), Guinea still 
faces poverty (72% below the poverty line) and food insecurity (around 18%). The low unemployment 
rate (5.2% in 2014) in fact masks the scope of underemployment, unstable jobs and disparities. The 
unemployment rates of graduates of vocational schools and higher education institutions stand at 27.7% 
and 34.7%, respectively. Poverty is essentially rural, with a rate of about 80%, although these areas have 
proven hydro-agricultural potential. Rice is the staple food and the food deficit is filled annually by 
imports of about 600,000 tonnes. The main constraints facing the sector include: inaccessibility to 
production areas, poor water management, degradation of production systems, especially the mangroves 
owing to salinity and acidity, poor access to inputs, and low processing capacity. The aim of various 
strategies put in place is to reverse that trend, in particular by boosting investments in the agricultural 
sector and in production, marketing and processing infrastructure, and by promoting youth 
entrepreneurship and private sector involvement. It is vital to develop potential water resources and 
optimise the soil resource management, and to add value to products by reducing post-harvest losses 
through storage and quality processing that will open access to various markets. PATAG EAJ will fulfil 
that mission by modernising systems and factors of production, improving access to production areas, 
restructuring actors and improving conservation, processing and marketing conditions, with increased 
attention to value chains, youth/women's employment, and learning. PATAG EAJ is also a tool for 
implementing the CSP (2018-2022), which is built on two pillars: improving access to energy (Pillar 
1); and developing agricultural and industrial value chains (Pillar 2). Since it supports the 
transformation of the Guinean agricultural sector, this project is founded on Pillar 2. Through the 
development of agricultural value chains, agribusiness and agricultural entrepreneurship, it will 
contribute to inclusive and green growth, and to the improvement of people's living conditions. The 
project is in synergy with current and future operations, including those related to the construction of 
the Boké-Québo road and the Agricultural Processing Area Project. The area of intervention was also 
chosen based on the presence of an agricultural economic hub with identified potential in the rice and 
market gardening sectors. Hence, this project will seek to build on ongoing activities in targeted 
intervention areas and ensure complementarity to create greater impact. 

1.2.2 The objectives of PATAG EAJ are consistent with the Bank’s "High 5s", which aim to feed 
Africa by 2025 and improve the people’s living conditions through the development of agricultural 
value chains, build the capacity of stakeholders, create jobs and generate income. The project is aligned 
on the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (TYS) 2013-2022 and its two guiding objectives of inclusive growth 
and transition to green growth, as well as three areas of special interest: gender, agriculture and food 
and nutrition security. It plugs into the Bank's Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience 
in Africa, and will help in achieving the objectives of the Enable Youth Initiative and the Jobs for Youth 
in Africa Strategy by creating opportunities for young people. It is consistent with the Bank's 
Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) programme, which focuses on the 
adoption of new production and processing technologies in agricultural value chains. Specifically, it is 
in harmony with climate change adaptation initiatives by promoting renewable energies, water-saving 
techniques and resilient systems. 



 

3 

1.3. Aid Coordination  

Development aid is coordinated by the Government of Guinea through the Coordination and Consultation 
Framework (CCC) of the Permanent Secretariat in the Prime Minister’s Office. In addition to the CCC, a 
strategic mechanism for coordination between the Government and technical and financial partners (TFPs), 
a technical monitoring committee (TMC) to strengthen inter-sector coordination, and thematic dialogue 
groups (TDGs) bringing together TFP and Government representatives have been set up at the sector level. 
The "rural development, food security and environment" thematic group is chaired by the World Bank for 
TFPs, and the Ministry of Agriculture for the Government. Through its Country Office in Guinea (COGN), 
the Bank is an active member of the CCC and some TDGs. The key ongoing projects with an agricultural 
value chains and youth agricultural entrepreneurship support component backed by TFPs, and with which 
PATAG EAJ will need to develop synergies, are highlighted in Volume 2. The project will also establish 
synergies with Bank projects: the Boké-Quebo Road Construction Project with a rural roads component 
for the supply of agricultural products (ongoing) and the Boké Agropole Agricultural Processing Area 
Project (2019). In the wider rural sector (agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and environment), the intervention 
of the different partners is presented in Annex A4 of Volume 2, and is summarised as follows: 

Sector or Sub-Sector 
Size of  

GDP Exports Labour 

[Rural sector] [23%] 5% (2015) 80% 
Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government Donors   Amounts (USD million) 

 
 

  Period 

 World Bank 308.2 2013-2023 

 AfDB 
247.55 
 

2018-2022 

7.3% of public budget  IFAD 141.8 2013-2024 

 IsDB  29.4 2018-2025 

 BADEA 44 2017-2021 

 AFD 45.93 2017-2022 

 USAID  30 2017-2022 

 Abu Dhabi Fund  33.7 2018-2024 

 
Existence of thematic working groups No 
Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 
Role of AfDB in aid coordination Reinforced with COGN 

 

II- Project Description  

2.1. Project Objectives and Components  

2.1.1 PATAG EAJ’s sector goal is to help foster strong and inclusive economic growth. The specific 
objectives are to contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural and agribusiness value 
chains, and to promote youth agricultural entrepreneurship in the Boké and Boffa Prefectures. It will: 
(i) help to boost production and productivity, and improve access to production and processing factors 
and markets; (ii) contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural value chains that can 
employ a high number of young people and women; (iii) help to improve access to basic socioeconomic 
services for economic development; and (iv) build the capacity of the stakeholders involved in 
implementing PNIASAN/PASANDAD to achieve the objectives of PNDES in general, and of the 
PNDA in particular, and for better sector governance. 

2.1.2 PATAG EAJ was designed in light of results and lessons from the Bank's experience in the 
country and in the sub-region, acquired from efficient operating procedures, targeting of high-impact 
priority activities, and strong stakeholder involvement. The activities will take place in the two hubs – 



 

4 

A (Boffa) and D (Boké) – and will target poor, highly inaccessible areas with huge agricultural potential. 
Beyond the development of production, processing and marketing infrastructure in the areas concerned, 
the project will support: (i) the strengthening of the organisational and technical capacity of actors, 
particularly young people and women; (ii) the promotion of processing and marketing through the 
dissemination of new technologies (TAAT) and support for product labelling; (iii) the promotion of 
youth entrepreneurship and women’s empowerment; and (iv) the improvement of governance in the 
sector through the organisation of beneficiaries and capacity building. The selection and involvement 
of committed farmers, the choice of proven techniques and transformative actions will aim to ensure 
the sustainability of interventions and infrastructure. PATAG EAJ will support 5 000 farmers, 1 000 
young people and women, 100 seed growers, 100 groups and 20 unions, and will impact 39 252 direct 
beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries through its different activities. It will be implemented 
over a four-year period (January 2019 - December 2022) and will include three components, 
summarised below. 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Component Cost Component Description 

Component 1: 
Modernisation and 
development of 
agricultural 
infrastructure 

UA 
4.846 

million 

A1 Rehabilitation/development of rice-cultivation facilities and access roads: (i) 237 ha of rice-
growing lowlands (with 25 ha of gardens irrigated from wells) and 50 ha for rice seed production, 
(ii) 65.5 km of access roads; (iii) 32.7 kilometres of hedgerows, and 10 ha of stone barriers. 
A2. Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas: (i) 15 ha for women’s market 
gardening (solar pumping and drip irrigation); (ii) 31 hectares of modern farms for young 
entrepreneurs. 
A3. Construction of agricultural and social infrastructure: (i) Construction of the Lisso market and 
two stalls; (ii) construction of two input shops and six product storage warehouses; and (iii) 
construction of six processing centres. 

Component 2: 
Development of 
value chains and 
youth agricultural 
entrepreneurship  

 

B1 Production and productivity support: (i) support for access to inputs: development of the 
Koba seed centre; support for 10 groups of young seed growers; establishment of revolving 
fertiliser and seed funds; operationalisation of two input shops for young entrepreneurs; (ii) support 
for agricultural mechanisation: establishment of four service centres for young entrepreneurs, 
training and support for the establishment of ten young drivers and ten repairers; (iii) advisory  
support and structuring of farmers’ organisations (FOs): dissemination of 15 TAATs; guidance 
for 900 farmers and 15 groups, setting up of 50 management committees and 4 maintenance SMEs, 
land security and conflict prevention on 25 sites. 

2.189 
million 

B2 Promotion of processing and market access: (i) support for product processing: supply of 10 
post-harvest kits to young FOs; capacity building for 5 women unions/economic interest groups 
(EIGs) (rice, groundnut and fonio parboiling) and 40 groups of parboilers; training of 40 groups 
and unions in quality and packaging standards management; (ii) promotion of market access: (i) 
organisation of group sales and matching of farmers and wholesalers; promotion of the “Consume 
Local/Made in Guinea” label; (iv) support for the certification of agricultural products and the 
labelling of parboiled rice; and (v) education and nutritional monitoring of the population, and 
communication for behavioural change. 
 B3 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship: (i) training of 600 young people on 
agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) support for the establishment 50 young project proponents; (iii) 
made-to-measure training for 30 young people. 

Component 3 
Project management 

UA 
0.963 

million 

(i) Coordination of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial management; (iii) 
acquisition of goods, works and services; (iv) establishment of a communication plan; and (v) project 
implementation monitoring and evaluation. 

2.2. Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions used in PATAG EAJ are based on field data and lessons learned from 
similar projects, and based on design methods adapted to the specific context of the intervention area. 
It involves development of medium-sized sites of lowlands with access to new technologies and solar 
energy for the dewatering. 



 

5 

 

2.2.2 The technical options selected took into consideration the ease of work management and 
equipment, the willingness of the beneficiaries to adhere and adopt these choices. The main arguments 
are: (i) to maximize the intensification level in these areas where two campaigns can be made, (ii) to 
achieve better water efficiency and control; (iii) to introduce solar energy, clean and renewable resource 
and appropriate mechanization; (iv) to promote new irrigation technologies through the introduction of 
drip systems, (v) mastering management and maintenance aspects to ensure sustainability. 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Short Description Reason for Rejection 

Development of one large 
area, with total water 
control where the project 
would be concentrated 

Build a large pumping station, 
coated water transport channels 
with large civil engineering 
structures for water collection, 
supply and delivery for the 
various blocks and 
neighbourhoods 

This alternative is not technically feasible and does not 
ensure the availability of labour, in terms of both quantity 
and quality, for the development of the facilities and the 
investments to be made. It is highly likely that the area 
will not be fully exploited, since available labour on 
several sites close to small villages or large towns can be 
used to better exploit irrigated areas and develop the 
facilities. 

Development of market 
gardening areas with 
improved wells without 
any means of dewatering 

Build large-diameter wells at a 
rate of one well per hectare where 
irrigation water is manually 
drawn and carried by farmers to 
the parcels 

The challenge for the development of market gardening 
production is the manual removal of water from wells. 
This takes up a considerable amount of work time in 
return for mediocre efficiency and makes the task, which 
is performed mostly by women, very tedious and limits 
the production capacity of women involved in market 
gardening, consequently leading to a loss of interest. This 
method is also only feasible on small gardens not 
exceeding a few dozen square metres, especially during 
the dry season, when the demand for water is high. 

Development of 
intermediate animal-
draught cultivation 
instead of motorized 
ploughing 

Animal-draught cultivation in the 
project regions is adapted to light 
soils and a limited amount of 
moisture for high productivity. 
Its effectiveness depends highly 
on the physical state of the area to 
be ploughed 

The large areas of arable land in the region, the short 
period conducive to land preparation and the reduction of 
the rainy season impede animal-draught cultivation and 
militate in favour of mechanised ploughing. 
Consolidation of the network of agricultural 
mechanisation service providers in the project area will 
contribute to the achievement of this objective. 

2.3. Project Type  

PATAG EAJ is an investment operation financed from TSF resources. The Government of Guinea has 
not yet committed to implementing programmes using the sector approach, given a number of 
institutional constraints and fragility context. The project approach is the most appropriate, to ensure 
the achievement of results and the efficient and effective use of the resources allocated to the project. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The cost of the project is estimated at UA 8.987 million or GNF 113 274 million. The foreign 
exchange portion is UA 3.845 million and constitutes 43% of the total cost. Customs duty and taxes are 
the responsibility of the State, which must take the necessary measures to ensure the enforcement of 
this provision. The provision for physical contingencies is expressed as a percentage of the base cost 
(5%) and applied for civil engineering works, mainly in the form of construction/rehabilitation of 
irrigation facilities, roads, markets, stores, shops and storage centres. The provision for price escalation, 
commonly referred to as "financial contingencies", is calculated based on the inflation level. The 
inflation rate used was 8%. The breakdown of project cost is presented in the tables below, by 
component and expenditure category. An expenditure schedule by component is also provided. The 



 

6 

detailed table of project costs and the list of goods and services are provided in Annexes B2 and B8.2 
of Volume II, respectively. 

Table 2.3: Estimated Cost by Component 

Components 
GNF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 
Exchange 

Foreign 
 Exchange 

Local 
Currency Total 

Foreign 
Exchange 

Local 
Currency Total 

A. Modernisation/development 
of agricultural infrastructure 

27 820 26 445 54 265 2.207 2.098 4.306 51% 

B. Support for the development 
of value chains and youth 
agricultural entrepreneurship 

9 783 15 758 25 541 0.776 1.250 2.027 38% 

C. Project management 2 001 10 006 12 006 0.159 0.794 0.953 17% 
D. Project Preparation Facility 
(PPF) 

5 772 67 05 12 478 0.458 0.532 0.90 46% 

Total base cost 45 376 58 914 104 290 3.600 4.674 8.275 44% 
Provision for physical 
contingencies   

1 293 11 81 2 474 0.103 0.094 0.196 52% 

Provision for price escalation  1 797 47 13 6 510 0.143 0.374 0.517 28% 

Total project cost 48 466 64  808 113 274 3.845 5.142 8.987 43% 
 

Table 2.4: Estimated Cost by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 
GNF Million UA Million  

% F.E. % Categ. F.E. L.C. Total F.E.  L.C. Total 
Works 25 857 23 620 49 477 2.052 1.874 3.926 52.3% 43.7% 

Goods  6 902 44 88 11 390 0.548 0.356 0.904 60.6% 10.1% 

Services 12 617 20 730 33 347 1.001 1.645 2.646 37.8% 29.4% 

Operation - 3 034 3 034 - 0.241 0.241 0.0% 2.7% 

Personnel - 7 042 7 042 - 0.559 0.559 0.0% 6.2% 

Base cost 45 376 58 914 10 4290 3.600 4.674 8.275 43.5% 92.1% 
Provision for physical 
contingencies   

1 293 1 181 2 474 0.103 0.094 0.196 52.3% 2.2% 

Provision for price escalation 1 797 4 713 6 510 0.143 0.374 0.517 27.6% 5.7% 

TOTAL 48 466 64 808 11 3274 3.845 5.142 8.987 42.8% 
100.0

% 

2.4.2 The project will be financed through a grant of UA 3.24 million and a loan of UA 4.63 million 
from the TSF, representing 87.6% of the project cost, net of taxes and customs duty. The Government's 
financial participation, estimated at UA 0.898 million, will be limited to covering the costs of taxes and 
customs duty, and the establishment of a revolving fund for the procurement of inputs (fertilisers and 
seeds). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to their participation in routine maintenance 
and upkeep, which can easily be carried out, and their 10% participation in the financing of young 
entrepreneurship projects, estimated at UA 0.220 million. The breakdown by source of financing is 
shown in Table 2.5 below. 

Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

SOURCES 
GNF Million UA Million 

% source Foreign 
 Exchange 

Local  
Currency Total 

Foreign  
Exchange 

Local  
Currency  Total 

TSF loan 37 220 21 136 58 356 2.953 1.677 4.630 51.5% 
TSF grant 11 246 29 590 40 837 0.892 2.348 3.240 36.1% 
Govt. - 11 310 11 310 - 0.897 0.897 10.0% 
Beneficiaries  - 2771 2 771 - 0.220 0.220 2.4% 

TOTAL 48 466 64 808 11 3274 3.845 5.142 8.987 100.0% 



 

7 

 
Table 2.6a: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

COMPONENTS 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total 

A. Modernisation/development of agricultural 
infrastructure 

1.512 2.721 0.073 - 4.306 

B. Support for the development of value chains 
and youth agricultural entrepreneurship  

0.443 0.928 0.440 0.215 2.027 

C. Project management 0.296 0.211 0.221 0.225 0.953 
D. PPF advance 0.990 - - - 0.990 
Base cost 3.241 3.859 0.735 0.440 8.275 

Provision for physical contingencies  0.098 0.095 0.004 - 0.196 

Provision for price escalation  0.229 0.215 0.048 0.025 0.517 

TOTAL 3.568 4.168 0.787 0.465 8.987 
 

Table 2.6b: Expenditure Schedule by Source of Financing (UA million) 
SOURCES 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total % 
TSF loan 1.367 2.894 0.364 0.005 4.630 51.5% 
TSF grant 1.841 0.575 0.369 0.455 3.240 36.1% 
Government 0.280 0.559 0.054 0.004 0.897 10.0% 
Beneficiaries 0.080 0.140 -   - 0.220 2.4% 

TOTAL 3.568 4.168 0.787 0.465 8.987 100.0% 

2.5. Project Beneficiaries and Target Area  

2.5.1 The project area, consisting of the Boffa and Boké Prefectures (A and D hubs), is part of the 
Boké region, located in the North-West of the Republic of Guinea. The Boké region covers an area of 
35 234 km² and has 5 prefectures (Boké, Boffa, Fria, Gaoual and Koundara), 32 rural municipal councils 
(“communes”) and 5 urban municipal councils. The region’s climate is conducive to agriculture, with 
abundant rainfall in coastal areas (2 500-3 000 mm/year) that decreases gradually towards the north to 
800 mm and 1 000 mm in Gaoual and Koundara. Estimated at 1 190 724 inhabitants (INS/Demographic 
Prospects, General Population and Housing Census (RGPH3), 2017 projection), the Boké region 
population is highly cosmopolitan and is primarily engaged in agro-pastoral activities. The average 
population density is 32 inhabitants/km². 

2.5.2 The Boké region is one of the most important bauxite areas in Guinea. Currently, 14 mining 
companies are active in the region, attracting a large number of people to the area (accelerated 
population growth), with growing demand for food and nutrition. Young people, who account for more 
than 60% of the region's population and the bulk of its agricultural workforce, are abandoning 
agriculture and opting for work in the mining sector. They are involved in the social unrest that the area 
has been experiencing because of its status as the bauxite basin par excellence. 

2.5.3 The intervention sites were selected based on an analysis comprising multiple criteria: (i) 
accessibility; (ii) existence of a participatory and community/local operating set-up; (iii) absence of 
latent land conflict; and (iv) overall consistency with project objectives (availability of labour, level of 
organisation and spirit of initiative of future beneficiaries, expertise and participation of women and 
young people). Various types of sites have been pre-identified: (i) development of lowlands: with partial 
control of irrigation water (sites in rice-cultivation lowlands), and with total control of irrigation water 
(Koba sites for rice seed growers and mixed rice cultivation and market gardening areas in the Boké 
area); (ii) mixed areas of rice cultivation and market gardening alternating over the agricultural year 
with total water control; (ii) market gardening areas (wells, solar pumping equipment, loading tank and 
drip irrigation). 



 

8 

2.5.4  The population of the area is mainly engaged in agriculture (rice, maize, cassava, groundnuts, 
sorghum/millet, cowpeas, market garden produce, cashew nuts, etc.), livestock farming and trade. 
Traditional and family-type agriculture faces various challenges, including lack of or dilapidated state 
of facilities, difficulty of accessing factors of production (certified seeds, quality inputs, ploughing and 
post-harvest equipment, etc.) and markets. Women are involved in all rural agricultural activities and 
participate mainly in work on rice fields and market gardens, as well as in produce processing and 
marketing. The project is aimed at small farmers, particularly women and young people, who constitute 
the bulk of the vulnerable segments of the population in terms of food and nutrition insecurity and 
poverty. The project will reach 1 000 young people and women, 5 000 farmers, 200 seed growers, 100 
groups and 20 unions. Other direct targets are artisans, processors, traders, young entrepreneurs, 
students in pilot school canteens, various service providers and NGOs, etc. Through its activities, 
PATAG EAJ will reach 39 252 direct beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries. 

2.6. Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project design is the result of a participatory process that involved all stakeholders: 
government departments, farmers’ organisations, women's groups, civil society, private sector, TFPs, 
projects, etc. Initiated as part of implementation of PATAG EAJ PPF activities, these broad 
consultations continued during the project preparation and appraisal mission. Consultation meetings 
organised in each of the two prefectures with all the parties (decentralised technical services, NGOs and 
support and advisory associations, local authorities, beneficiary representatives, including women) led 
to a consensual identification of the challenges and needs of the intervention area, and for the two sectors 
concerned. Focused discussions with local institutional and civil society partners and visits to various 
potential sites, followed by working sessions with beneficiaries, including women and young people, 
made it possible to draw up an exhaustive inventory of development needs in the area and to identify 
the support needs for the two sectors and the most appropriate methods of implementation, as well as 
the appropriate measures for the effective action. The sites and activities were chosen following several 
investigations and fruitful discussions with the beneficiaries and other stakeholders. 

2.6.2 This participatory process revealed strong enthusiasm for the project and a broad consensus on 
its design and implementation methods. For instance, farmers reaffirmed the need to fully exploit the 
high potential of the intervention area (land, natural watercourses, mangroves, lowlands, etc.). Women 
emphasised their interest in market gardening, farm produce processing and marketing with 
modernisation of production and processing tools, and improved market access. During visits to various 
sites, stock was taken of existing facilities and infrastructure, and technological options to be adopted 
for their construction/rehabilitation proposed. Developing a good communication plan around PATAG 
EAJ and maintaining the participatory approach during its implementation will ensure that local actors 
take ownership of the project during its execution.  

2.7. Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in the Project Design  

2.7.1 PATAG EAJ design drew largely from lessons learned from projects executed by the Bank in 
Guinea and the sub-region, with every effort made to reflect the context of the country's fragility and to 
address some of the weaknesses identified during project implementation and highlighted in portfolio 
reviews and completion reports. At the last review conducted in July 2018, the portfolio performance 
was deemed satisfactory, but efforts will have to be made with regard to: (i) the effectiveness timeframes 
(11 months instead of the 6 months recommended by the Bank); (ii) the timely appointment of project 
management teams, including the coordinator and financial management and procurement officers; (iii) 
the lengthy procurement timeframe; (iv) delays in the release of counterpart funding, which impedes 
smooth project execution; (v) the systematic introduction of performance contracts and objective-based 
annual evaluation; (vi) the timely preparation of the baseline situation and deployment of monitoring 
and evaluation systems; and (vii) the availability of studies to improve the quality-at-entry of operations. 

  



 

9 

2.7.2 The Portfolio Performance Improvement Plan (PPIP 2018) also advocates the implementation 
of specific measures to accelerate project execution and the implementation pace. These lessons were 
taken into account in this project, as reflected in: (i) continuous dialogue and close monitoring by the 
Country Office to gradually reduce the long delays and fulfil the conditions for effectiveness; (ii) 
improvement in project quality by supporting the formulation and preparation of the detailed 
designs/competitive bidding documents (APD/BDs) and management and monitoring/evaluation tools 
prior to project start up (with PPF resources); and (iii) building of the procurement and financial 
management capacity of project management teams. It should be noted that the current portfolio has 
become significantly younger in recent years, the average age of operations having dropped from 5.5 
years in 2011 to 2.7 years in 2017. Moreover, the portfolio had no problematic projects (PP) or 
potentially problematic projects (PPPs) in 2017. 

2.7.3 PATAG EAJ was designed to take the following into account: (i) the need to enhance the 
quality-at-entry of the project by making feasibility studies available and by preparing the initial 
competitive bidding documents; (ii) the need to pay special attention to the involvement of local actors, 
notably farmers directly concerned, through an inclusive participatory approach; (iii) the intervention 
of other partners (World Bank, World Food Programme, etc.) to ensure coherence, complementarity 
and synergies in the activities selected; (iv) the need to pay attention to the procurement process and 
methods; and (v) the primordial importance of building the capacity of the different actors. In light of 
the above-mentioned strategic thrusts, special emphasis was also placed on certain thematic areas in 
formulating the project: (a) food and nutrition security; (b) value-chain approach; (c) decent youth 
employment and women's empowerment; and (d) resilience to climate change. All these provisions will 
make it possible to satisfy the design and execution criteria contained in Presidential Directive No. 
002/2015. 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation system of the project's logical framework indicators is part of the 
Ministry of Agriculture’s monitoring and evaluation system. The system will come under the 
supervision of the monitoring and evaluation officer, with the support of Project Management Unit 
experts (rural engineer, value chain expert, etc.), the Prefectural Directorate of Agriculture (DPA) and 
the Rural Engineering Technical Office (BTGR). Particular emphasis will be placed on targeting 
parameters that may be tracked and collected internally, and those relating specifically to women and 
young people (disaggregated data for women and young people). The main performance indicators that 
will be monitored from the baseline scenario include: (i) surface area of lowlands developed for rice 
farming with partial water control; (ii) surface area developed for rice farming with total water control; 
(iii) surface area developed for market gardening; (iv) infrastructure built (number of hectares with drip 
irrigation, number of garden farming hectares protected with grill fences, number of markets 
commissioned, number of kilometres of farm roads, number of product storage warehouses, number of 
input shops, etc.); (v) level of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (tonnes/hectare); (vi) 
number of farmers (including women) by type of development; (vii) number of demonstration units 
(DUs) and TAATs distributed; (viii) number of farmers’ organisations structured and management 
committees established; (ix) level of increase in farmers' income, including those of women and young 
people; (x) number of jobs for young people and women created through entrepreneurial initiatives and 
number of young entrepreneurs established; (xi) number of farmers, processors and merchants trained 
and organised; (xii) level of involvement of women in decision-making bodies (leadership), and 
women’s rate of access to land following the development; (xiii) number of processing units established 
and allocated (including to women); and (xiv) number of nutrition activities and school canteens 
supported, and level of impact on food and nutrition security. The indicators selected for the project will 
be aligned on those selected under PNIASAN and will be used to assess the impact of the project on 
fragility, resilience and inclusion. The Bank’s various supervision missions and periodic progress 
reports will reflect the level of achievement of the indicators.  

 



 

10 

III- Project Feasibility  

3.1. Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3:  Key Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) GNF 20 370 million  
IRR (baseline scenario) 12.7% 
ERR (baseline scenario) 18.8% 

 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic analysis was conducted based on the cost/benefit of the 
additional cash flow from the production models of the two priority sectors (rice and market gardening). 
The following assumptions were used: (i) the period for evaluating the impact of PATAG EAJ is 25 
years; (ii) the average basic prices, yields and production costs of the 2016/2017 crop year were selected 
for the baseline scenario and realistic projections were made covering up to full project development, 
taking into account the existing potential and the absorptive capacity of beneficiaries; (iii) additional 
income was determined by calculating the difference between the baseline scenario and the “with-
project” scenario, based on gross proceeds minus production costs; (iv) an equal inflation rate was 
selected for jobs and resources on the cash flow table; (v) for the calculation of the economic rate of 
return, a cost correction coefficient was added for factors related to distortions inherent in customs 
duties. The detailed assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, the tables of the operating 
models (baseline scenario and “with-project” scenario) and financial and economic flows are presented 
in Annex B7 of Volume 2. The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PATAG EAJ 
is financially and economically sustainable.  

3.1.2 Financial performance: The hydro-agricultural improvements and land exploitation will 
generate additional production of approximately 1 030 tonnes of paddy rice, 210 tonnes of certified 
seeds and about 2 000 tonnes of market gardening products, in addition to creating 3 500 permanent 
jobs. The additional income resulting from the various development and farming models selected are 
the following: (i) lowlands with partial water control (rice): GNF 3 205 641 per ha; (ii) lowlands with 
total water control (double cropping for rice seeds): GNF 10 309 850 per ha; (iv) lowlands with total 
water control (double cropping for rice and one cropping for market gardening): GNF 12 325 695 per 
ha; and (v) irrigated market gardening: GNF 24 326 025 per ha. The overall additional income generated 
will help to increase the value added brought about by the project, thus increasing the project's 
contribution to agricultural GDP. The financial internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 12.7% for a 
NPV of GNF 20 370 million. 

3.1.3 Economic Performance: The basic economic rate of return (ERR) stands at 18.8%, for a net 
present value (NPV) of GNF 71 691 million and a cost-benefit ratio (CBR) is 1.81. This result is 
significant, especially since some benefits could not be included in the calculations due to the lack of 
data to permit their evaluation, notably improvements in living conditions and food security brought 
about by increased income and food availability, the effects of watershed and environmental protection 
measures, capacity building in other types of economic activities carried out by the beneficiaries and 
the multiplier effects on sector actors (suppliers of inputs, equipment, services, etc.). Sensitivity tests 
were performed based on the assumption of a possible escalation in costs (10%), a decline in agricultural 
production with the risk of non-adoption of farming techniques by farmers (10%), and a reduction in 
the benefits generated by the rehabilitation of agricultural products and  agricultural infrastructure, and 
the availability of processing and storage units for agricultural products (10%). Based on the results 
summarised in Annex B7 of Volume 2, the EIRR seems insensitive to any decreases in the benefits 
generated by rice and market gardening productions (-10%) (for an IRR of 16.6%), in storage, 
processing and rural roads infrastructure (-10%) (for an IRR of 18.5%). Similarly, a possible escalation 
(+10%) in investment and maintenance costs reduces the IRR to 16.8%. 



 

11 

3.1.4 The project’s other economic impacts may be summarised as follows: (i) upstream effects of 
additional income on service providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, consulting firms); (ii) downstream 
effects of the generation of additional income on producers, traders and processors who are essentially 
women; (iii) decrease in foreign exchange costs owing to the sharp drop of rice import costs in the trade 
balance; and (iv) impact on wealth creation in the country due to the increase in GDP resulting from the 
generation of additional value added. For households, project benefits will translate into, among other 
things, better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age and the elderly); 
lower medical bills and reduction of the difficulty of farm work, especially for women, decline in the 
incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty; strengthening of livelihoods and the resilience of 
PATAG EAJ targets in relation to food insecurity and the effects of climate change.  

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The project is classified in Category 2 under the Bank's Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Policies. It was subjected to an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, the 
summary of which was posted on the Bank's Website on 12 September 2018. PATAG EAJ activities 
will be carried out in 18 areas located in the Boffa and Boké Prefectures. The project’s environmental 
impacts will be minimal given the relatively modest size of the infrastructure/development and their 
distribution across several locations. Moreover, the impact assessment reveals that the project 
implementation will be really beneficial for the socioeconomic development of the Boké and Boffa 
Prefectures since it will enable: (i) better management of soil and water resources, thanks to technical 
supervision of the irrigation methods and the rational distribution of the water to the plots, which will 
limit their over-exploitation and degradation; (ii) proper water control through adapted and appropriate 
(environmentally friendly) facilities, and the use of renewable energy; (iii) the reduction of agricultural 
land degradation, water and soil conservation, the development of vegetation cover, through the 
installation of erosion-control structures; and (iv) the development/promotion of new technologies and 
resilient/smart practices. In short, the project’s physical activities will cause no major environmental 
and social impacts. The impacts, if any, will be very short-lived on the receiving environments and on 
the environmental components as a whole. The summary of the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) was posted on the Bank's Website on 15 October 2018. 

3.2.2 Climate change: The project complies with the Bank's climate protection policies since the 
climate risks have been identified. The programme’s climate sensitivity has been analysed in accordance 
with the Climate Screening and Adaptation Review and Evaluation Procedures Booklet and the Climate 
Safeguards System (CSS). Based on the preliminary analysis of project activities, some operations will 
be more sensitive than others. The roads and facilities will be more climate-sensitive than other 
infrastructure. The design of the roads that will be built will incorporate engineering structures to ensure 
the normal flow of waterways crossed by the roads. In addition, the longitudinal and transverse profiles 
of feeder roads will be so designed as to facilitate the evacuation of water that falls or flows onto the 
road surface and to avoid water stagnation along the right-of-way. The building materials that will be 
used should promote a good compaction level that can strengthen the adhesion of different primary 
particles to reduce their crumbling with the falling of exceptional showers. In building supporting 
infrastructure for the agricultural sector other than the roads, account will be taken of their likely 
exposure to hazards (high winds, rising temperatures, exceptional rainfall, etc.). In addition, the project 
will favour the use of solar energy for dewatering in irrigated areas and for operating the equipment that 
will be installed. This alternative will make project activities cleaner and greener. 

3.2.3 Involuntary Resettlement: PATAG EAJ activities will not lead to any people resettlement or 
restriction of access to goods and livelihoods. 

3.2.4 Gender: Women play a major role in the agricultural economy, and are found throughout the 
value chain from production, processing to marketing. However, they face major constraints in gaining 
access to resources and factors of production, including land, inputs, fertilisers, financing, new 
technologies and extension services. As a result, they work under less favourable conditions compared 



 

12 

to men, which considerably undermines their performance. In rural areas, the income gap between men 
and women in the agricultural sector may be as high as 50%. To address the gender disparities described 
in the above gender analysis, PATAG EAJ pays specific attention to women's strategic interests and 
aims to improve their socioeconomic status in the two regions covered by the project. 

3.2.5 Based on consultations and exchanges with individual women and women's groups, as well as 
with other partners involved in the agricultural value chain and entrepreneurship, the project will 
implement the following activities: (i) Build capacity in  agricultural production, entailing the 
development of 237 ha of lowlands for rice cultivation that will enable women to have at least two rice 
seasons and one market gardening season per year;  development of 46 ha strictly for market gardening, 
of which 15 ha will be for women's market gardening activities, and 50 ha for the production of rice 
seeds. In addition, 30% of the rice schemes to be developed will be reserved for women's groups. 
Despite the strong involvement of women in the rice-farming sector, the management of rice farms 
remains a male preserve (only 9% of rice areas are managed by women). To address this situation, the 
project will train all women and men directly affected by the project (5000 producers), on issues 
pertaining to land tenure security and women's right to acquire land. An awareness campaign on the 
respect of the community's right of use and conflict prevention and management mechanisms will be 
organised to facilitate support for rice producer groups to acquire land and title deeds in newly 
developed areas. The project also includes a package of integrated services for women and young 
people, aimed at improving their access to socioeconomic infrastructure and innovative production 
technologies. Through the rehabilitation of rural roads, the project will help to open up the Boké and 
Boffa areas and facilitate the evacuation of agricultural products to the markets. Socioeconomic 
infrastructure (rural markets, processing units, market gardens and storage warehouses) will be provided 
primarily for the benefit of women and young people, with a view to improving their working 
conditions, easing their tasks, strengthening their economic empowerment, and improving food and 
nutrition security. The project will apply affirmative action in favour of women and vulnerable groups, 
wherever local traditions tend to exclude them from decision-making bodies or from certain benefits. 
Generally, the project will ensure that women are included when it comes to access to factors of 
production (managed land, agricultural inputs, equipment and production equipment), organisation and 
management of the new infrastructure (shops, markets, etc.), and training. Therefore, the project will 
help to strengthen women's economic autonomy and decision-making power; (ii) Enhance skills in 
agricultural production and processing, management, marketing and market access, which entails 
developing the skills of women and young people through the dissemination of Technologies for 
African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), with focus on production and processing. Skills will also 
be developed in management, packaging, marketing and networking for market access, procurement 
and inventory management, leadership and entrepreneurship. In this regard, study tours will be 
organised for women engaged in processing to enable them to draw on the experience of neighbouring 
countries such as Burkina Faso; and (iii) Entrepreneurship, job creation and leadership and market 
access for women and young people: Increasing production and improving processing conditions will 
rekindle young people's interest in the agricultural sector, which will reduce youth unemployment rates. 
Women and young people will be trained in business plan development and given the support needed 
to set up their own businesses. In addition, women in the processing sector will be put in touch with 
private economic operators that have been identified as well as with WFP to ensure the direct purchase 
of their products. The project is classified in Category 2, according to the Gender Marker System. The 
budget allocated to specific gender promotion and economic empowerment activities stands at 
approximately UA 2.7 million. Details on the gender analysis are provided in the Technical Annex on 
gender. 

3.2.6 Nutrition: The project will develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality 
of food consumed by the people, especially by women and children, and will collaborate with the World 
Food Programme (WFP) to supply school canteens with food products from the area. The additional 
production of rice (1 000 tonnes) and horticultural products (2 000 tonnes) will help to improve feeding 
and nutrition, and hence the people’s health. Incorporating direct nutrition events into project activities 



 

13 

is essential to impacting the people’s nutritional status. Furthermore, activities aimed at supporting 
product quality, labelling and certification will help to improve the nutritional intake. Activities to 
prevent the resurgence of waterborne diseases and rice urticating caterpillars will also contribute to 
improving the health and nutrition of the local population.  

3.2.7 Social: The different activities implemented under the project (improved access to factors of 
production, technical routes for production, processing and marketing) will considerably help to 
enhance food and nutrition security and improve income levels, thereby significantly reducing the 
incidence of poverty. The project will further strengthen the connectivity between producers and the 
market through partnerships that will be beneficial to all stakeholders of the rice and horticulture value 
chains. Enhancing food security through the developments, coupled with awareness raising concerning 
dietary best practice, will help  to improve the people’s nutritional status, particularly that of  vulnerable 
groups such as women of childbearing age and children below the age of five. The rehabilitation of 
roads, construction of the storage/conservation warehouses, rehabilitation of the markets and the support 
of the processing units, will contribute to reducing post-harvest losses (expected to decline by at least 
30%), as well as facilitate product marketing. As a result, the income of households will increase, putting 
them in a better position to bear food, health and education expenses. By making it easier for 
beneficiaries to participate in decision-making processes and to secure land (management of community 
infrastructure, management of conflicts between farmers and herders, maintenance of access roads, 
etc.), the project will also bolster the local development process and promote good governance. Project 
activities will lead to: (i) a 19% increase in the people’s income; (ii) the creation of 3 526 direct decent 
jobs, including 147 in agricultural development works, 2780 in entrepreneurship and SME 
strengthening activities, and 600 temporary jobs; (iii) the creation of self-promotion capacity among 
project beneficiaries in terms of rural development operations in agricultural value chains; (iv) increased 
accountability and the development of human resources, leading to better organisation of rural 
communities; and (v) promotion of small operators (workmen, craftsmen, agricultural workers, micro-
enterprises), following the experience acquired by associations from participating in works 
implementation. The number of direct and indirect project beneficiaries is estimated at 39 252 and 247 
287, respectively. The increase in income will benefit the most vulnerable rural households, as they will 
henceforth be in a better position to bear the food, health and education expenses. Overall, by improving 
living conditions, the project will help to reduce rural poverty and exodus by retaining the people, 
especially the youths, in the localities. 

3.2.8 The promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women (nearly 100 persons 
targeted) will help to develop the entrepreneurial culture among project initiators with a view to 
increasing income, creating decent jobs and promoting leadership among young people and women. 
The development of agricultural entrepreneurship will improve the attractiveness of the rural 
environment and create several production hubs in the area. This will produce concrete results and 
ensure the sustainability of the activities. The project will also facilitate the access of young promoters 
to critical materials, equipment and inputs (basic kits), depending on their business plans and areas of 
specialisation. The training will provide basic concepts and will include specialisation modules. There 
will also be tailor-made training designed to address the specific needs identified. 

IV- Implementation 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Implementation modalities: Project implementation will be overseen by an autonomous 
Project Management Unit (PMU), comprising a small team based in Boké and placed under the 
supervisory authority of the Ministry of Agriculture (MA). The Ministry shall exercise its authority 
through the National Directorate of Agriculture (DNA), which shall be responsible for the technical 
supervision. The team will be recruited through a call for candidature and will include: (i) a project 
coordinator; (ii) a responsible for monitoring and evaluation; (iii) a rural engineering specialist, 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of agricultural infrastructure works; (iv) a value chain 



 

14 

expert, specialised in farmers' organisations and gender issues; (v) an administrative and financial 
officer; (vi) a procurement specialist; and (vii) an accountant. All experts will sign a performance 
contract that will be evaluated annually. 

4.1.2 The Technical Directorates of the Ministry of Agriculture will monitor the implementation of 
operations in consultation with decentralised services. Partnership agreements will be signed with 
DNGR (infrastructure monitoring), ANPROCA (advisory support and PO), IRAG (research 
development), AGUIPE (youth employment and entrepreneurship), etc. The Strategy and Development 
Bureau (BSD) will be responsible for project external monitoring. These entities will receive capacity-
building support and will adjust their operational mechanisms, if need be, to allow close monitoring on 
the ground. An agreement will also be established with BGEEE for project environmental monitoring. 
The project will also ensure the close involvement of Prefectural Directorates of Agriculture and the 
Rural Engineering Technical Office (BTGR) of Boké and Boffa. Private service providers (enterprises, 
consulting firms, NGOs, individual consultants, etc.) will be responsible for the delivery of certain 
works, goods and services, in accordance with the procurement methods defined in the financing 
agreements. The local population will take part in some labour-intensive works (ring dike, hedgerows 
and routine maintenance), under the supervision of specialised NGOs and with the support of the 
Directorate General of Forests and Wildlife. 

4.1.4 Supervision of activities: A Steering Committee will be set up, chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture or a designated representative. The Committee’s secretarial services will be provided by the 
Project Coordinator. In addition to the relevant technical directorates of the Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Steering Committee will comprise (indicative only) designated representatives of MPDE, MEF, 
MASPFE, ME, MPAEM, MEEF, METFPET, MC, MIPSP, and representatives of the Chamber of 
Agriculture and CNOP-G, the private sector and civil society. Its function will include: (i) monitoring 
the project implementation; (ii) ensuring coherence and planning of eligible activities; (iii) conducting 
the annual review of the progress report, and approving the annual technical programme and budget; 
(iv) evaluating the project impact; (v) identifying constraints to and opportunities for improving the 
project impact; and (vi) ensuring technical and methodological compliance with project objectives, 
PNDES objectives and relevant sector policies, including the PNIASAN and the rice development 
strategy. The Steering Committee will meet twice a year to review project outcomes, validate financial 
statements, discuss programmes and approve the related budgets.  

4.1.5 Procurement. Goods, works and consultancy services financed by the Bank will be procured 
in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Financed Operations (AfDB Procurement 
Policy), October 2015 edition, and the provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. In line with this 
policy and following various evaluations conducted, it was agreed that procurement of goods, works 
and services under the project be made using the Bank's procurement system (AfDB System). 

4.1.6 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): In order to take project specificities 
into account, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at country, sector and project levels; and (ii) the capacity of 
the executing agencies. The outcomes of these assessments pointed to the existence of a substantial level 
of procurement risk. Therefore, the Bank's procurement methods and procedures will be used for project 
implementation, with the understanding that the capacity development action plan proposed in 
paragraph B.5.9 of Annex B5, Volume 2, will be discussed with the Guinean authorities so that the latter 
may carry out the reforms identified as necessary to expedite the use of the national procurement system. 

4.1.7 Financial management: Given that the public management system in force at the Ministry of 
Agricultural was deemed unsatisfactory upon assessment, a parallel accounting system based on the 
SYSCOHADA accrual accounting method will be set up and managed by the PMU responsible for 
project administrative, financial and accounting management. In addition to the other experts, the PMU 
in charge of PATAG EAJ will comprise an administrative and financial officer (AFO) who will have at 
his/her disposal the management tools that were procured under the PATAG EAJ PPF. These tools, 
comprising the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual, and the accounting 



 

15 

management software, will be developed and staff trained in their use. The AFO will produce quarterly 
financial monitoring reports providing details on the implementation of project activities and the use of 
financial resources, and an annual financial statements consisting of the balance sheet, the consolidated 
financial statements, the status of the capital assets and notes to the financial statements to which the 
reconciliation statement of the special account will be appended. Training on Bank financial 
management requirements will be provided by Bank experts at the project launch.  

4.1.8 Disbursements: Project financial implementation will mainly involve the reimbursement, 
special account and direct payment methods. An account will be opened with a commercial bank 
acceptable to the Bank to receive part of the TSF loan resources and will be used to finance operating 
expenses. This special account will be used for an initial advance whose amount will be determined 
based on the estimated budget for six months of project activities. The special account will be 
replenished on the same basis after the Borrower must have justified the use of at least 50% of the 
amount of the previous advance. The direct payment method will be used for disbursements relating to 
goods, services and works contracts. Training in Bank disbursement rules and procedures will be 
provided at the project launch  

4.1.9 Audit: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to African Development Fund 
financing agreements, the country shall account for the use of the resources allocated. Therefore, an 
independent and competent external audit firm will verify once a year the reliability of the consolidated 
annual financial statements prepared by the project management team, and will assess the functioning 
of the internal oversight system of the entire project. The audit firm will be recruited according Bank 
terms of reference and following a competitive bidding procedure prescribed by the Bank. The terms of 
reference shall be subject to the Bank’s prior approval. The continuation of audit services during the 
last two years will be contingent on the Bank's validation of the audit report for the first year. The audit 
expenses will be financed with ADF resources. Audit reports will be forwarded to the Bank yearly latest 
six months following the close of the audited fiscal year.  

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The project’s monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be 
integrated into the PNIASAN monitoring mechanism of the Ministry of Agriculture. It will be designed 
taking into account the common target indicators adopted in the project logical framework to enable the 
production of homogeneous and regular information (on a half-yearly basis) on the operations. The 
baseline situation will be consolidated through the Project Preparation Facility (PPF), with gender-
disaggregated data. This system will be participatory and will provide regular information on 
performance and impact indicators, as well as on the implementation of activities planned. The project 
partners will be systematically involved in the data collection and monitoring effort. A baseline situation 
will be established, based on the final hydro-agricultural sites selected. The monitoring and evaluation 
framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to highlight the impacts on women, 
young people and the most vulnerable groups. Targeted surveys will also be conducted to better 
understand issues relating to income, food security, nutrition, job creation, gender mainstreaming,  
vulnerability, and resilience. The information collected will be fed into the computerized monitoring 
and evaluation system to capture actual values and gauge project impacts and outcomes. This 
information will be recorded in periodic progress reports, highlighting the level of project progress and 
the achievement of outcomes. External monitoring and evaluation missions involving the relevant sector 
departments and the Strategy and Development Bureau (BSD) will also be organised regularly by the 
Government, in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the African Development 
Bank with support from its Conakry Office. The ESMP will be monitored by the Guinean 
Environmental Studies and Evaluation Bureau (BGEEE). 

  



 

16 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule: 
 
Activities  Date/Period   Responsibility 
Preparation July 2018  AfDB/Govt. 
Preparation of the ESMF September 2018  AfDB 
Appraisal 2nd half September 2018  AfDB/Govt. 
Preparation of priority PDs and BDs 4th quarter 2018  AfDB/Govt./PPF PMU  
Establishment of the PMU December 2018  Govt./AfDB 
PATAG EAJ negotiation 17 October 2018  Govt./AfDB 
Board presentation 16 November 2018  AfDB 
Signing of the financing agreement December 2018  AfDB/Govt.  
Effectiveness of first  disbursement January 2019  Govt./AfDB 
Launch of PATAG EAJ January 2019  AfDB/Govt./PMU 
Signing of agreements with partners 1st quarter 2019  PMU/Partners/TS 
Preparation of remaining PDs and BDs 1st half 2019  PMU/MAEP 
Works implementation and services 2019 to 2022  Contractors/Firms/PMU 
Implementation of operational activities 2019 to 2022  PMU/Govt./Service Providers  
Midterm review 1st quarter 2021  AfDB/Govt./PMU 
Project completion date 31 December 2022  PMU/Govt./AfDB 
Completion report 1st quarter 2023  AfDB/Govt. 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1 Indicators of political, economic and social governance remain mixed in Guinea, despite the 
strides made in recent years. The country’s weak performance in terms of governance and combatting 
corruption generally translates into a higher frequency of political and institutional hazards. The trend 
of the corruption perception index indicates that despite the slight improvements witnessed over the 
past five years (2012-2017), the situation remains virtually unchanged. Guinea is ranked 148th out of 
180 countries with an average score of 25, compared with a regional average of 34. 

4.3.2 As part of PATAG EAJ implementation, and with a view to mitigating the risks inherent in the 
weaknesses highlighted, capacity building for actors and institutional support are envisaged as a means 
of contributing to sector good governance. Furthermore, it was decided that financial management and 
monitoring/evaluation tools would be developed and the PMU team recruited through a call for 
candidature prior to project start up. In addition, although progress has been made in aligning the 
procurement system on WAEMU guidelines, the sluggishness of the procurement system is one of the 
major weaknesses encountered during the implementation of development projects. With regard to 
procurement, operational arrangements were adopted to address the weaknesses observed.  

4.4. Sustainability  

The sustainability of project investments mainly relates to the beneficiaries' ability to regularly and 
sustainably maintain and manage the infrastructure. In this regard, the project will pay special attention 
to the quality and sustainability of the facilities that will be put in place. Transformative works will be 
carried out based on detailed technical studies and using qualified companies or specialised jobbers. 
Other activities that will contribute to the sustainability of structures relate to the security of tenure over 
the land needed for the structures, support for the organisation of beneficiaries, provision of 
management tools to ensure better maintenance, support of recurrent costs of infrastructure (hydro-
agricultural development, markets, shops, farm road, etc.), and strengthening the structuring of 
producers both men and women. The management committees will be offered technical skills, for the 
introduction of an annual fee that allows the management of facilities and building maintenance fund. 
The managerial, accounting and logistical capacity of these entities will be built to enable them, upon 
project completion and in the long term, to become autonomous enterprises capable of initiating income-
generating activities in such areas as maintenance of structures, mechanics, transportation, agricultural 
product processing, etc. Moreover, the developments will enhance the people's adaptation and resilience 
capacity in the face of recurrent climate risks, as well as reduce the economic vulnerability of the 



 

17 

beneficiaries. The strong motivation observed among the beneficiaries during field missions is a factor 
that guarantees the sustainability of the facilities and the participation of beneficiaries in all activities 
and maintenance works. Other project activities that will contribute to its sustainability include land 
security for the facilities, support for the organisation of beneficiaries and the availability of 
management tools to ensure better maintenance, support of the recurrent costs of infrastructure (hydro-
agricultural development, markets, shops, farm roads, etc.), and strengthening of producer 
organisations. In addition, the activities included in the rural entrepreneurship promotion, 
transformation and market access components will generate value added and wealth, which are factors 
that would foster the ownership of project developments by the direct beneficiaries. 

4.5. Risk Management  

Besides the risk posed to this project and to other operations of the portfolio (i.e. the risk of political 
instability coupled with a difficult economic situation), several other risks were identified, for which 
mitigation measures are proposed. 

Risk Mitigation Measure Level 
Political instability, coupled with a 
difficult economic situation  

Contribution to improving socioeconomic and environmental 
resilience for greater stability. High 

Low mobilisation of counterpart resources   Counterpart resources limited to providing premises and paying the salaries of project employees. Low 

Inadequate commitment on the part of 
technical services of the relevant 
Ministries and weak capacity of the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 

Prior involvement of technical services in PPF preparation from the 
project preparation phase; provision of support and capacity 
building services; recruitment of PCU staff on a competitive basis 
and establishment of performance contracts. 

Low 

Procurement and works implementation 
delays  

Enhancement of quality-at-entry through the use of the PPF 
mechanism; use of the delegated contracting management method 
(this will be confirmed at the end of the evaluation mission); and 
use of the community labour system. 

Moderate 

Inadequate ownership by the beneficiaries 

Involvement of beneficiaries in the selection of sites, clarification 
of land tenancy through an inclusive social assessment process, 
structuring and training of Management and Maintenance 
Committees 

Moderate 

Risks of conflicts between farmers and 
transhumant herders 

Involvement of municipalities in the management of cattle 
corridors, development of reception areas for transhumant herders 
and protection of facilities. 

Moderate 

Weaknesses in financial management and 
monitoring/evaluation 

Prior preparation of the procedures manual and establishment of the 
monitoring and evaluation mechanism as part of the PPF. Moderate  

4.6. Knowledge Building  

PATAG EAJ operations that will lead to better knowledge management and building may be 
summarised as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in local community resilience and 
adaptability to the recurrent impacts of climate change, through hydro-agricultural works and better 
water resource management; (ii) dissemination of new production and processing technologies: 
dissemination of improved seeds and resilient farming techniques, development of drip irrigation and 
solar pumping techniques, dissemination of new technologies for processing agricultural products,  and 
promotion of mechanisation; (iii) the establishment of demonstration units and the dissemination of best 
practice will help to protect and preserve resources, and mitigate the vulnerability of soil resources; (iv) 
support for quality improvement and labelling/certification will help to ensure compliance with norms 
and standards that promote access to new markets; (v) organisation of workshops and exchange of visits, 
as tools for interaction between researchers, support staff and producers for the purpose of adapting 
technologies to the local context;  (vi) conduct of awareness and information campaigns through various 
communication channels (community radios, media programmes, websites, films, etc.); and (vi) 
promotion of innovative youth and women's employability actions. 

  



 

18 

V- Legal Framework  

5.1. Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a Grant Protocol Agreement and a Loan Agreement signed 
between the Republic of Guinea, on the one hand, and the African Development Bank and the African 
Development Fund (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Fund"), on the other hand, acting as 
administrators of the Transition Support Facility (TSF). 

5.2. Conditions Associated with ADF Intervention, in its Capacity as Administrator of the 
 Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

5.2.1 Effectiveness: The effectiveness the TSF Loan Agreement will be subject to the fulfilment by 
the Borrower, to the satisfaction of the Fund, of the conditions set out in Section 12.01 of the General 
Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the African Development 
Fund (Sovereign Entities) of February 2009.  

The TSF Grant Protocol Agreement will become effective on the date of its signature by the parties, in 
accordance with Section 10.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Protocol 
Agreements Relating to Grants from the African Development Fund (Sovereign Entities) of February 
2009. 

5.2.2 Disbursement: In addition to the respective effectiveness of the financing agreements, the first 
disbursement of the TSF loan and the TSF grant will be subject to the fulfilment of the following 
conditions by the Borrower/Donee, to the Fund’s satisfaction: 

(i) Provide evidence of the establishment of the Project Management Unit (PMU) in Boké 
Region, under the supervision of the Executing Agency; and 

(ii) Provide supporting documents attesting to the recruitment of key members of the Project 
Management Unit, including: (i) a coordinator; (ii) an administrative and financial manager; 
and (iii) a procurement specialist, whose qualifications and terms of reference will have 
been deemed acceptable by the Fund. 

5.2.3 Institutional arrangements: The Borrower/Donee undertakes to put the following 
institutional arrangements in place: 

(i) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, provide 
supporting documents attesting to the PMU’s recruitment of: (i) monitoring and evaluation 
specialist; (ii) a rural engineering specialist in charge of technical monitoring of 
infrastructure construction; (iii) a value chain specialist for youth entrepreneurship and 
farmers' organisation; and (iv) an accountant, whose qualifications and terms of reference 
will have been deemed acceptable by the Fund; 

(ii) Maintain the PMU established under the supervision of the Executing Agency in  Boké 
Region, until project completion; 

(iii) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, provide 
supporting documents attesting to the establishment of the Project Steering Committee, 
which will be specifically charged with monitoring project activities; and 

(iv) Within three (3) months following the first loan/grant disbursement, provide supporting 
documents attesting to the appointment of Project Steering Committee members, including 
a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture who will chair the Committee. 



 

19 

5.2.4. Other conditions. The Borrower/Donee also undertakes: 

(i) Within three (3) months following the first loan/grant disbursement, to develop and submit 
to the Fund the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and an 
accounting management software package, the terms of which will have been deemed 
satisfactory to the Fund; and 

(ii) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, to submit copies 
of the conventions and protocols signed with: (i) the National Directorate of Rural 
Engineering (DNGR); (ii) the National Rural Promotion and Agricultural Advisory Agency 
(ANPROCA); (iii) the Institute of Agricultural Research of Guinea (IRAG); (iv) the 
Guinean Employment Promotion Agency (AGUIPE); and (v) the Guinea Environmental 
Studies and Evaluation Bureau (BGEEE), the terms of which will have been deemed 
satisfactory by the Fund. 

5.2.5 Environmental and social safeguards clauses: The applicable provisions will be provided in 
the Grant Protocol Agreement and the Loan Agreement. 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  It will be implemented as part of the Bank's 
intervention strategy in Guinea, as defined in the CSP (2018-2022). 

VI- Recommendation 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed award of a UA 4.63 
million loan and a UA 3.24 million grant from the Supplemental Support Window (Pillar I) of the 
Transitional Support Facility, to the Republic of Guinea, for the purpose and according to conditions 
set out in this report. 

 

























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK


 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME: INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT 

PROGRAMME FOR AGRICULTURAL SECTORS (PADIDFA) 

COUNTRY: KINGDOM OF MOROCCO 

 

Appraisal Report 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

May 2018 

 

PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 

INSTRUMENT:     Sector Budget Support 

PBO DESIGN MODEL:      Programme-Based Support Operations  

 

 

LOAN/ GRANT INFORMATION  

Client Information  

BORROWER:      Government of Morocco 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 
 

Financing Plan 

 

Source Amount (EUR) Instrument 
 

AfDB 
 

200 million 
 

Loan 

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 
 

Loan currency Euro (EUR)  

Type of Loan Fully flexible loan 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years) 

Grace period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Weighted average maturity  To be determined (depending on amortization profile, 

maturity and grace period) 
Reimbursement  Equal half-yearly instalments after the grace period or 

profile adapted to borrower's needs 
Interest rate  Base rate + Funding margin + Lending spread + Maturity 

premium (this interest rate must be greater than or equal to 

zero) 

Base rate Floating (EURIBOR 6 months revised every 1st February 

and 1st August) 
A free-floating option is available to set the base rate.  

Funding margin The Bank’s funding margin revised every 1st January and 

1st July and applied every 1st February and 1st August with 

the base rate 

Lending spread 80 basis points (8.8%) 

Maturity premium To be determined:  

-       0% if weighted average maturity <= 12.75 years  

-       0.10% if 12.75<weighted average maturity <= 15 years  

-       0.20% if weighted average maturity <= 15 years 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount, payable by the date of signature 

of the loan agreement  

Commitment fee  0.25% per year of the non-disbursed amount, starting to 

accrue 60 days after the date of signature of the loan 

agreement and payable on the set payment dates 

Base rate conversion option* Besides the free base rate fixing option, the borrower may 

revert to the floating rate or reset all or part of the disbursed 

loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Rate cap or collar option* The borrower may cap or collar the base rate for all or part 

of the disbursed loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Loan currency conversion 

option* 

The borrower may change the currency of all or part of its 

disbursed or undisbursed loan to another Bank loan 

currency. Transaction fees apply. 

 



 

v 

 

Implementation Schedule - Key Milestones (planned) 

Programme approval 15 May 2018 

Effectiveness 30 June 2018 

First disbursement 30 July 2018 

Second disbursement  30 July 2019 

Mid-term review 15 January 2019 

Programme closure 31 December 2019 

 

  



 

vi 

 

PROGRAMME EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

Programme 

Overview 

Programme Name: Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural 

Sectors in Morocco (PADIDFA).  

Scope and Sector: National Territory / Inter-sector.  

Overall Schedule: May 2018 – December 2019.  

Operational instrument /Financing: Sector Budget Support / EUR 200 million to be disbursed in two 

tranches (2018 and 2019). 

Programme 

Outcomes 

The objective of PADIDFA is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness with a view to ensuring 

inclusive and sustainable economic growth by promoting value chains, employment creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. It builds on two 

components: (1) “Support to job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 

sub-sectors” which will ensure: (i) skills development for access to employment in agricultural and agro-

industrial sectors; (ii) improvement of the investment climate and youth and female entrepreneurship in 

rural areas; and (iii) support for the structuring of agricultural sectors, processing of agricultural products, 

the development of agro-industry and exports; (2) “Support lasting rural employment through sustainable 

use of natural resources by the agricultural sector” which will ensure: (i) the strengthening of sustainable 

agricultural sector governance; (ii) improvement of water resource management to mitigate water stress 

and boost sustainability; and (iii) Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector.  

 

The implementation of these reforms will make it possible to support, by 2020, the following major 

outcomes: (i) Support to agricultural exports; (ii) Contribution to poverty reduction in rural areas; (iii) 

Mobilisation of additional private investments in the Sector Programme Contracts; (iv) Job creation for 

youth and women (nearly 3,000 jobs) ; (v) Irrigation Water Saving (a total of 990 million m3 in 2020) ; 

(vi) Extension of the use of renewable energies (solar pumping for 100,000 ha in 2020; (vii) Promotion 

of aggregation projects – PPP; (viii) Support for the establishment of four vocational guidance centres 

in rural areas; (ix) Formal recognition of all inter-professional associations in 2020 (21 inter-professional 

associations); (x) Validation of a Sustainable Development Action Plan for at least four key sectors 

(agriculture, water, energy, industry, etc.) by 2020; (xi) Annual training and qualification of nearly 300 

trainers, 2,600 graduates as young agricultural workers or technicians, and certification of approximately 

10,000 young daughters and sons of farmers benefiting from apprenticeship training. 

 

Alignment with 

Bank Priorities  

This sector budget support operation is fully aligned with the Bank's "High 5s", and directly contributes 

to creating an enabling environment for achieving the following three High 5s: "Feed Africa", "Integrate 

Africa" and "Improve the living conditions of the people of Africa". It also supports the green and 

inclusive growth objectives of the AfDB's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022.  It is perfectly consistent 

with Morocco's Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for the period 2017-2021, more particularly its Pillar II to 

"Improve living conditions through jobs for youth, women and in rural areas". PADIDFA is aligned on 

the Bank's Agriculture and Agro-Industries Sector "Feed Africa" Strategy. In particular, it supports the 

inclusive development of value chains and the sustainable promotion of strategic value chains. Lastly, 

PADIDFA is in line with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) "Investing in Gender Equality for 

Africa's Transformation", particularly on Pillar II "Economic Empowerment". PADIDFA would also 

support the thrusts of the new economic model and is fully in line with the process of establishing the 

advanced regionalization system launched by the Government. The approach emphasizes 

interdependence and complementarity between agriculture, the environment, employment, water and 

energy to promote harmonious and sustainable economic and social development.  

Needs 

Assessment and 

Rationale 

Since 2008, Morocco has undertaken structural reforms to support the Green Morocco Plan. The Bank 

contributed to the Green Morocco Plan through two budget support operations (PAMV 1 and PAPMV 

2) which generated positive results. Based on lessons learned, PADIDFA adopts a holistic approach 

aimed at stimulating intra- and inter-sector synergies and complementarities within the Green Morocco 

Plan Ecosystem (E-PMV) and between the upstream and downstream sectors of agricultural value 

chains. Emphasis is laid on interactions and complementary synergies between the Green Morocco Plan 

(PMV) and other sector strategies, with a view to achieving common and shared objectives. This 

approach involves inter-sector design and a quest for convergence and consistency between the policies 

of stakeholder ministries (agriculture, employment, environment, water, energy, industry, etc.). 

Accordingly, this operation is a truly inclusive and sustainable ecosystem for the Green Morocco 

Plan. Based on these considerations, the proposed support programme would represent a new generation 

of inter-sector budget support. Essentially, it will engage in selective and optimal targeting of the main 

components of E-PMV in a bid to support accelerated, inclusive and sustainable growth, amplify the 

dynamics driven by PAPMV 1 and 2, consolidate the achievements made and strengthen stakeholder 

mobilization to attain the appropriate objectives. It is not a mere counterpart to the implementation of a 

reform package. Rather, it fully fits into the national sustainable development policy and proposes to 



 

vii 

 

bring real value added to national policy implementation by systematically strengthening the 

convergence and overall consistency of sector policies relevant to the agricultural and rural sector.  

Harmonisation 

During the preparation of this budget support, the Bank's team met with major donors in order to promote 

potential synergies and complementarities within the framework of this operation. Thus, this programme 

is designed in coordination with other donors, more particularly the World Bank, which recently 

approved results-based financing in December 2017 (USD 200 million) aimed at promoting agricultural 

value chains. The same applies to the European Union Delegation (D-EU) in Morocco, which supports 

the VMP in addition to other bilateral financing (in particular KfW, AFD, JICA, BTC, etc.). Generally 

speaking, donor coordination in Morocco is very satisfactory and takes the form of formal dialogue and 

exchange frameworks, of which the Bank is an active member. In addition, thematic groups, led either 

by the partners or by the administration, meet regularly to coordinate activities related to sector 

operations. 

Bank’s Value 

Added 

The rationale for PADIDFA is the importance of agriculture in the Moroccan economy and its impact 

on employment, especially women’s and youth employment in rural areas, and its role in adaptation to 

climate change and water stress. It follows upon and consolidates the two phases of support to the Green 

Morocco Plan (PAPMV-1 & 2), implemented over the 2012-2017 period, and a welter of interventions 

contribute to the inclusion and sustainability of the Green Morocco Ecosystem Plan (E-PMV) which 

require synergies and complementarities with other sectors. The promotion of agricultural sectors will 

enable Moroccan agriculture to play a pivotal role in the country's economic and social development. 

The Bank is better placed to support Morocco in the reforms of this sector given the investments it has 

financed, the numerous technical assistance operations provided and the success of the two budget 

support operations (80% of the measures fully implemented for PAPMV-1 and 91% for PAPMV-2). The 

choice of this instrument will also provide the government with the necessary financial resources to 

implement its development policy and continue its reform efforts with the Bank's support and assistance. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment   

The acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan and sustainability of its achievements will create lasting 

jobs, especially for youth and women, and build the institutional capacities of women's and youth 

organizations. This will have a positive impact on the standard of living of these target groups. Particular 

attention is paid in this programme to the capacity of agricultural sectors to generate additional 

employment, especially for rural women and youth. This requires a series of measures to improve the 

provision of training, adapt it to the needs of the rural world and promote entrepreneurship in rural areas. 

Policy Dialogue 

and Related 

Technical 

Assistance    

PADIDFA's preparation benefited from wide-ranging consultations, which enabled quality dialogue with 

all stakeholders, in particular the Moroccan authorities, trade associations, the private sector and civil 

society. These stakeholders were actively involved in the programme’s design by focusing on a 

participatory and inter-sector approach that allows the views of the sectors to be superimposed and 

potential convergences to be identified. The quest for ownership of the measures was at the heart of the 

design process. This process was reinforced during the preparation and appraisal by the organisation of 

consultation and validation workshops with all the actors concerned (seven administrative departments 

and representatives of the trade associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their relevance and the 

expected impact. This consultation will be continued during implementation through the inter-sector 

steering committee. 



   

viii 

PRELIMINARY RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and Programme Title: Morocco - Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA) 

Programme Goal: Help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, employment creation, improvement of the business climate and sustainable 
natural resource management. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS 

/MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  Baseline Situation Targets 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Improvement of agricultural 
sector competitiveness 

Value of agricultural exports MAD 21.3 billion MAD 45 billion in 2030 MEF / Global 
Competitiveness Report 

 

Improvement of the living 

conditions of rural 

communities 

Rural poverty rate  9.5 % in 2014 5% in 2030 HCP/Human Development 

Report, UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

I. Jobs created through the 
development of supported 

agricultural sub-sectors 

(support for inclusive 
development) 

 

Contribute to jobs created for the youth and 
women in rural areas 

42000  
jobs, including 38,000 in 

rural areas in 2017 

62000 jobs including 55,800 
in rural areas in 2020 

Annual HCP Report on 
Employment 

Risks:  

External shocks and unfavourable international 

economic environment/fluctuation in the prices of 

hydrocarbons and commodities 
 

Climatic hazards and extreme weather events 
 

Mitigation Measure: 

Budget supervision committee established 
 

Targeted measures: management of shortages, 

promotion of localized irrigation, etc. 

Additional training for trainers, youth and 

girls 

- 400 trainers, 2600 youths and 

10000 girls trained in 2020 

Specific training report 

(Ministry of Agriculture, 
Vocational Training). 

Private investment in the agricultural sub-
sectors supported by the programme 

- At least MAD 1 billion by 
2020 

Report from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, COMADER and 

FENAGRI 

II. Sustainable management of 

agricultural sub-sectors 
improved, to ensure the 

sustainability of jobs created 

(sustainable development 
support).  

Amount of water saved in million cubic 

metres (mm3). 

880 mm3 (cumulative 

period 2008-17) 

990 million m3 in 2020 Report from the Ministry of 

Agriculture 

Utilization of renewable energies (solar 
pumping)  

10,000 farms in 2017, or 
nearly 30,000 ha 

30,000 farms in 2020, 
representing 100,000 ha.  

Ministry of Agriculture and 
AMEE 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

I. Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors Risks: 
- Insufficient inter-sector coordination capacity 

between the various government departments 

involved in implementing programme reforms 
 

- Divergent interests of stakeholders  

 

Mitigation Measures: 

- Institution of the Steering Committee in MEF 

and strengthening of Agriculture/PMV, Water and 

Employment thematic groups 

 
- Strengthening of inter and intra-ministerial 

consultation, and creation of focal points 

 
 

I.1.  Skills development to ensure access to employment in the agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors 

Improvement of training 

tailored to private sector needs 
in rural areas 

 

Operationalisation of the Centre for 

Pedagogical Engineering and Training of 

Trainers 

Centre for Training of 

Trainers is non-existent 

One (1) engineering centre 

functional before end-2019 

Note on the centre’s 

operationalization signed by 
DEFR. 

Production of a Job-Competency Framework 

(JCF) and a Directory of Jobs and Trades 

(DJT) for the agricultural sector  

Not available JCF and DJT produced for the 

agricultural sector in 2018 
Copy of JCF and DJT  

Increased employment 

opportunities in rural areas 

Creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas 

0 in 2017 Four (4) centres established 

before end-2018 

Instruments creating the 

centres 

1.2.   Improvement of the investment climate and entrepreneurship among the youth and women in rural areas 

Acceleration of investment in 
the agricultural sector 

Transmission of the law governing the 

National Agricultural Registry (RNA) to 

the SGG 

Bill prepared Bill submitted to the SGG 
before end-2019 

Letter of transmission to the 
SGG 

Business creation support for 

the youth and women in rural 

areas 

Completion of a study on the preparation of a 

national plan for the creation of regional 

incubators and establishment of two 
incubators 

An incubator established 

in Larache 

Study conducted and less than 

two incubators established in 

2019. 

Summary report  

Improve support to sub-sector 

businesses  
Signature of a framework agreement 

between ONCA and COMADER on 

Not available Copy of the signed agreement.  



 

ix 

 

agricultural extension, training and 

support for farmers. 

Encouragement of women’s 
entrepreneurship in rural areas 

Conduct of a study on women’s 
entrepreneurship 

Not available Study and action plan 
available before end-2019 

Copy of an action plan for the 
guide 

Strengthening agricultural 

extension in the agri-food 

sectors 

Preparation and signature of a partnership 

agreement between the DIAEA and ONCA 

for the development of agricultural 

extension in irrigated areas. 

Not available Agreement signed by end-

2019 

Copy of the signed agreement 

I.3.    Support for structuring of agricultural sub-sectors, processing of agricultural products, and the development of agro-industry and exports 

Structuring of inter-
professional associations 

Continuation of the process of recognition of 
inter-professional associations  

14 out of 21 inter-
professional associations 

recognized 

21 inter-professional 
associations recognized in 

2019 

Instruments of recognition 

Establishment of Agri-food 

Processing Areas (ZTAA) for 

the development and processing 
of agricultural products 

Publication of the Order establishing the 
amounts, conditions and procedures for 

granting State financial assistance for units 
for the enhancement of fresh agricultural 

products and their by-products. 

Not available Order published before end-

2019. 

Summary note on support to 

CIAAs and copy of the signed 

Order 

Improvement of standards for 

the promotion of exports, 
particularly with African 

countries 

Order defining complementary and special 

measures to combat the Newcastle disease 

and avian influenza in order to support 

poultry exports  

Incomplete texts Draft decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Copy of the Letters of 

transmission to the SGG 

Transmission of the draft law on 

fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop 

supports to the SGG. 

Incomplete texts Draft law transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2019 

Copy of the Letter of 

Transmission to the SGG  

II. Support lasting rural employment through the sustainable use of natural resources  

II.1.     Reinforcement of Sustainable Agricultural Sector Governance 

Promotion of green governance Publication of the Decree setting up the 

sustainable development strategy committee 
before end-2018 

Not available Decree published in the OG 

before end-2018. 

Copy of the OG 

Validation of Sustainable Development 

Action Plans (PADD) in 2019  

Not available Four (4) PADD validated in 

2019 

Validation report 

II.2.   Improvement of water resource management to mitigate the water stress and boost sustainability 

Strengthening of the 

institutional framework for 

integrated water resource 
management   

Decree on the PNE, PDAIRE and Local 

Water Management Plans (2019) 

Not available Decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Decree governing the water resource 

information system 

Not available Decree prepared before end-

2019 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Improvement of adaptation to 

climate change 

Preparation of regional vulnerability indices 

and regional CC adaptation plans  

Not available Study launched in three pilot 

regions before end-2019 

Service order on the study 

II.3.   Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector 
Reduction of the carbon 

footprint and further 
empowerment of small farmers 

Presentation of the Energy Efficiency 

Strategy to the Governing Council (2030) 

Not available EE strategy presented to the 

government council before 
end-2018  

Minutes of the Government 

Council 

Strategic study on the promotion of 
renewable energy in agriculture (solar 

pumping) 

Tripartite Convention 
(MEF-AGRI-ENV) 

available 

Results of the study available 
before end-2019 

Consultation notice 
Signed agreement 

 

Key Activities:  

- Signature of loan agreements and fulfilment of effectiveness and disbursement conditions 
- Implementation of adopted reforms, Government’s half-yearly and annual reports, Bank supervision reports as well as the programme’s mid-

term review and completion reports. 

Financing:  

 ADB loan   EUR 200 million: Two disbursement tranches (2018 and 2019) 



   

x 

 

Schedule for Implementation of PADIDFA Programme Activities 

 

 

Description of Activities 
2018 2019 2020 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

1. Negotiations, Approval and Effectiveness 

Loan negotiations                                                                     

Loan approval by the Board                                                                     

Loan approval and effectiveness                                                                     

2. Programme Implementation 

Implementation of first tranche measures                                                                     

Mid-term review of the programme                                                                     

Implementation of second tranche measures                                                                     

Disbursement of the first tranche                                                                     

Disbursement of the second tranche                                                                     

Audit reports                                                                     

3. Programme Completion 

Submission of the PCR by the Government                                                                     

PCR completion mission by the Bank                                                                     

Validation of the PCR by the Bank                                                                     

 



   

1 
 

I. INTRODUCTION: PROPOSAL 

1.1. This is a proposal to grant a EUR 200 million loan to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable 

Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA). It is a sector budget support 

operation in two tranches to be executed over the 2018-2019 period to help achieve the objectives of the 

Green Morocco Plan (PMV). The programme entails consolidation and deepening of reforms already 

implemented under PAPMV-1 & 2 between June 2012 and September 2017. Its design is informed by 

lessons from Phases I and II of PAPMV (cf. 4.4.3), the principles of the Paris Declaration as well as good 

practice principles for the application of conditionality. It will supplement other programmes financed by 

the World Bank, the European Union and bilateral funds (AFD, JICA, KfW, CTB, etc. see Annex 5).  

1.2.  The programme objective is to contribute to the creation of sustainable jobs in the rural 

areas of Morocco by boosting agricultural sector competitiveness through the promotion of value 

chains, improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. 
PADIDFA is based on Morocco’s various strategic orientations and is consistent with the second pillar of 

CSP 2017-2021 by supporting the improvement of living conditions through employment for youth, 

women and rural areas.  

1.3.  The programme is intended to sustain and consolidate the achievements of the Green 

Morocco Plan, and launch its acceleration phase (2017-2020). It helps the authorities with the 

formulation and implementation of inter-sector strategic reforms to strengthen the social and 

environmental dimensions of the PMV and promote inclusion, sustainability and competitiveness in 

Morocco’s agricultural sector.  

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1. Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Since adoption of its new Constitution in July 2011, Morocco has enjoyed outstanding 

stability while implementing reforms in tandem with multiparty politics. The September 2015 

regional and municipal elections were an important step towards implementing the decentralization 

process enshrined in the new Constitution. The October 2016 parliamentary elections resulted in the 

victory of the Justice and Development Party (PJD). In March 2017, Mr. El Othmani was appointed Head 

of Government by the King and a new Government was formed on 5 April 2017.  

2.1.2 In the last decade, Morocco recorded highly satisfactory results in good governance and 

corruption control. On 28 December 2015, it adopted the National Anti-Corruption Strategy that covers 

various aspects, including the improvement of institutional and legal measures, the implementation of 

preventive and enforcement measures, and the strengthening of community education and awareness-

raising. In November 2017, the decree to establish the Anti-Corruption Commission, placed under the 

authority of the Head of the Government, was published in the Official Gazette.  

2.2. Recent Economic Trends, Macroeconomic and Budgetary Analysis 

2.2.1 In 2017, the estimated real GDP growth rate of the Kingdom of Morocco was 4.1%. That 

year was characterized by an exceptionally good agricultural season. Hence, the Ministry of Agriculture 

announced in September that the overall cereal output reached 96 million quintals (compared to 33.5 

million in 2016), representing an increase of 187%. This was the fourth best cereal output in the country 

since the launch of the Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has expanded the use of certified seeds and 

targeted areas best suited for cereal farming. Hence, real GDP growth in 2017 was largely driven by an 

increase in agricultural value added (+15.1%). The non-agricultural value added also grew, albeit at a 

slower pace (+3.1%) but at a higher rate relative to 2016 (+2.2%), driven mainly by the processing 

industries, mining and tourism. The manufacturing sector production index improved by 1.9%, the largest 

increase since 2012. This robust performance in the sector is consistent with the excellent sales trends 

abroad for all major export sectors, including aeronautics (+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics 

(+7.6%), automobile (+7.3%), textiles and leather (+6.1%).  



 

2 
 

2.2.1 Domestic consumption continues to be supported by controlled inflation and improved 

revenue.  Household consumption increased in 2017, benefiting from the positive impact of a good 

agricultural season, an increase in remittances from Moroccans in the Diaspora (+4.5%) and the creation 

of 57,000 jobs (35,000 in rural areas). With regard to public consumption, the Government's investment 

efforts were sustained in 2017, and benefited from positive trends in outstanding equipment loans 

(+11.4%) and investment spending from the State budget (+5.1%). For 2018, the primary economic 

indicators point to the continuation of investments.  

Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators - PEA, 2018 (% of GDP, unless otherwise stated) 

Indicators 2016 2017 (e) 2018 (p) 2019 (p) 

Real GDP growth 1.2 4.1 3.1 4.1 

Agricultural GDP growth -12.8 15.2 -1.0 - 

Non-agricultural GDP growth 3.1 3.0 3.6 - 

Inflation  1.6 0.9 1.8 1.9 

Budget balance (% of GDP) -4.1 -3.6 -3.0 -2.6 

Current account (% of GDP) -4.4 -4.0 -3.2 -2.9 

2.2.3 In 2017, Morocco continued its fiscal consolidation policy started in 2011. The budget deficit 

was expected to reach 3.6% of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.1% in 2016. External trade recovered in 2017 

compared to 2016, mainly due to the net decline in wheat imports (owing to increased production and a 

fiscal policy change limiting imports) and consolidation of the growth pace of exports through the 

development of the “new industries of Morocco” initiative (automobile, aeronautics and electronics). 

Despite the increase in the energy bill (+30%), imports rose at a lower rate (+5.7% compared to 7.2%) in 

2016, mainly due to the decline in grain imports (-22%). The current account deficit was estimated at 4% 

of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.4% in 2016. This improvement also stemmed from the increase in FDI 

and remittances from abroad, which rose in 2017 by +32% and +2% respectively, compared to 2016. 

Foreign exchange reserves remained at a reasonable level in 2017, i.e. approximately six months of 

import. 

2.2.4 The public debt was estimated at 64.3% of GDP in 2017 compared to 64.7% in 2016. The 

authorities have set a debt target of 60% of GDP by 2021, to be achieved through the stringent budgetary 

control policy initiated in 2013. Although the Treasury debt continued its upward trend from 2010 (its 

ratio to GDP was 63.2% in 2014 compared to 62.3% in 2013 and 49% in 2010), it started declining from 

2017. The debt ratio is expected to rise to 64% in 2018. It is worth noting that the increased debt since 

2010 stems from the recovery plan to combat the effects of the international financial crisis and the 

sluggish growth in Europe. Nevertheless, since 2013, the State has initiated a public expenditure control 

strategy to gradually reduce the budget deficit to 3% and ultimately reverse the upward trend in the debt 

volume (scenario validated by the IMF). According to the latest IMF mission (July 2017), the public debt 

will remain sustainable in the medium term mainly because its composition and structure are dominated 

by domestic debts, which account for 78% of the total debt. 

2.2.5 Morocco has an accommodating monetary policy and kept its interest rate unchanged in 

2017 (2.25%) after a decline of 0.25 point in 2016. It will be recalled that Morocco has kept its key 

interest rate low in order to stimulate its economy by encouraging credit to businesses. Inflation remained 

low at an average 0.9% in 2017, although it is expected to double to 1.8% in 2018. Furthermore, in January 

2018, Morocco announced the adoption of a new and more flexible exchange rate regime. 

2.2.6 In terms of the economic prospects for 2018, the real GDP growth rate should reach 3.1%. 

This prediction is based on an “average” agricultural season that yields a lower forecast (-0.8%) for 

agricultural value added.  Non-agricultural GDP will continue rising and is expected to reach 3.7%. The 

industrialists consulted during the economic situation survey conducted in the manufacturing sector by 

Bank Al-Maghrib expect an increased production and sales in 2018. Similarly, the forecasts for 2018 are 

also good for the tertiary sector, including tourism that grew by 32.3% in January 2018 compared to 

January 2017.  



 

3 
 

2.3. Public Finance Management 

Morocco has initiated several reforms to modernize its financial management system, as defined in 

the new Constitution adopted in 2011. In accordance with Article 75 of the Constitution, Parliament 

adopted the Organic Finance Law on 2 June 2015. This law, which went into force in 2016, has been 

gradually and progressively implemented over five years to enhance ownership of the new budgetary, 

accounting and financial rules that it advocates. The new Constitution guarantees the independence of the 

Court of Auditors and enshrines regionalization and administrative decentralization by strengthening 

control at the regional level. Accordingly, a Court of Auditors will be established in each region to carry 

out more exhaustive management control of public bodies and municipalities. 

2.4. Economic and Agricultural Sector Competitiveness 

2.4.1 According to the Davos Global Competitiveness Report, Morocco was the fifth most 

competitive economy in Africa and the first in North Africa in 2017. The Kingdom has maintained its 

ranking (71st out of 137 countries) and confirmed its significant advance made in: (i) improvement of the 

effectiveness and efficiency of institutions (49th/137); (ii) infrastructure development (54th/137); (iii) 

macroeconomic stability (55th/137) and (iv) improvement of the efficiency of goods markets, in particular 

the efficiency of the Agricultural Policy, which ranks Morocco 16th/137.   

2.4.2 This economic performance stems from considerable efforts made by the authorities to 

implement structural reforms that accelerate the transformation of the country’s economic model 

and industrialization. In 2016, manufacturing sector exports accounted for 70.1% of total exports, 

compared to 65.8% in 2005. In 2017, export from Morocco’s “global industries”, such as aeronautics 

(+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics (+7.6%) and automobile (+7.3%) increased remarkably.  

2.4.3  Despite these economic diversification and sophistication efforts, the agricultural sector 

still accounts for a significant share of the Kingdom’s GDP (14%) and its performance, which is 

highly sensitive to climatic fluctuations, considerably affects the country’s economic growth (see §2.2.1). 

Nevertheless, the agricultural sector holds enormous potential in terms of development and job creation 

owing to its structuring of value chains and improvement of product quality (ADB, 2016).  

2.4.4 The agricultural sector has experienced sustained growth since implementation of the 

Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has boosted sector competitiveness. Since 2008, the Plan has helped 

to increase: (i) the irrigated surface area by over 25% (137,000 ha); and (ii) the fruit and vegetable yield 

by 70%. Exports of agri-food products increased sharply to over USD 4.8 billion in 2016, representing a 

280% rise since 2001 (and more than 170% since 2008). Despite growing competition, especially from 

countries of the Mediterranean basin, Morocco is ranked among the five leading exporters of several 

products. Mindful of the importance of the sector and of the underlying issues, Morocco 

triggered the acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan (APMV) in 2016 as an instrument for 

implementing the agricultural strategy, with emphasis on the agricultural downstream, 

promotion of agricultural value chains and convergence with other complementary sectors. 

2.4.5 Besides, competitiveness gains are possible because agricultural value chains remain little 

developed and fragmented. Agricultural production is characterized by the coexistence of a large 

number of small-sized farms (70% of the 1.5 million farms have a surface area below 5 ha), the low 

quality of their output, little market integration and a limited number of large farms with high value added 

whose output is mainly exported. In fact, the 1.5 million farms only account for 4% of exports, while the 

agribusiness sector, which is less labour-intensive (60,000 workers), accounts for 2%. 

  



 

4 
 

2.5. Inclusive Growth, Poverty Situation and Social Context 

2.5.1 Efforts made to reduce social inequalities and poverty are beginning to bear fruit, with an 

estimated poverty rate of 4.2% in 2014. This result is the culmination of many reforms initiated in the 

1990s. Poverty is on the decline but remains rooted in rural areas. The constitutional reform of 2011 

promotes the universal character of the social safety nets. Since then, reforms are aimed at improving the 

coverage and efficiency of the social protection system, particularly regarding pensions, unemployment 

and health insurance. Nevertheless, this mechanism affects only a fraction of the population due to its 

fragmented targeting and the lack of an integrated strategy. In 2016, the authorities announced the 

establishment of a single identifier, coupled with the institution of a social identifier to improve targeting 

by 2021.  

2.5.2 Morocco has also made significant efforts to achieve the SDGs, especially SDG4, although 

major challenges remain in terms of the secondary education dropout rate and efficient support to 

out-of-school youth. The country has almost achieved universal primary education and significantly 

reduced the literacy rate for youth aged 15-24 by 10.8% (HCP, 2018). However, the school dropout 

phenomenon and its management by the authorities remains a concern particularly in secondary 

education. Although data from the Ministry of Education shows a decrease in the dropout rate, the number 

of dropouts remained significant at 279,177 compared to 329,618 in 2016.  

2.5.3 The persistent dropout rate and the poor diversification of the Moroccan economy tend to 

create structural unemployment for the youth and women, and increases underemployment in 

rural areas. In 2017, net job creation by the Moroccan economy was estimated at 86,000 jobs, comprising 

32,000 in urban areas and 54,000 in rural areas, relative to a loss of 37,000 in 2016 especially in the 

agricultural sector. This is far from the target of 200,000 annual jobs referred to in the National 

Employment Strategy. Hence, the unemployment rate rose from 9.9% in 2016 to 10.2% in 2017. In rural 

areas, underemployment affects 10.8% of rural workers. Young people aged 14-24 are still the most 

vulnerable to unemployment at a rate of 26.5%, followed by graduates at 17.9%, and women at 14.7%. 

The low level of qualification for the youth who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) 

confines them to precarious jobs with little pay and no future prospects (approximately two thirds of 

employees have no work contract and almost 78.4% have no health insurance). Similarly, the poor 

matching of training to employment is one of the causes of unemployment among graduates from non-

technical disciplines who predominantly come from the faculties of social sciences. Such graduates leave 

school with skills for which there is no demand in the domestic labour market and especially in the 

agricultural sector. Difficulties in ensuring the socio-professional integration of the youth prevent 

households from investing in education and fuel the school dropout rate.  

2.5.4  The agricultural sector employs 40% of the labour force and over 93.2% of the female 

labour force in rural areas, thus playing a major economic, social and environmental role.  The 

agricultural value added to the national economy increased by 13.5% in October 2017, thus by 3.9% year 

on year, compared to +1% during the same period in 2016 (HCP). In the third quarter of 2017, the 

agricultural sector (including fisheries and forestry) grew by 1.3%, creating a further 47,000 jobs 

nationally (40,000 in rural areas and 7,000 in urban areas), compared to losses of 75,000 jobs in 2014, 

27,000 in 2015 and 66,000 in 2016. The agro-industrial sector employed 143,000 people in 2016 with an 

output mainly destined for the domestic market. This sector has 2,050 industrial units composed largely 

of SMEs. Agricultural exports accounted for approximately 12% of all industrial goods exported in 2016. 

Hence, the sector accounted for 5% of national GDP in 2016, representing almost 27% of industrial GDP 

with a value added of approximately MAD 30 billion. 

2.5.5. Lastly, challenges in terms of gender inequality and the inclusion of small farmers in 

agricultural value chains persist. Women usually hold unskilled and non-permanent jobs with no 

social insurance. According to HCP data, over 93.2% of the rural female labour force is recruited by the 

agricultural sector, which often employs them as seasonal or occasional workers while men hold longer-

term jobs. Although the presence of women at decision-making levels is increasingly affirmed, women 

are still confined to labour-intensive manual tasks that require no special skills while men occupy the 

more skilled positions. These inequalities are also observed in income distribution because women earn 



 

5 
 

less than men and the number of women entrepreneurs in agricultural and agribusiness value chains 

remains insignificant. Unpaid employment is estimated to account for 40% of rural jobs (ILO 2014) and 

concerns 74% of the female labour force and 68% of young people aged below 25 years. These differences 

limit women's opportunities to access skills development and entrepreneurship, increase their 

vulnerability in the labour market and further relegate them to the informal sector. 

III. GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

3.1 Government’s Development Strategy and Medium-Term Reform Priorities 

3.1.1 Morocco has adopted a series of sector plans to accelerate growth, ensure sustainability 

and promote inclusion. The strategies marshalled are aimed at modernizing traditional sectors such as 

agriculture and fishing, and developing innovative sectors like renewable energy and services with high 

value added (industry, etc.). 

3.1.2 In 2008, the Government rolled out its 2030 Strategic Vision for the agricultural sector and 

initiated the Green Morocco Plan. The objective of the Plan is to boost agricultural productivity and 

increase exports and private investment in the sector. The Plan will help to combat poverty, ensure food 

security and equip the Kingdom with the skills needed to cope with vagaries of the weather and preserve 

its natural resources (water, soil and energy). 

3.1.3 The agricultural sector is also targeted by several other strategies. The National Industrial 

Acceleration Plan for 2014-2020 is aimed at integrating agricultural value chains to support the agri-food 

sector through the promotion and restructuring of strategic sectors (including staple food crops and export 

crops) by supporting the development of agropoles (integrated logistic platforms). Furthermore, the 

National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD) 2015-2030, the National Water Strategy 2009-2030 

and the National Energy Efficiency Strategy 2008-2030 focus on sustainable natural resource 

management and protection. Consequently, there is need for a systemic vision to support the 

sustainability and inclusion of the Green Morocco Plan Ecosystem. In this regard, PADIDFA, which 
is consistent with all the above strategies and with the Government Gender Equality Plan (GEP), 

advocates inter-sector coordination and is fully in line with the process of establishing the advanced 

regionalization system.  

3.2 Constraints to Implementation of the National/Sector Development Programme  

3.2.1 The growth diagnostic (conducted by the Bank in collaboration with the authorities and 

MCC) identifies poor coordination between economic stakeholders as one of the constraints to 

private investment. There are numerous public policies aimed at accelerating Morocco’s economic 

transformation and the development of value chains. However, the lack of coordination between public 

entities (agencies and ministries), private stakeholders (within value chains) and between the public and 

private sectors (promotion of trade agreements, for example) has a negative impact on the expected 

outcomes of public action. This problem is fundamental to agricultural development. The development of 

this sector requires support for concerted nationwide action at different levels, namely: (i) collaboration 

between the various departments of the Ministry of Agriculture; (ii) inter-ministerial coordination; and 

(iii) coordination between central and decentralized structures. For natural resources, such coordination 

involves the development of transversal governance and planning tools for the concerted monitoring of 

natural resource utilisation. 

3.2.2 The growth diagnostic identifies human capital as a major constraint to more inclusive and 

robust growth. The agricultural sector faces three major challenges: (1) the skills developed should be 

tailored to the needs of sector stakeholders - the involvement of inter-professional associations in the 

training cycle and the streamlining of higher education are essential in this case;  (2) research and 

development by public training-research structures must satisfy the needs of sector stakeholders; and (3) 

the adult population with a low human capital should not be excluded from value chain development. The 

development of human capital through agricultural vocational training in the regions is essential to 

improve the quality of the workforce, enhance salaried employment and promote self-employment. 



 

6 
 

Furthermore, there are other challenges to the encouragement of investment in agriculture, namely: (1) 

the low level of investment due to the fact that farm sizes in Morocco are limited by land tenure insecurity 

in rural areas as well as problems of joint ownership and fragmentation; (2) the lack of greater investor 

visibility in the agricultural sector; (3) the need for better promotion of recourse to PPPs; (4) the lack of 

dedicated logistics platforms that enable the private sector to develop synergies; (5) the lack of 

mechanisms that  enable small farmers to come together and offer a common service of sufficient 

magnitude to other stakeholders in the chain; and (6) the need to strengthen advisory services (with private 

initiatives) to support agricultural production (in terms of quality and quantity). 

3.2.3 Land tenure policy that facilitates investment in agriculture. Land tenure is one of the major 

obstacles that investors face. In particular, the growth diagnostic shows that the frequent lack of land titles 

in the agricultural sector limits investment by farmers and consequently undermines agricultural sector 

transformation.  Several projects have been initiated to address this constraint. One example is the public-

private partnership operation intended to make land of sufficient size available to private investors for a 

relatively long lease period. At the end of 2016, a surface area of 111,000 ha was made available to 

investors (particularly in the agropoles), who have ended up making actual investments of nearly MAD 

14 million on the ground; i.e. 95% of planned investments. Furthermore, to address the constraint of land 

fragmentation and improve the management of small farms, aggregation around private stakeholders or 

professional organizations with significant managerial capacity was adopted and implemented. This 

model yields a win-win partnership between the productive upstream and the commercial and industrial 

downstream.  

3.2.4 Resource overexploitation is a concern for Moroccan authorities. From an environmental 

standpoint, the agricultural sector is currently the bedrock of sustainable development in Morocco, given 

that it is the primary user of water and land resources, and one of the main users of energy resources 

directly (pumping, mechanical tools) or indirectly (fertilizers). In fact, agriculture uses 80 to 85% of the 

country's water resources. Another challenge for the sector is the achievement of sustainable growth 

through agriculture, considering the fragility of natural resources. This problem is even more acute as 

Morocco is encountering water stress. Rainfall is very low and the water is unevenly distributed among 

the various regions. The national water context is marked by increasingly growing scarcity, mainly due 

to climate change, irrational use and population growth. Morocco's natural water resources are among the 

lowest in the world.  This potential is estimated at the equivalent of 700 m3/inh./year and this quantity 

could drop to 520 m3, compared to the critical threshold of 1000 m3/inh./year. Therefore, it is necessary 

to manage water demand efficiently by planning investments, synchronizing with dam water resources, 

controlling water extraction and organizing stakeholders, while stimulating the search for new non-

conventional water resources. The issue of land and energy management, particularly the use of 

subsidized butane gas by this sector, is also the focus of attention. In this regard, there is a growing national 

advocacy for increased use of solar pumping. 

3.2.5 Finally, particular attention should be given to rural women, who hold 61% of jobs in the 

sector. The inclusive transformation of this sector is possible only if special attention is paid to rural 

women who are considered fragile stakeholders. 

3.3 Consultation and Participatory Process 

Stakeholders were actively involved in programme design through a participatory and inter-sector 

approach that allowed for consideration of views of various sectors and identification of potential 

convergences. The quest for ownership of measures informed programme design. Stakeholders 

concerned (various administrative entities, representatives of professionals, private operators, civil 

society, etc.) were involved throughout the process. This process was reinforced during the preparation 

phase through the organization of a consultation workshop with all stakeholders (seven administrative 

departments and representatives of inter-professional associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their 

relevance and impact. A workshop on the ownership of measures involving civil society and the private 

sector, organized during the appraisal, made it possible to agree on common ground, find a better basis 

for addressing the interests of stakeholders, and produce a validated matrix of measures and programme 

performance indicators. This consultation will be continued during implementation phase through the 

inter-sector steering committee. 



 

7 
 

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1. Linkage with the Bank Strategy  

4.1.1 This budget support programme falls under the second pillar of CSP 2017-2021 for 

Morocco, namely “improving living conditions through employment for the youth, women and 

rural areas”. It contributes to the achievement of three of the High 5s, namely: “Feed Africa”, “Integrate 

Africa” and "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". It pursues the green and inclusive 

growth objectives of the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022 and is fully consistent with the 2016-

2025 Feed Africa Strategy (agricultural transformation through value chains development) as well as the 

Bank’s other sector strategies (including youth employment, the water and energy strategies, etc.). 

PADIDFA is also part of the Strategic Framework and Governance Action Plan 2014-2018 (GAP II). 

4.1.2  The Programme is justified by: (i) the importance of ensuring the sustainability of  

Morocco Green Plan (PMV) achievements and supporting its acceleration phase; (ii) the magnitude 

of the financial needs created by the reforms implemented by the PMV and associated sectors 

(environment, water, energy and employment); (iii) the urgency of instituting rational natural resource 

management (through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD), the 

implementation of the Sustainable Development Action Plan (PADD) in the agricultural and associated 

sectors, management of the water stress and disruption of the water resources balance, and the insufficient 

development of agricultural products and clean energies); (iv) insufficient inclusive development (social 

inclusion based on age, gender and geography; insufficient creation of employment particularly in the 

agro-industry ecosystem, etc.); (v) poor promotion of value chains, limited empowerment of inter-

professional associations and low private sector involvement; and (vi) the urgency of addressing the 

demands of unemployed young graduates and marginalized rural women. The programme is also fully 

consistent with the advanced regionalization and inter-sector convergence process to sustain and support 

the impact of PMV and the PMV acceleration phase initiated in 2017. 

4.2. Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

4.2.1  As presented in the previous chapters, Morocco enjoys a political and economic 

environment that is conducive to the use of the reform support instrument. The country has also 

demonstrated its commitment to the sector reform process, particularly in the agricultural sector (see 

Annexs 3 and 5). 

4.2.2  Furthermore, from the fiduciary standpoint, the country meets the eligibility criteria. The 

performance assessment results of Morocco’s PFM systems obtained in 2016 using the PEFA 

methodology (including public procurement) confirm that the country fiduciary risk level is moderate. 

According to the report, the main conditions for budgetary and financial discipline have been met, 

especially budget reliability and the achievement of set stability objectives. It specifies that more strategic 

public resource allocation remains a priority objective for the Government and that this objective is central 

to the reform programme currently being implemented. Lastly, it points out that the current public finance 

management system contributes only moderately to the improvement of public service quality, which is 

why the LOF introduces a performance-based approach and provides for objectives and indicators for 

measuring the quality of services. 

4.2.3 The public finance management and procurement framework has undergone significant 

reforms in recent years to attain international standards, as reflected in satisfactory fiduciary 

assessments conducted by the Bank and other partners. In particular, the Bank recently assessed 

Morocco's national public procurement system in November 2017 using the OECD/DAC methodology 

and the fiduciary risk for the procurement component at the national level was deemed moderate. The 

evaluation report of the national procurement system was validated with the participation of the major 

public procurement stakeholders and the key technical and financial partners. 

 

 



 

8 
 

4.3. Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

4.3.1 Since 2010, a donor coordination process has been conducted by the Ministry of 

Agriculture (Directorate for Strategy and Statistics-DSS) to coordinate PMV support. Regular 

meetings are held in the presence of technical and financial partners. The Bank plays an important role in 

this process through its country office (COMA). Hence, the design of PADIDFA was characterized by 

sustained consultation with the DSS and close coordination with partners, particularly the World Bank, 

the European Union, French Cooperation (AFD) and Belgian Cooperation (CTB). Considering the 

programming schedules, parallel financing was recommended. Furthermore, Moroccan authorities 

harmonize interventions through the MEF. The design of this programme took into consideration 

complementarity with the other TFPs, especially the World Bank, which operates in the same field. 

Additional measures were recommended, including processing zones, the establishment of an agricultural 

register and strengthening of agricultural extension (supported by the EU). 

4.3.2 In the water sector, coordination between the various donors is done through a thematic 

group established in 2011. This thematic group meets regularly to discuss sector trends, and to seek 

greater coordination and harmonization of sector interventions. The Bank has led this thematic group 

together with the AFD and the World Bank since 2016. 

4.3.3 In the areas of training and employment, the Working Group on Youth (2016) and donor 

coordination on education and training (initiated in 2008) are the discussion platforms for 

employment and training issues. The Bank actively participates in these working groups while 

harmonizing its interventions bilaterally with those of partners.  This coordination supplements the 

government’s consultative framework through annual consultation meetings and discussions on sector 

strategies that impact skills development and employment. 

4.4. Linkage with Other Bank Operations  

4.4.1 The Bank’s active portfolio in Morocco comprises 28 ongoing operations for a net 

commitment of UA 1.7 billion. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance remains satisfactory in 

general, with an average total score of 2.7 on 3 in 2017. The portfolio covers seven sectors: energy 

(35.4%), transport (23.5%), water and sanitation (16.7%), social (5.7%), agriculture (3.6%), and multi-

sector (15.1%). 

4.4.2 Promoting inclusive and green growth, and inclusive value chain development is a crucial 

issue of particular interest to the Bank. This programme is linked to the Bank's investment operations 

in Morocco, notably PAPNEEI, which supports the irrigation sector, as well as operations that promote 

renewable energies. The programme also consolidates budget support for reforms aimed at improving the 

business environment, boosting competitiveness (PACEM and PAAIM) and ensuring training-

employment matching (PAAFE). Furthermore, it supplements the two phases of the Green Morocco Plan 

Support Programme (PAPMV-1 & 2). The Bank also backs the establishment of a “Result Delivery Unit” 

within the Office of the Head of Government. Part of this support will be mobilized to monitor the results 

of SNDD implementation (see the measurement framework given as annex). 

Table 2 : Lessons learned from PAPMV-1 & 2 and previous Bank operations in Morocco 
Key lessons learned Measures taken to factor the lessons into the programme 

Adoption of an inter-sector approach to 

programme design that can generate institutional 

value added and rally stakeholders 

An inter-sector approach was adopted to promote additional synergies among 

the various departments and strategies. The programme identified areas of 

convergence and inter-sector interests. 

Importance of a collaborative approach and an 

inter-ministerial steering mechanism  

Programme design was conducted through grassroots consultation (organization 

of consultation workshop with stakeholders during the design phase) and the 

consolidation of the inter-ministerial steering committee was recommended. 

Ownership of measures guarantees 

sustainability 

Consideration was given to ownership of measures and provision made for the 

necessary support items (measurement forms, ownership workshop, 

consultative validation process, etc.).  

Enhance the management of preliminary 

dialogue to reduce the timeframe for adopting 

regulatory and legislative texts pertaining to 

stakeholder ownership 

Consideration was given to dialogue on ownership and measures were balanced, 

thus giving rise to texts containing direct action measures on the effective 

implementation of reforms. 

Need to sustain the PMV and strengthen water 

sector governance and regulation 

Provision was made for measures relating to the Supreme Council for Water and 

Climate (at the central level) and Water Basin Councils (at regional level). 



 

9 
 

4.4.3 Furthermore, the two PMV (PAPMV-I & 2) support phases generated conclusive results 

with highly satisfactory performance. The programme managed to satisfy virtually all the proposed 

measures through its two phases. Of the 56 measures planned under PAPMV-1, 45 were fully executed 

and 11 were partly implemented. At PAPMV-2 completion, a high implementation rate was recorded for 

the various measures (91%, or 30 out of the 33 scheduled measures plus two measures partly completed). 

For some measures, progress has been significant and achievements have exceeded set targets (national 

irrigation map, inter-sector coordination mechanism, institutional reform road map, measures to promote 

local products and organic production, agricultural insurance, support for the agricultural development 

fund, adoption of more than 10 laws, including those relating to aggregation, inter-professional 

associations, the private agricultural advisory services, water law, the law on organic production, the 

framework law on the environment and sustainable development, the law setting up ONCA, approval of 

the National Strategy for Sustainable Development by the Government Council, support for the 

establishment of four agropoles and one zoopole (livestock sub-sectors) development of the national agri-

food strategy and signing of framework programme contracts with inter-professional associations, etc.). 

The main lessons learned from PAPMV I and II were strategic and enhanced the design of PADIDFA 

(see Table 2 and more details in the technical annex). 

4.5. Analytical Work Underpinning the Budget Support 

Programme design was informed by the results of several analytical studies conducted by the Bank, 

the Government and technical and financial partners. The results of the Bank's 2014 growth 

diagnostic remain valid.  They highlight the economic and social role of the agricultural sector (almost 

40% of jobs, 61% of which are held by women). However, the report highlights several sector challenges, 

including: (a) human capital problems especially in rural areas; (b) microeconomic distortions and 

especially access to titled land; (c) lack of coordination among stakeholders, which impedes the promotion 

of value chains; and (d) the disturbing water resources situation. The approach advocated by the 

programme helps the authorities to resolve these challenges. Component I focuses on improving access 

to employment through value chain development (skills improvement, etc.), while Component II focuses 

on sustainable employment. Sector upgrade and stakeholder mobilization are crucial. Stakeholder 

coordination is central to this budget support, either to improve natural resource management (in particular 

water, soil and clean energy) or to structure and develop value chains. 

Table 3: List of AfDB Analytical Work (with partners) 
Studies Contribution to Programme Design 

Growth Diagnostic Identifies the major constraints to more robust and inclusive growth – 

particularly skills and land.  

Study on the development of Agri-food Processing 

Areas (ZTAA) 

Identifies opportunities for promoting various crop sectors and 

agricultural value chains. 

Strengthening agricultural value chains to feed Africa IDEV study recommends an appropriate scope and scale for DCVA 

interventions and profitability for all CV stakeholders.  

Agricultural production, food security and value added 

in North Africa 

Recommends an increase in the share of value added for farmers to 

strengthen food security, reduce poverty and create more jobs.  

Technical assistance on assessing the quality of 

vocational training centres  

Establishment of a reference framework for assessing quality and 

internal output of vocational training (delegated or through 

apprenticeship). 

Feasibility study on a centre of excellence for the 

promotion of entrepreneurship to support employability 

in North Africa 

Recommends the development of entrepreneurship through the 

generation/dissemination of knowledge and networking; support for 

resource mobilization and institutionalization of the platform. 

Technical assistance for development of the model in 

Morocco Attanmia Souk to boost youth and women’s 

entrepreneurship 

Recommends: (i) the improvement of access to funding and technical 

support for entrepreneurs; and (ii) strengthening of the ecosystem and of 

the entrepreneurial culture in Morocco with specific access for the youth 

and women. 

V.  PROPOSED PROGRAMME 

5.1. Programme Goal and Objective 

The programme objective is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive 

and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, job creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. The programme 

is intended to support the Green Morocco Plan 2008-2020, mainly in terms of the acceleration and 



 

10 
 

sustainability of achievements as well as the strategies of associated sectors (National Sustainable 

Development Strategy, National Water Strategy, Energy Strategy, National Employment Strategy and 

Industrial Acceleration Strategy). Hence, PADIDFA will help to: (i) support the PMV ecosystem and 

amplify its impact; (ii) promote the inclusion of vulnerable stakeholders (especially the youth and 

women); and (iii) build agricultural sector resilience. It is an important institutional lever for creating 

synergies between strategies governing agriculture, the environment, water, energy and employment. 

5.2. Programme Components 

5.2.1 The creation, sustainability and improvement of employment quality in agricultural sub-

sectors are essential to the reduction of multidimensional poverty in rural areas and thus remains 

the focus of national concerns. Based on data from the 2014 population census, the number of people 

living in multidimensional poverty rose from 80% in 2004 to 85.6%. Hence, among the 3.9 million poor 

Moroccans identified through the multidimensional poverty mapping exercise conducted in 2014, over 3 

million live in rural areas. Therefore, the development of agricultural value chains remains a major 

challenge for their socioeconomic integration. PADIDFA supports a series of medium- and short-term 

strategic reforms to improve the quality of life for the people through quality jobs and self-employment 

in rural areas, and the protection of such jobs through sustainable natural resource management.  

Component I: Support to Job Creation through the Development of Agricultural and Agro-Industrial 

Sub-sectors 

5.2.2 This component seeks to lay the institutional and operational foundations for the inclusive 

development of agricultural sub-sectors in Morocco, which create better quality jobs that particularly 

benefit women and the youth in rural areas. Job creation will be enhanced through: (i) skills development; 

(ii) improvement of the business climate and support to agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) structuring of 

agricultural and agribusiness sub-sectors; and (iv) support for agricultural produce processing. 

Sub-Component I.1: Skills Development to Ensure Access to Employment in the Agricultural and 

Agro-Industrial Value Sub-sectors 

5.2.3 Problems and Constraints. Despite the considerable investments in human resource training 

under the PMV, the skills and qualifications deficit continues to limit access to employment.  This deficit 

also affects the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural enterprises, and reduces the potential of 

agro-industrial exports, de facto affecting job creation. Hence, the problem is twofold.  According to 

businesses, difficulties pertaining to unreliable access to quality raw materials, informal processing in 

production processes, product selection and packaging as well as poor traceability and certification partly 

stem from the lack of technical skills at the grassroots to ensure quality-at-entry, especially for products 

coming from cooperatives and small farmers. This situation further limits access to large markets and the 

creation of supplementary value added. Similarly, the limited access of agri-food VSEs and SMEs to 

business support services and highly-qualified personnel hampers quality improvement and an increase 

in product value added. The insufficient number of trainers, the quality of training programmes and the 

limited involvement of inter-professional associations are major challenges to be met in the medium term. 

5.2.4. Recent Action by the Government. Training and research are major levers of the Green 

Morocco Plan to: (i) support the development of agricultural value chains by providing a skilled workforce 

and anticipating skills needs in the medium term; and (ii) build the capacity of structures responsible for 

the national agricultural training and research system. The government has established an agricultural 

vocational training scheme with 52 schools covering all regions of the Kingdom to satisfy the demand for 

skilled labour in the various sub-sectors, boost their competitiveness and promote the socio-professional 

integration of rural youth. The new and current modes of work-related vocational training and 

apprenticeship partly meet the needs of the production sectors retained under the Green Morocco Plan but 

still fail to achieve the objectives of the Green Morocco Plan quantitatively and qualitatively, and meet 

the emerging rapidly evolving inter-professional needs. 



 

11 
 

5.2.5. Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To meet the demand for training skills in the 

medium and long term, the programme will support: (i) the extension of the agricultural apprenticeship 

training mechanism; and (ii) the strengthening of research and development in partnership with 

universities, inter-professional associations and the private sector. In this regard, the following measures 

will be taken: (1) the establishment and operationalization of the Centre for Pedagogical Engineering and 

Training of Trainers; (2) the opening of an additional centre for local agricultural vocational training; (3) 

signature of the amendment to the delegated management agreement on the livestock production zoopole; 

(4) signature of an implementation agreement between the Vocational Training Department and the 

Ministry of Agriculture to increase the number of apprentices in agricultural apprenticeship training 

programmes; (5) launching of a call for projects under the competitive fund to focus research more on the 

needs of inter-professional associations with the greater involvement of universities and the private sector; 

(5) production of JCF and DJT for the agricultural sector; and (6) creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas. Yearly, these actions will lead to the training and qualification of nearly 

300 trainers and 2,600 young agricultural workers or technicians, and the certification of approximately 

10,000 farmers’ daughters and sons who would receive apprenticeship training. These are work-based 

short-term training courses (10 months) that yield a vocational qualification in about 30 professions 

leading to recruitment in agricultural enterprises or to self-employment (see Annex - Volume 2). 

Sub-component I.2: Improvement of the Investment Climate, Access to Employment and 

Entrepreneurship for Rural Youth and Women 

5.2.6. Problems and Constraints. As indicated in paragraph 3.2.3, the growth assessment shows that 

the frequent absence of land titles in the agricultural sector limits farmer investments and consequently 

agricultural sector transformation. In terms of financing, ignorance of the existing mechanisms and limited 

access to seed loans remain the major challenges for agricultural entrepreneurs. Despite their diversity, 

existing financing instruments are often unknown to rural youth and are intended more for project 

proponents who demonstrate maturity and experience in agricultural value chains and who present robust 

and bankable business plans. This raises the problem of a deficit in entrepreneurial culture and education 

as well as in long-term quality technical support. However, most young people embarking on agricultural 

entrepreneurship do not have the requisite technical skills to ensure the success of their businesses due to 

a lack of training, social capital and an entrepreneurial culture. The establishment of an environment 

conducive to dynamic, integrated and quality support for entrepreneurs as well as market access for young 

farmers remain a priority. 

5.2.7  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. To overcome the major financing challenge, 

the Moroccan Government has developed a range of tools for start-ups through the establishment of 

competitive funds and guarantee mechanisms for independent entrepreneurs, start-ups and VSEs/SMEs. 

The State also supports several promising incubator/accelerator programmes including Réseau 

Entreprendre Network, Eirene 4 Impact, Espace Bidaya which target innovative start-ups with high 

potential, and Dare INC which supports social enterprises from ideation to growth and international 

markets. However, the pilot nature of these programmes and limited access opportunities for rural youth 

reduce their potential impact on self-employment, owing to the remote location of these youth and 

concentration of the programmes in large urban centres. The State has also undertaken to formulate a legal 

framework that grants access to work and income-generation opportunities to the most isolated rural 

communities.  

5.2.8  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To facilitate investment, the programme will 

help to secure agricultural land mainly through: (1) transmission of the law on the National Agricultural 

Register (RNA) to the SGG; and (2) transmission to the SGG of the four decrees implementing Law No. 

113-13 on the management of pastoral and sylvo-pastoral areas. In particular, the programme supports 

the promotion and active participation of young people and women in the development of agricultural and 

agro-industrial sectors through reforms and affirmative employment initiatives that favour rural women 

and youth, including greater access to active employment programmes. Specifically, the programme will 

support the establishment of an entrepreneurial and employment support ecosystem to inform, guide and 

accompany young people and women wishing to invest in agricultural sub-sectors. It will also support 

businesses in the various sub-sectors in general. This entails: (3) implementing a national plan for the 



 

12 
 

establishment of regional agricultural incubators; (4) drafting and implementing a framework agreement 

with COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; (5) transforming the 

framework agreement into specific agreements; (6) conducting a gender diagnostic in two vocational 

training establishments; (7) conducting a study on women’s entrepreneurship; and (8) drafting and 

signature of a partnership agreement between DIAEA and ONCA for the development of agricultural 

advisory services in irrigation areas. 

Sub-Component I.3: Support for Structuring of Agricultural Sub-sectors, Processing of 

Agricultural Products, and Development of Agro-Industry and Exports  

5.2.9. Problems and Constraints. The agricultural sector needs to develop its value chains and boost 

its competitiveness, sustainability and productivity to meet national and export needs for products with 

comparative advantages and to generate more jobs. Despite the economic performance of the sector, 

Moroccan agriculture still faces challenges in developing its agricultural products, especially on the 

international scene. Although commendable efforts have concentrated on upstream production 

(modernization and upgrading of facilities, improvement of production and productivity), focus should 

shift to the processing and enhancement of agricultural products (agribusiness, etc.). There is need to 

develop processing and logistics platforms to accommodate agro-industrial processing units. Similarly, 

agro-industry support structures for ensuring compliance with standards, particularly those responsible 

for the promotion of Moroccan agricultural and agri-food exports, such as ONSSA (National Authority 

for the Health Safety of Food Products), still face a legislative deficit in certain areas. Consequently, the 

regulations must be reviewed and/or enhanced to create a conducive framework for the upgrade of 

agricultural products in order to boost their marketing and export value and volume.  

5.2.10. Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. In a bid to consolidate the achievements of 

PMV 2 and promote the inclusive development of agricultural sectors, Morocco has embarked on a 

thorough effort to restructure inter-professional associations covering 21 sub-sectors and ensure the 

formal recognition of 14 inter-professional associations. To accelerate agro-industry development and 

boost exports, Morocco has embarked on the implementation of an Agro-food Sector Development 

Strategy covering promotion, export and distribution on the domestic market. A programme contract for 

the agri-food industry was signed for the period 2017-2021. This contract is intended to increase turnover, 

exports and value added in the sector. It specifically targets the promotion of certain agri-food sectors (the 

CP forecasts an investment volume of MAD 12 billion, including MAD 8 billion to be borne by the private 

sector). Similarly, the 2014-2020 Industrial Acceleration Plan was implemented in the Souss-Massa 

region in January 2018 and 8 agreements were signed on that occasion, thus creating a competitive 

economic hub. The Ministry of Agriculture, Maritime Fisheries, Rural Development, Water and Forestry 

is also planning to set up Agro-Food Innovation Centres (CIAA). Moreover, two of the seven agropoles 

scheduled under the Green Morocco Plan are already operational (Meknes and Berkane). These agropoles 

are expected to be a major lever for the agricultural sector. They seek to enhance the processing and 

marketing of agricultural products by providing a framework for the integration of all the segments of the 

value chain. Finally, ONSSA (National Office for the Health Safety of Food Products) set up in 2010 

under the PMV and under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, is continuing its efforts to 

promote agri-food product exports.  

5.2.11 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. This sub-component is intended to develop 

Agro-food Processing Zones (ZTAA) while improving standards to boost exports especially to the rest of 

Africa. There is a dual social inclusion challenge at this level, namely: ensuring the transformation of very 

small agricultural enterprises and increasing the qualitative participation of small farmers in value chains. 

Therefore, the programme will support the development of inclusive mechanisms that ensure the 

participation and equitable remuneration of these vulnerable groups through a unified and more inclusive 

vision of value chains, including increased and improved access to production resources, markets and 

social coverage for agricultural workers. It provides for: (1) support for the creation and revitalization of 

agricultural cooperatives; (2) publication of the decree introducing the new FDA subsidy rates for 

agricultural processing units; (3) revision of legal instruments developing new legislation in the field of 

food safety – ONSSA’s legal arsenal (involvement of various structures in control activities; supervision 

of professionals; pesticides; exports; plant health; fertilizers); (5) drafting and transmission to the SGG of 



 

13 
 

new sanitary instruments governing the export of poultry products and preparation of terms of reference 

(CPS). These measures will support small producers, facilitate the processing of agricultural products and 

accelerate agricultural exports through the improvement of standards. 

Component II: Support Lasting Rural Employment through Sustainable Natural Resource 

Utilisation by the Sector 

5.2.12 This second component targets the long-term protection of jobs created in the agricultural sector 

through promotion of sustainable natural resource management (especially water) by the agricultural 

sector, and encouragement of renewable energy usage in rural areas.  

Sub-component II.1: Strengthen Sustainable Development Governance 

5.2.13 Problems and Constraints. As in other countries in the region, promoting green governance in 

Morocco is now an absolute priority for meeting the challenges posed by climate change in particular. 

Nevertheless, these challenges must be addressed as part of an inter-sector approach that includes the 

agricultural sector. Coordination around these objectives is crucial to the protection of created rural area 

jobs that are threatened by dwindling resource availability. 

5.2.14 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco also played a major role on the 

international scene by undertaking to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions under COP 21 and organizing 

COP 22 in 2016, which included water resources on its agenda.  For COP 21, Morocco undertook to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 13% before 2030. This target could be raised to 32% if international 

funds (estimated at USD 45 billion) are mobilized. As regards climate change mitigation, 50% of the 

projects focus on energy. They include: (i) the determination to increase the share of renewable energy in 

the installed electricity capacity from 34% in 2015 to 42% by 2020; and (ii) the improvement of energy 

efficiency. As regards adaptation, the programme includes: (i) the substitution of overexploited 

groundwater with surface water; and (ii) the acceleration of desalination programmes, construction of 

dams and recycling of wastewater by 2030. Water conservation is an essential pillar that can be developed 

through appropriate technologies and improved efficiency in usage. The National Sustainable 

Development Strategy (SNDD) was drawn up and presented to the Government Council on 1 June 2017, 

and adopted by the Council of Ministers of 25 June 2017. It received backing under the second phase of 

the Bank's support to the Green Morocco Plan (2015-2017). This strategy seeks to achieve Morocco's 

vision of a green and inclusive economy by 2030. In total, seven major challenges have been identified 

as pillars and have been broken down into 31 strategic sub-pillars and 137 objectives with precise 

indicators. This makes it a reference and convergence tool for various public policies aimed at ensuring 

Morocco's sustainable development. Thus, the Sector Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD) 

specifying the contribution of each department to the implementation of this Strategy, as well as the 

Action Plan relating to State exemplariness have been drafted. To achieve these objectives, a governance 

framework is being established that comprises two committees: a Strategic Committee that has a policy 

and guidance role, and a Steering Committee that has an operational role. 

5.2.15 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: In a bid to support the operationalization of 

the SNDD, promote green governance and give impetus to a new inter-sector governance drive, the 

programme proposes the following measures: (1) Publication of the decree creating the Sustainable 

Development Strategy Committee in the Official Gazette; (2) Validation of at least four Sustainable 

Development Action Plans (PADD) in 2019; and (3) Design of a monitoring and evaluation system for 

the SNDD in 2019. The expected outcomes from implementing these measures are: (i) the scheduling of 

meetings of the strategic committee; (ii) the drafting and adoption of a ministerial order institutionalizing 

the steering committee mentioned in Article 6 of Decree No. 655 to create the strategic committee for 

implementing the SNDD; (iii) implementation of the PADDs of four sectors validated in 2019; (iv) 

strengthening of the steering and of the monitoring/evaluation strategy as well as improvement of 

decision-making.   



 

14 
 

Sub-Component II.2: Improvement of Water Resource Management to Mitigate the Water Stress 

and Boost Sustainability  

5.2.16 Problems and Constraints. The renewable water resource rate is less than 600 m3/person/year 

(the critical threshold being 1000 m3/person/year). Although drinking water production increased fivefold 

over the past three decades, the 145 dams have a storage capacity that is below the population's annual 

water consumption. Climate trends in the sub-region are disturbing due to declining rainfall estimated at 

30% by 2050. This pressure on water resources is compounded by the development of irrigation (1.5 

million hectares), although efforts are underway to convert large-scale conventional irrigation systems to 

drip irrigation.  In response, Morocco has initiated the development of non-conventional resources such 

as seawater or wastewater. The adoption of an integrated approach to ensure water resource sustainability 

is crucial to the development of sustainable and job-creating agriculture. 

5.2.17  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. The National Water Sector Strategy 

formulated in 2009 is the strategic framework followed by: (i) the National Water Plan - PNE (focusing 

on demand management, especially demand for irrigation and water development); (ii) supply 

management and development (including non-conventional resources); and (iii) water resource 

conservation and adaptation to climate change. With the Bank's support, under PAPMV-2, the 

Government adopted a new Water Law in 2015 (Law No. 36-15), which introduced innovations in water 

planning, water governance and adaptation to climate change. 

5.2.18  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: The proposed measures are essentially aimed 

at implementing the new Water Law through promulgation of its main implementing instruments. These 

measures are: (1) transmission to the SGG of the decree governing the Supreme Council for Water 

Resources and Climate; (2) as regards water resource planning: transmission to the SGG of implementing 

decrees relating to: (i) planning documents (National Water Plan, Integrated Water Resource Management 

Master Plan, Local Water Management Plans); (ii) the water basin boards (including the publication of 

the decree governing water basin agencies in the Official Gazette) and (iii) Presentation of the PNE to the 

Interministerial Water Commission; (3) as regards the water information system: preparation of the decree 

relating to the Water Information System, preparation of the reference frameworks for agricultural water 

needs per region for rational use of irrigation water. To improve adaptation to climate change, regional 

vulnerability indices and Regional Climate Change Adaptation Plans for three pilot regions should be 

developed.  These actions will strengthen the legal framework for planning and governance for the 

concerted, territorialized and sustainable use of water resources. These actions will also help to build 

stakeholder resilience to climate change. 

Sub-component II.3: Support for Energy Transition in the Agricultural Sector 

5.2.19 Problems and Constraints. Faced with the challenges of climate change and the energy bill, a 

drive is already underway to use renewable energies, especially solar pumps, in agriculture. However, 

this drive remains essentially limited to large farmers. Small farmers are still difficult to reach, mainly 

because funding problems force them to rely on butane gas, which is still subsidized. Butane gas is 

frequently used to pump irrigation water and its consumption has even attained alarming proportions for 

some crops, thus putting pressure on the compensation fund (for 2017, a structural increase in butane gas 

compensation was noted, with a total subsidization cost of over MAD 9.9 billion in 2017 compared to 

MAD 6.7 billion in 2016). In the agri-food industry, additional efforts are also needed to reduce the energy 

bill of agri-food companies. Hence, public authorities should support increased energy development for 

agricultural holdings and agro-industrial units.  Furthermore, the development of agro-industry and 

irrigation systems generates a certain amount of waste (plastics, agricultural product processing by-

products, etc.) that is beginning to increase in volume and needs to be treated and recycled to avoid 

environmental pollution and contribute to job creation. 

5.2.20 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco has a clear desire to optimize its 

economy through the adoption of energy efficiency in several sectors (with agriculture included among 

the five priority sectors). This drive is essentially based on the National Energy Efficiency Strategy for 

2030, which seeks to achieve a renewable energy share of 52% instead of 34% in 2015. This strategy 

provides for the adoption of a programme contract between the State, the Moroccan Energy Efficiency 



 

15 
 

Agency (AMEE) and priority sectors (industry, construction, agriculture, transport and public 

electrification). Crédit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) introduced a special financial product (called 

“EcoTaqa”) to finance initiatives that promote renewable energy. Through its Nationally Determined 

Contribution (NDC), Morocco has undertaken to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 42% of projected 

emissions by 2030. The use of solar energy in the agricultural sector is a highly publicized strategy (solar 

pumping is part of the energy efficiency programme contract). In this regard and in partnership with 

GEF/UNDP, AMEE has launched the “Development of photovoltaic pumping systems for irrigation” 

project, which is part of implementation of Morocco’s commitments to develop renewable energy and 

combat climate change. For the climate change adaptation component, Morocco has adopted a National 

Climate Change Adaptation Plan and drawn up a green sectors promotion plan under the law on waste 

management (adopted in 2006).  

5.2.21 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. The programme provides for the following 

measures: (i) Presentation of the Energy Efficiency Strategy to the Government Council (by 2030); (ii) 

conduct of the strategic study and provision of mechanisms to support the promotion of solar pumping; 

and (iii) preparation of a skills directory for energy auditors to support the energy optimization for farms 

and agro-industrial units. These measures will promote renewable energy and energy efficiency, and 

facilitate butane substitution in the agricultural sector. 

5.3. Policy Dialogue 

The Government is moving towards the PMV acceleration phase by 2020 following the mid-term 

evaluation of the Plan. The major themes to be addressed in the policy dialogue during the programme 

implementation period are: (i) inter-sector coordination; (ii) sustainable natural resource management 

(reforms related to agricultural water use, agricultural land tenure, renewable energy support, energy 

efficiency and agricultural institutions); (iii) capacity-building (agricultural register, monitoring system, 

private agricultural advisory services, empowerment of inter-professional associations, competitive 

agricultural research mechanisms); (iv) development of green sectors and of the circular economy; and 

(v) the promotion of agro-industry and value chains. Furthermore, policy dialogue will be conducted in 

coordination with development partners, through the existing PMV thematic support group and under the 

G20 Compact with Africa programme.  

5.4. Loan Conditions  

Preliminary Measures - Triggers: Dialogue with the Government led to the identification of relevant 
measures that can support the programme and which the Government has undertaken to implement. These 

preliminary measures were selected based on their maturity status, relevance and significance. They are 

summed up in the table below: 

Table 4: Preliminary measures - Triggers 

Component Preliminary measures  

Measure 1 Publication in the OG of the Decree setting up the Sustainable Development Strategy Committee  

Evidence: Copy of decree published in the OG 

Measure 2 Draft decree on the composition and operation of the Higher Council for Water Resources and Climate 

Evidence: Copy of the letter of transmission to the SGG 

Measure 3 Start of construction work on a local agricultural vocational training centre 

Evidence: Copy of the service order launching the works 

5.5. Good Practice Principles for the Application of Conditionality  

The five good practice principles for the application of conditionality were factored into the 

programme design in accordance with the Bank's policy governing programme-based support 

operations (PBO), namely: (i) strengthening of national ownership by emphasizing on dialogue with the 

Government throughout the design and implementation of the Bank’s CSP 2017-2021 for Morocco in 

general, and the budget support programme in particular, due to the fact that PADIDFA was designed 

with the active collaboration of the authorities: (ii) the existence of a coordination drive initiated between 

TFPs; (iii) alignment of the Bank's support procedures on national priorities, including the priorities of 

the PMV acceleration phase 2017-2020 and the strategies of associated sectors; (iv) the targeting and 



 

16 
 

streamlining of disbursement measures and conditions resulting from the matrix developed in close 

coordination and cooperation with Moroccan authorities; and (v) alignment of Bank support with the 

country’s budget cycle, especially for FY 2018 and 2019 and the 2018 Budget Act. 

5.6. Financing Needs and Mechanisms  

5.6.1 The 2018 Budget Act provided for a budget of MAD 276.1 billion compared to MAD 285.6 

billion in 2017. This decrease stems from the reduction in operating expenses pursuant to the restrictive 

policy adopted by the Kingdom since 2012. Capital expenditure increased slightly by MAD 2.4 billion. 

According to the Budget Act, the overall financing requirement for 2018 is estimated at MAD 33.3 

billion or approximately EUR 3 billion. Nearly 57% of these needs will be covered by domestic loans 

and 43% by external loans, representing EUR 1.3 billion. The increased recourse to domestic borrowing 

is consistent with the Kingdom's prudent debt management policy. This debt allocation enables Morocco 

to hedge against exogenous shocks, especially against exchange rate risks. PADIDFA will be 
implemented in two tranches of EUR 100 million. In 2018 and 2019, the Bank's budget support will 

cover 3.4% of total budget financing needs (4.5% of the external financing need in 2018). AfDB financing 

will cover 3% of the current account financing requirement in 2018, helping to stabilize external debt by 

preserving foreign exchange reserves.  

Table 5: Projected Financing Needs and Sources in MAD/USD Million (Source: LOF 2018; IMF 2017) 

 

Items  

2018 

(MAD 

million) 

2018  

(EUR 

million) 

2019 

(MAD 

million) 

2019  

(EUR 

million) 

A Total revenue and grants  236 800 20 899 241 282 21 295 

  Including: non-tax revenue (excluding budget support) 22 000 1 942 14 700 1 297 

B Total expenditure and net loans  276 100 24 368 278 802 24 606 

  Including: public debt interest payments 27 100 2 392 29 036 2 563 

C including investment expenditure (*) 60 300 5 322 63 623 5 615 

D Special account 6 000 530 5 000 441 

E Net financing requirement (commitment basis) (A-B+D) -33 300 -2 939 -32 520 -2 870 

F Gross external funding 25 000 2 206 10 000 883 

M Including external AfDB funding 8 100 715 8227 726 

F Amortization 16 900 1 492 1 773 156 

I Net external financing (E-F) 1 133 100 1 133 100 

J Net domestic financing 16 400 1 447 30 747 2 714 

K Residual financing gap (E+I+J) 0 0 0 0 

VI. PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 

6.1. Programme Beneficiaries  

PADIDFA will benefit the Moroccan population in general, and the youth and women in the rural areas 

in particular. It will specifically benefit: (i) local councils; (ii) inter-professional associations and 

professional organizations; (iii) agricultural VSMEs and organizations (crop sectors, waste management, 

etc.); (iii) the private sector (training, research, private agricultural councils, etc.); (iv) project proponents 

and young agricultural and rural entrepreneurs due to improvement of the business environment; and (v) 

women's associations and rural women (access to value chains, land tenure security, local services, etc.).  

6.2. Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

6.2.1 Environmental Impact. The programme concerns the implementation of sector reforms and 

will not have any direct or indirect negative impact on the natural environment. Consequently, in 

accordance with Bank guidelines, it is classified in environmental and social category 3. It will enhance 

environmental protection through: (i) improvement of the environmental and social performance of 



 

17 
 

agricultural activities through the development and popularization of tools; (ii) promotion of resilient and 

sustainable agriculture through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy 

(2015-2030), particularly in the agricultural sector; and (iii) rational management and protection of water 

resources. 

6.2.2 Climate Change. The programme will have a positive impact by promoting the establishment 

of a legal, institutional and organizational framework that facilitates the development of climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures. Accordingly, it will significantly contribute to the reduction of GHG 

emissions resulting from irrigation activities by replacing diesel and/or gas-powered pumps with solar 

pumps. It will also enable Morocco to play its role under the Paris Agreement and the Nagoya Protocol. 

6.2.3 Social and Gender Impact. Given the social objectives of the programme, social risks are 

virtually non-existent since the programme will ensure the social protection of rural communities and the 

promotion of Moroccan youth and women. In particular, it will focus on: (i) youth and women’s 

integration through the creation, preservation and quality improvement of employment in agricultural 

value chains; (ii) the definition of a framework for protecting and developing agricultural value chains; 

(iii) the inclusion and strengthening of the resilience of women small-scale farmers under the general 

drive to boost the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural businesses. In addition to the 21 inter-

professional associations identified, the programme will benefit young people, particularly women under 

35 who are likely to be absorbed into agricultural value chains as self-employed entrepreneurs, farm 

employees, members of cooperatives or farmer's daughters/sons wishing to perpetuate their family 

farming business. The programme targets 20,000 young people who will benefit from agricultural training 

or support services in rural entrepreneurship.  Besides, the economic empowerment activities of the inter-

professional associations and the signing of delegated training management agreements will improve the 

productivity of their members and develop their marketing and market integration skills at the national 

and international level. The programme will also facilitate the integration of out-of-school youth into rural 

family homes and agricultural apprenticeship training centres where they will be trained in various trades, 

including agricultural production, processing and marketing techniques.  Finally, the programme will 

support the development and implementation of an action plan for women's entrepreneurship that will 

help, in the medium term, to eliminate the major constraints that still hinder the full commitment and 

economic empowerment of women in promising agricultural sectors. 

6.3. Impact in Other Areas  

6.3.1 Apart from the major impacts cited, the programme will support South-South cooperation 

with other African countries. Strategic value chains are likely to initiate and consolidate this cooperation 

(e.g. poultry, olive, red meat, milk, etc.) as well as capacity-building activities on training by inter-

professional structures (e.g. the Casablanca zoopole which is a PPP success story).  

6.3.2 The programme can also generate an impact in other areas, such as regional integration 

(development of regional agricultural trade and exports), food security (increase in agricultural production 

and product development), skills development in the various value chains, agricultural entrepreneurship 

(PMV stakeholders) and the development of private initiatives (resulting from the initiatives of inter-

professional associations, promotion of the circular economy and waste management, etc.). It also targets 

synergy between PAIIM (general budget support) and PADIDFA (sector budget support). 

6.4. Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation  

6.4.1. As was the case for PAPMV-I & II, the programme executing agency will be the 

Directorate for Strategy and Statistics (DSS) in the Ministry of Agriculture. As far as inter-sector 

measures are concerned, the Budget Directorate will be charged with the strategic coordination of the 

programme.  Based on the results recorded, these directorates are qualified and have the required skills. 

The programme provides for the establishment of technical coordination within the Ministry of 

Agriculture and a strategic committee within MEF. The Bank adopts an approach that stimulates synergies 

between the various sector strategies, ensures stakeholder involvement and strengthens the 

complementarity of donor interventions. Special attention will be given to results-based management. 

This operation is of particular interest to seven ministries, namely: (i) MEF (DB); (ii) MA (DSS, DIAEA, 



 

18 
 

DF, DDFP, DEFR, ORMVA); (iii) the sector ministries in charge of water resources, the environment, 

energy and employment and vocational training; and (iv) the inter-professional associations concerned. 

Local involvement is reflected through local structures such as ORMVA, the WBAs and ONCA’s and 

DEFR’s decentralized agencies, etc. 

6.4.2. The matrix of measures agreed upon with the Government and the Performance Measurement 

Framework will serve as PADIDFA’s monitoring/evaluation tools (Annex 2). The MA will collect data, 

coordinate monitoring/evaluation and provide information to the Bank through MEF. In this regard, it 

will produce half-yearly reports providing necessary information on programme’s progress. Supervision 

missions are planned during the implementation phase to assess progress. The Bank's country office will 

continuously monitor the implementation of programme reforms. At programme completion, the 

Government will prepare and submit a completion report to the Bank. That report will serve as the basis 

for organizing the programme completion mission. 

6.5. Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement 

6.5.1. The ERFP or CFRA was conducted by the Bank in September 2016 through a review of 
Morocco's public finance management. It concluded that the overall fiduciary country risk is moderate, 

thanks to the generally satisfactory public finance management processes. The September 2016 PEFA 

report confirms this finding because Morocco obtained the following 30 ratings out of 31 public finance 

management performance indicators: 5 As, 14 Bs and B+, 5 Cs, 6 Ds and D+.  

6.5.2  The outcomes of these assessments confirmed Morocco's implementation and execution of the 

reforms set out in LOLF No. 130-13 of 2 June 2015. These include strengthening public management 

performance through a programme budget; establishing principles and rules on the financial balance of 

the Budget Act; ensuring public finance transparency; and increasing the role of Parliament in budget 

discussions and public finance control. On this subject, Morocco has initiated a major reform 

implementation drive through a progressive and evolutionary approach. Some reforms have been 

implemented and others are underway. However, the challenge remains optimizing the functional 

organization of MEF to improve reform implementation, which has generated an ongoing study. Fiduciary 

risks relating to the management of programme fund flows are low at Bank-Al-Maghrib, which holds the 

Single Treasury Account.  Budget appropriations management mechanisms are in place in the sector 

ministries involved in the programme and remain under the supervision of the internal and external State 

control bodies. Although these ministries have sector strategies, the strategies are sometimes not fed with 

sufficient data. Due to the weaknesses noted, an LOF training plan is organized for the sectors by the 

Budget Sub-Directorate.  

6.5.3 Considering Morocco’s fiduciary country risk level, the vast public finance management 

reform drive and the fiduciary assessment of the sectors concerned, the programme’s overall fiduciary 

risk is also moderate.  Capacity-building needs were expressed in the areas of triennial budgetary 

programming, programme evaluation, performance measurement, risk mapping package, procedures 

manual and control system, etc.  

6.5.4. Financial Management and Disbursement Mechanisms. MEF will manage the fiduciary 

aspects of the operation.  By its very nature, the operation will help to cover the 2018 and 2019 budget 

deficits, subject to the Borrower meeting its general and specific conditions. Programme funds will be 

tracked through the budget revenue circuit on external funding and in accordance with national regulations 

governing public finance management. The accounting regarding the funds will be based on the budget 

revenue nomenclature. At the Borrower's request, the Bank will make disbursements in two tranches in 

accordance with principles of fungibility (single till) and the single treasury account. Each year, the 

Moroccan Government tables the Audited Budget (“Loi de Règlement”) (BRL) on the execution of the 

Budget Act (FL) before Parliament in the first quarter of year n+2. This BRL is accompanied by the report 

of the Court of Auditors on the implementation of the FL and the general statement of conformity. The 

IGF will carry out the specific audit of programme fund flows and performance audit because of its 

proven experience in auditing the Moroccan PBOs financed by the Bank. The ToRs for the specific audit 

of fund flows were be drawn up by the IGF and discussed with the Bank. The time limit for submission 

of the audit report to the Bank will be six months from closure of the programme. The programme could 

be subject to fiduciary supervision.  



 

19 
 

6.5.5 Public Procurement Trends and Reforms. The national public procurement system made 

remarkable progress with the installation in January 2018 of members of the National Public Procurement 

Commission (CNCP), which is responsible for investigating complaints from competitors concerning 

public procurement and issuing legal opinions on disputes between public procurement holders and the 

Administration concerning the application of the regulations governing public procurement. In a bid to 

further improve public procurement transparency, the following key actions will be implemented by the 

National Public Procurement Commission (CNCP): (i) creation and commencement of trials for the 

effective operationalization of the CNCP website; (ii) preparation of the Ethics Charter, the internal rules 

of the Commission (including for ad hoc experts), the procedures manual per mission (processing of 

complaints, request and analysis of opinions, standing committees); and (iii) preparation of the strategy 

document on a rolling three-year programme. With regard to reforms, the decree creating the CNCP will 

be reviewed with a view to including the essential function of data-collection and production of statistics, 

among others.  

6.5.6  Sector Context of Public Procurement. Sector analysis highlights the following findings:  (i) 

Social sector: the procurement timeframe (from publication of the bid invitation to contract signature) is 

three months on average; the definition of needs (to prepare a CPS for the construction of a building for 

example) can take up to one year.   The Ministry reported limited productivity among the staff who need 

training in public procurement. (ii) Agricultural sector: in the Ministry of Agriculture, the definition of 

needs takes three to six months. The General Inspectorate of Agriculture carries out audit missions for all 

eligible contracts in accordance with the public procurement decree. However, the summaries of the 

control and audit reports are not published in accordance with Article 165 of the said Decree.  (iii) 

Environment sector: on average, the Ministry of Environment launches a maximum of 15 bid invitations 

for rehabilitation of landfills and two to three for delegated management (design, construction, operation). 

The ministry has introduced terms of reference with ecological specifications (air, biogas) in compliance 

with environmental regulations.  (iv) Water sector: minor weaknesses were noted in the management of 

public contracts, for instance the accumulation of incompatible tasks at the internal control level (e.g. 

needs determination and participation in the bid opening).  

6.5.7  Procurement of goods and services. Being a multisector budget support operation (agriculture, 

water, environment, social), the resources provided by the Bank will be fungible with those of the 

Treasury and used for the country's current needs and procurements, in accordance with the national 

procurement system whose regulatory framework is governed by Decree No. 2-12-349 of 20 March 2013. 

The Bank conducted the latest review of this system in November 2017 through a country procurement 

system assessment using the OECD/MAPS methodology (BPAR), and concluded that the risk level was 

moderate. An assessment of procurement practices in the sectors concerned reveals that no significant 

procurement element would justify the application of a fiduciary risk assessment in identified sectors that 

is different from the situation at the national level. Consequently, usage of the national procurement 

system will guarantee the efficient use of resources to be allocated under this operation, thanks to 

acceptable procurement procedures and an effective and reassuring control mechanism. However, the 

assessment mission identified measures to enhance the transparency of the national procurement system 

and improve the effectiveness of control and audit mechanisms in the agricultural and water sectors (see 

Technical Annex, Volume 2, procurements). To reinforce these improvements in public procurement, the 

government is undertakes to: 

 Publish the opinions issued by the CNCP on its website. This site, currently being finalised, will 
be operational by 31 December 2018 at the latest; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Agriculture and Maritime Fishing (MAPM) of the 

summaries of all control and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for 

negotiated contracts exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public 

procurement portal. In this regard, the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Agriculture shall 

submit the verification report to the Bank latest 30 June 2018; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Water Resources of the summaries of all control 



 

20 
 

and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for negotiated contracts 

exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public procurement portal. In this 

regard, the General Inspectorate of the Water Resources Secretariat shall submit the audit report 

to the Bank latest 30 June 2018. 

 

VII. LEGAL DOCUMENTATION AND AUTHORITY 

7.1. Legal Documentation  

7.1.1 The legal document to be used under this programme is the Loan Agreement. The parties 

to this Agreement are the African Development Bank and the Government of the Kingdom of 

Morocco. The Loan Agreement shall become effective subject to fulfilment of the conditions provided 

for in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions for Loan Agreements. 

7.2. Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

7.2.1. Conditions precedent to presentation of the programme to the Board. Through dialogue 
with the Government, it was agreed that the Government will implement certain preliminary measures 

before the programme is presented to the Bank's Board of Directors. These conditions are outlined in 

Table 5 on preliminary conditions. 

7.2.2. Disbursement in two tranches. Disbursement of the loan shall be subject to fulfilment of the 
following preliminary conditions:  

First tranche (EUR 100 million in 2018): Provide the Bank with proof of: (i) the opening of a Treasury 

Account in Bank-al-Maghrib acceptable to the Bank and intended to receive loan resources; (ii) the 

establishment of an inter-sector coordination mechanism, including the creation of: (a) a Programme 

technical coordination team in the Ministry of Agriculture; and (b) a strategic coordination committee of 

the programme in the Ministry of Economy and Finance; (iii) signature of a framework agreement with 

COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; and (iv) an Order defining 

additional and special measures to combat the Newcastle disease and avian influenza with a view to 

promoting poultry exports. 

Second tranche (EUR 100 million in 2019): Provide the Bank with proof of :(i) transmission of the bill 

on the National Agricultural Register (RNA) to the SGG; (ii) signature of a partnership agreement 

between the ONCA and DIAEA for the development of agricultural advisory services in irrigation areas; 

(iii) transmission of the draft law on fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop supports to the SGG; and (iv) 

proof of validation of four (4) Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD).  

7.3. Compliance with Bank Group Policies  

PADIDFA complies with Bank Group policies and guidelines on programme-based support. It helps to 

create an environment conducive to the achievement of the High 5s and the operational priorities of the 

Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 and the Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021 for Morocco. No 

exemption from Bank guidelines is requested under this operation. 

VIII. RISK MANAGEMENT 

8.1  Major risks could arise from external shocks caused by unfavourable international 

economic conditions and hydrocarbon price trends. These could be compounded by severe vagaries 

of the weather and extreme phenomena as well as weak inter-sector coordination capacity. With regard 

to components, the risks stem from the overexploitation of natural resources, the marginalization of 

certain groups of stakeholders, divergent interests of stakeholders, the limited capacity of users and 

stakeholders in the cooperative sector, and sociocultural resistance on gender issues.  



 

21 
 

8.2. Mitigating the anticipated risks depends on government's ability to rollover certain 

measures (especially insurance to mitigate climate risk); set up integrated flood forecast and warning 

systems (flood event management); and draft water shortage management plans (drought management). 

These plans should contain measures established in advance in accordance with the degree of scarcity and 

that include all user sectors for proactive water scarcity management. It would also require the 

strengthening of inter-sector coordination through high-level support from the country's 

authorities. At component level, provision is made for consultation committees (working groups) to 

facilitate the search for solutions, particularly on key issues (water, environment, energy and social), as 

well as institutional and legal measures to protect all stakeholders. Each reform is also accompanied by 

awareness-raising and communication actions, particularly on gender and youth issues. Follow-up 

workshops will be organized with the support of the Bank's Office (COMA) to strengthen inter-sector 

coordination. 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the Board of Directors approve an African Development Bank loan, not exceeding 

EUR 200 million, for the Kingdom of Morocco to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable Development 

Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors in accordance with the conditions set out in this report. 

 





The PPP irrigation programme concerns the following: 

 New hydro-agricultural development projects: extension of irrigation in 
Gharb (30 000 ha), development of new irrigated areas downstream of 
the Adossa dam (5 442 ha) and the Saiss plain (30 000 ha), located 
downstream of the Mdez Dam ,and extension of irrigation in the Dakhla 
irrigated area using desalinated water (5 000 ha); 

 Irrigation safeguard projects in areas with high agricultural production 
potential: the seawater desalination-based irrigation project in the 
Shtouka area in Souss-Massa (15 000 ha) and the Azemmour-Bir Jdid 
coastal area irrigation project (3 200 ha). 

5. Enhancement of agricultural production 

> Promotion of agricultural exports 

Enhancing agricultural and food exports has always been one of the fundamental 
objectives of Morocco's agricultural policy. The Green Morocco Plan attaches special 
importance to the development and diversification of agricultural exports. It plans to triple 
the export volumes for citrus fruit and vegetables and fruit by pursuing efforts to promote 
exports to new destinations and also to traditional markets such as the European Union. 

Also, in order to help strengthen the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and ensure 
its integration into the European market, financial and technical support was provided by 
the European counterpart under the advanced status arrangement. The support targets 
the modernization of the agricultural sector as a whole and provides for assistance in the 
process for aligning the Moroccan normative framework with the European normative 
framework on sanitary and phytosanitary matters, which would ultimately allow the 
elimination of non-tariff barriers limiting access to Moroccan products. 

Moreover, to enhance and promote production quality, Morocco and the European Union 
concluded, in accordance with the terms of the Agricultural Agreement, an agreement 
on the reciprocal protection of geographical indications (GIs) for agricultural products, 
including fisheries products. This GI protection agreement was initialled by both parties 
in January 2015 in Berlin. 

> Development of local products 
The Department of Agriculture designed a comprehensive strategy for increasing 
existing supply of local products and established a legal framework encouraging farmers 
to promote and market their produce.  

It thus triggered a momentum that motivated the collective upgrading of small-scale 
farming, particularly in mountain and oases areas, where agriculture is characterized by 
remarkable specificities and the products have specific qualities, often bearing witness 
to the time-honoured traditions and secular know-how of the local people.  

Thus, the implementation of Law No. 25-06 on the distinctive marks of origin and quality 
(SDOQ) for foodstuffs and agricultural and fisheries products created the necessary legal 
framework for the recognition and protection of products with a specific quality linked to 
the country. 

The Moroccan system of labelling, implemented since the entry into force of Law 25-06 
in 2009 and up to the end of 2017, has led to the recognition of 53 distinctive marks of 
origin and quality (SDOQ), including 43 marks for Protected Geographical Indication 
(PGI), 5 for Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) and 5 Agricultural Labels. 

> Agropoles for enhancing the value of agricultural products 

As part of the implementation of the Green Morocco Plan, the Department of Agriculture 



 

VIII 
 

established 7 agropoles at Meknès, Berkane, Tadla, Souss, Haouz, Gharb and Loukkos 
to enhance the value of agricultural products through agro-industry. 

Furthermore, in a bid to build the capacity of stakeholders and support the efforts of 
professionals to improve the productivity of competitive and high-potential sub-sectors 
and enhance the value of each region’s agricultural products, the Department of 
Agriculture set up in each Agropole a Food Qualipole comprising 3 groups of specific 
operational laboratories (ONSSA, INRA and EACCE) and common spaces (reception 
centre, conference centre, accommodation area and restaurant). 

III. PRESENTATION OF THE WATER SECTOR 

The water sector in Morocco has been of special interest to public authorities and a 
central concern of the economic policies because of its crucial role in ensuring the 
country's water security and supporting its development, especially in the area of 
irrigated agriculture. 

In this context, Morocco has for long been engaged in a dynamic policy to build major 
hydraulic infrastructure, in an effort to improve access to drinking water, meet the needs 
of industries and tourism, and develop large scale. irrigation. 

Indeed, Morocco has managed to build an efficient water management model specific to 
the country and cited as an example internationally. 

This undeniable success was based on: 

• The water resource control and mobilization policy involving  the construction of 
large reservoir dams (major hydraulic infrastructure comprising 140 major dams 
with a total capacity of nearly 17.6 billion m3), water transfer structures and several 
wells drilled for groundwater; 

• The development of technical skills and applied scientific research; 

• The launch of a long-term planning policy in  the early 1980s that allows decision-
makers to anticipate water scarcity by giving public authorities long-term visibility 
(20 to 30 years); and 

• Lastly, major advances in the regulatory and institutional spheres, such as Law No. 
10-95, which consolidated the integrated, participatory and decentralized 
management of water resources by establishing watershed agencies and 
introducing financial mechanisms for the protection and preservation of water 
resources. 

As part of the modernization of the arsenal of legal provisions on the water sector, the 
Government revised Law No.10-95 on water in order to have a comprehensive, clear, 
precise and applicable legal and institutional framework. Indeed, the new Law No. 36-15 
on water, published in August 2016, strengthened the achievements of the Law No.10-95 
and incorporated new aspects, including: 

• Consolidation and strengthening of management and decentralized, integrated and 
participatory planning of water resources; 

• Strengthening of consultation and coordination bodies and agencies by setting up 
the Basin Council, which is a regional forum for discussion of water management 
issues; 

• Establishment of legal bases for the diversification of supply through the use of 
unconventional water resources; 

• Strengthening of the institutional framework and mechanisms for the protection and 
preservation of water resources through participatory management contracts; and 

• .Integration of the management of extreme events related to climate change. 

Moreover, in order to consolidate the above-mentioned achievements and meet water-
related challenges, the Government drafted the National Water Plan (PNE), which is an 
extension of the guidelines of the National Water Strategy presented to His Majesty on 14 



 

IX 
 

April 2009 in Fez. 

The main principles considered in the development of the PNE action plans focus on: 

 Integrated and concerted management of water demand and water resources; 

 Strengthening of the country's water security and adaption to climate change; 

 Solidarity in its various dimensions; 

  Promotion of good governance in the water sector and the search for efficiency in 
the activities of stakeholders, the search for convergence and the alignment of 
sector programmes; and 

 Search for mechanisms and means of financing the water sector combining public 
subsidies and the direct recovery of costs through water rates. 

The PNE is based on three pillars, namely: 

•  Management of water demand and water valuation; 

•  Supply development; and 

•  Preservation of water resources, the natural environment and adaptation to climate 
change. 

Currently, and in accordance with of the new Law No. 36-15 on water, the National Water 
Plan (PNE) and the Water Resources Integrated Development Master Plans (PDAIRE) are 
being updated to cover the period up to 2050, taking into account impacts of climate 
change. 

IV. PRESENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY STRATEGY 

The 2030 National Energy Efficiency Strategy, which is part of His Majesty King 
Mohammed VI's far-sighted vision for energy transition and the reinforcement of 
renewable energies, aims to achieve a target of 52% of renewable energies in 
Morocco's energy mix. 

This strategy will be translated into a programme contract between the State and 
the Moroccan Energy Efficiency Agency (AMEE). It includes several measures 
planned for the period 2018-2021, affecting the most energy-intensive sectors, 
notably the Transport sector, the leading energy consumer sector with a 
consumption  rate of 38%, followed by the construction sector with 33%, and 
industry with a final energy consumption share of 21%. The agricultural sector 
and public lighting, with an energy consumption rate of 8%, are also targeted.  

Today, the energy bill remains high, given the Kingdom's energy dependence on 
outside sources. This bill is amounts to approximately DH 52.5 billion annually, 
of which 93.3%  is for imported energy, whereas Morocco has an institutional, 
legal and organizational environment that could enable it to guarantee the 
sustainability of this service and ro diversify its sources of energy. 

When this strategy was presented to the Government Council, the latter decided 
to further review the measures and commitments of the ministerial departments 
concerned by the strategy and to verify the indicators in an effort to enable 
collective participation and mobilization of the sectors concerned, and indicated 
that the National Energy Efficiency Strategy would be adopted by a Council of 
Ministers. 

V. AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GREEN MOROCCO PLAN 

The Moroccan Government uses the agricultural strategy of its Green Morocco 
Plan to capitalize on its experience and wishes to deepen its cooperation with 
the African Development Bank through a multi-sectoral support programme for 
the inclusive and sustainable development of agricultural sub-sectors, covering 
the following components: 

• Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 
sectors, 

• Support for the sustainability of rural employment through the sustainable use of 



 

X 
 

natural resources by the agricultural sector. 

 

VI. MODALITIES FOR THE MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
PROGRAMME 

Based on the first two experiments with the Support Programme of the African 
Development Bank for the Green Morocco Plan, an institutional framework will be 
formalized, focusing on the technical responsibility of the relevant ministries and on 
the overall coordination of the Budget Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance.  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





















































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 
 

 
 
 

MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN AND YOUTH 
EMPOWERMENTPROJECT (AVACYEP) 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

Grant Information 

Client’s information 
 
BORROWER:      Republic of Mozambique 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA)  
Financing plan 
 

Source Amount (UA 
million) 

Instrument 

ADF  11.001 Grant 
GoM   0.74 Counterpart funds 
Beneficiaries    0.24 Beneficiaries in-kind 

contribution 
TAAT (AfDB)    0.26 Grant 
TOTAL COST   12.24  

 
Key financing information 
 

  
Grant currency ADF UA11.00 

million 
Interest type* NA 
Interest rate spread* NA 
Commitment fee* NA 
Other fees* NA 
Tenor NA 
Service Charge NA 
Grace period NA 
FIRR, NPV (base case)       24.81 % 
EIRR (base case)                21% 
 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 
 
Concept Note approval  

 
February 2018 

Project approval July 2018 
Effectiveness September 2018 
Completion December 2023 
Last Disbursement December  2023 
Last repayment (month, year) 

 
  

                                                 
1 Resources coming from the cancelable amount from a closed Project 



 
 

iii 
 

I. Project Summary 
1.1. The Agriculture Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project (AVACYEP) is an integrated 
project to strengthen the capacity of rural communities to address the inter-linked challenges of food 
production, rural poverty, food insecurity and access to markets through the provision of horticulture 
and livestock related infrastructure, and improving food production and marketing activities, as well as 
capacity building for the affected communities. The total project cost is 12.241 Units of Account (17.294 
million dollars) over 5 years (2018-2023) and will be implemented in the four districts of Moamba, 
Namaacha, Chókwé and Chonguene with estimated total direct beneficiaries of 20,000 and additional 
20,000 indirect beneficiaries. This project consists of three approaches for scaling up agriculture water 
infrastructure development through: (i) increased horticultural crop production through value chain 
improvement, (ii) contribute to the introduction of best practice agricultural technologies to improve 
productivity of the red meat (i.e. cattle and goats) value chains, (iii) establishment of incubation centers 
for youth and women in order to promote entrepreneurship and agribusiness in order to create an 
appropriate and conducive environment for business development through advisor services and transfer 
of technologies to the beneficiaries of the program; (iv) through the aforementioned activities enhance 
the resilience to climate change and climate variability and risk.   

1.2. Needs Assessment: The AVACYEP emerged from the need to promote a competitive and inclusive 
agribusiness in the Maputo and Gaza provinces through increasing agricultural productivity and animal 
production; providing rural infrastructure to support production (i.e. irrigation, storage facilities); use of 
improved agricultural inputs (i.e. certified seeds and fertilizers); practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs); vaccinations; agro-processing; 
access to market; and, promotion of value chain development. The project also emerged in order to 
tackle the Bank’s and Government investment made at the Massingir Dam to promote irrigation 
development for the production of food crops and livestock with the aim of improving food security, 
thereby contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy in the region, and ensuring wealth 
creation for the rural population, including women and youth. It is expected that the private sector will 
fully participate in supporting the smallholders and the emerging farmers throughout-grower or contract 
farming approaches, supply of agricultural inputs, agro-processing, marketing the agricultural produce, 
and financing agricultural activities.   
 
1.3 Bank’s Added Value: The Project is also in line with the Bank’s High 5 Action Plan the Bank’s 
Ten Year Strategy (2013-2022), Agricultural Transformation in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) under the 
Bank’s High 52 including the Technologies for Africa Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) and Enable 
Youth Programs in order to transform the agriculture sector to enhance the country competitiveness and 
develop domestic clusters of agri-business and integrated value chains that can increase domestic value 
addition, generate jobs and attract FDI and know-how. The AVACYEP will also contribute to the second 
pillar of the new Country Strategy Paper 2018-2022, under preparation, through the envisaged increased 
agriculture productivity as a result of the improved water and land management activities and 
introduction of science based, proven and high impact technologies. The new CSP 2016-2021, currently 
under preparation, focuses on two strategic pillars that have been approved by CODE: Pillar I infrastructure 
development; and Pillar II Agriculture. 

                                                 
2 High 5 refers to the five priority areas that the Bank will be focus on in the next 10 years.   



 

 
 

 
 

iv 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
II. 

R
E

SU
L

T
S-B

A
SE

D
 L

O
G

IC
A

L
 F

R
A

M
E

W
O

R
K

 
 

C
ountry and P

roject N
am

e:    M
ozam

bique - A
gricultural V

alue C
hain and Y

outh E
m

pow
erm

ent Project (V
achangam

e). 
P

urpose of the P
roject:            T

o contribute to rural poverty reduction by ensuring food, incom
e, and nutrition security in a sustainable m

anner.  
 

R
E

SU
L

T
S C

H
A

IN
 

P
E

R
F

O
R

M
A

N
C

E
 IN

D
IC

A
T

O
R

S 
M

E
A

N
S O

F
 

V
E

R
IF

IC
A

T
IO

N
 

R
ISK

S/M
IT

IG
A

T
IO

N
 

M
E

A
SU

R
E

S 
IN

D
IC

A
T

O
R

  (IN
C

L
U

D
IN

G
 C

SI) 
B

A
SE

L
IN

E
 

T
A

R
G

E
T

  

IM
P

A
 

Poverty R
eduction and livelihood im

provem
ents 

for w
om

en and youth  
N

ational Poverty R
ate 

49%
 (2015) 

 
42%

 (2025)
 

M
E

F R
eports 

 

OUTCOMES 

1. Increased productivity and incom
e by w

om
en 

and youth in  the red m
eat  and horticulture 

value chains  
2. Increased youth em

ploym
ent and A

gribusiness 
ventures 

   

1. Increased annual yields and incom
e based for red m

eat and 
vegetables for youth and w

om
en (50%

); 
2. N

°. of skilled and unskilled jobs created (50 %
 Fem

ale) in 
the selected districts of G

aza and M
aputo provinces 

  

1. 1.5-2.0 ton/ha m
ajor 

vegetables,  159,274 
goats 
U

SD
250.00/year 

2. 6500 in the G
aza 

and 2300 in M
aputo 

districts 
   

1. 2.5-4.0 ton/ha of 
vegetables,  179274 
goats and 
U

SD
400.00/year 

2. 8000 in G
aza and 3000 

in M
aputo 

 

x 
M

E
F statistics 

x 
M

A
SA

 reports 
x 

IN
E

 statistics 
x 

W
FP reports 

labour m
arket 

observatory 
 

 

A
ssum

ptions 
1 

G
overnm

ent com
m

itm
ent, 

social and political consensus 
and m

acroeconom
ic stability 

2 
N

o restriction im
posed on 

w
ater extraction for irrigation. 

3 
N

o restrictions on private 
sector/ N

G
O

 participation in 
w

ater harvesting infrastructure 
and setting up of livestock 

OUTPUTS 

A
:  A

griculture V
alue C

hain D
evelopm

ent 
1. H

orticulture V
alue C

hain
 

(a) Irrigation schem
es using irrigation kits 

rehabilitated 
(b) A

griculture productivity im
proved 

(c) horticulture value addition services supported   
2. R

ed M
eat V

alue C
hain

 

(d)   livestock production practices im
proved  

(e) R
ed m

eat value addition services supported  
(f)  livestock infrastructures installed 

3. Y
outh and W

om
en E

m
pow

erm
ent 

(g) A
gribusiness incubation for w

om
en and youth 

entrepreneurs including investm
ent fund and 

finance m
echanism

 created 

 (a) 
A

rea developed w
ith irrigation kits 

(b) 
N

° of farm
ers, adopting new

 production technologies 
(including clim

ate com
patible technologies) 

(c) 
N

° of processing facilities and m
arketing service providers 

(d) 
livestock ow

ners adopting new
 production technologies  

(e) 
N

° of livestock processing facilities and m
arketing service 

providers 
(f) 

N
° of surface, w

ater troughs, m
ultifunctional boreholes 

slaughter-houses, disease control centers, processing 
facilities and feed stock sites 

(g) 
N

° of business plans and proposals approved for financing 
(50%

 of w
hich ow

ned by fem
ales) w

ithin the incubation 
program

 including accessing to financial m
echanism

. 

  (a) 530ha w
ith 

irrigation kits in 
2018 

(b) 8000 in 2018 
 (c)  3 and 4 in 2018 
(d)  2000 in 2018 
(e) 3 and 4 in 2018 
(f) 30, 48, 4, 2, 12, 5 in 

2018 
 (g) 560 in 2018 (122 

w
om

en) 
 

 (a) 880ha w
ith irrigation 

kits by year 2023 
(b) 

16000 by 2023 
(c) 3 and 4 in 2023 
(d) 

4000 in 2023 
(e)  3 and 4 in 2023 
(f)  45, 64, 6, 3, 15 and 

10 by 2023 
 (g) 

1500 in 2023 
(750 w

om
en) 

 

 
Project M

&
E

 
reports 

 
A

R
A

-Sul 
M

E
F  

M
A

SA
 

IN
G

C
 

C
E

R
N

A
C

A
R

T
A

 
SE

T
SA

N
 

D
irectorates of 
Livestock 

D
am

 operation 
records 

 R
isk: Lim

ited business and 
technical skills of targeted youth 
and w

om
en and M

SM
E

s in value 
chain m

anagem
ent 

M
itigation m

easure: Project 
includes business and technical 
skills training for targeted 
beneficiaries. 
R

isk: F
arm

ers w
ith no interest to 

adopt new
 technologies: 

M
itigation m

easure:  
Prom

oting stakeholder 
participation, engagem

ent and 
integration.  

B
: P

roject M
anagem

ent  
i   E

nhanced capacity of PIU
  

ii. M
&

E
 system

 established 
  iii. C

apacity building conducted 

(a) 
N

° of PM
U

 staff including those from
 the districts 

coordinating the project recruited 
(b) 

M
&

E
 system

 in place 
(c) 

B
aseline survey 

(d) 
T

raining project staff in M
&

E
, D

am
 Safety, A

griculture 
Financial Services and m

anaging clim
ate risk &

 
im

plem
enting adaptation  

(e) 
G

A
PI, FD

A
, ID

E
 and IPE

M
E

 supported 
(f) 

N
° of studies on environm

ent, social and clim
ate issues 

(a) 
0 staff in 2018 

(b) 
0 system

s 
(c) 

0 
(d) 

5 staff 
(e) 

0 institutions 
(f) 

6 studies 

(a) 1 staff  
(b) 1 M

&
E

 
(c) 1 
(d) 11 staff 
(e) 3 institutions 
(f) 12 

R
isk: A

daptability of selected 
seeds 
M

itigation m
easure:  R

esearch 
and dem

onstrative activities, 
extension and capacity 
building 

KEY 
ACTIVITIES 

C
om

ponents 
Inputs 

 C
om

ponent 1 - A
griculture V

alue C
hain D

evelopm
ent - Sub-com

ponent 1.1 horticulture value chain; 1.2 red m
eat value chain and 1.3 youth and w

om
en em

pow
erm

ent. 
C

om
ponent 1 cost: U

A
 9806,0 m

illion (77.96%
). 

C
om

ponent 2: Institutional Support and P
roject M

anagem
ent - Sub-com

ponent 3.1 Project C
oordination; 3.2 M

onitoring and E
valuation and 3.3 C

apacity B
uilding. 

C
om

ponent 2 cost: U
A

 2435,0 m
illion (22.04%

). 
 

 P
roject C

ost: U
A

 12.241m
illion. 

A
D

F
 G

rant: U
A

11.00.00 m
illion (90%

). 
G

overnm
ent: U

A
 0, 730. m

illion (6.0%
).  

B
eneficiaries: U

A
 0,240 m

illion (1.9%
). 

T
A

A
T

 (A
fD

B
): U

A
 0,260.0 m

illion (2.1) 



 

 
 

 
 

v 

 

                                           III. P
roject T

im
efram

e 
 

A
ctivity D

escription 
2018 

2019 
2020 

2020 
2021 

2022 
2023 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

1. 
A

ppraisal M
ission 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

2. 
G

rant N
egotiation 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

3. 
B

oard A
pproval 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

4. 
Signature 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

5. 
Fulfilm

ent of 
C

onditions for 
E

ffectiveness 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

6. 
Project L

aunch /Start 
O

ff 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

7. 
C

onstruction of 
Infrastructures 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

8. 
T

ransfer of 
technologies to 
farm

ers and livestock 
ow

ners 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

9. 
Im

prove V
alue chain 

production  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

10. M
arketing and A

gro-
processing Facilities  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

11. R
ehabilitation of 

youth incubation  
centers 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

12. Project 
im

plem
entation  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

13. N
° of business plans 

and proposals 
approved for financing  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

14. Supervision and 
M

onitoring 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

15. B
ank PC

R
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

16. A
udit 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 



 

1 
 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED GRANT/ TO MOZAMBIQUE FOR 

THE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN AND YOUTH EMPOWERMENT 
PROJECT (AVACYEP) 

 
Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed grant of UA 11.00 million 
from the ADF and UA 0.73 million from the Republic of  Mozambique for the financing requirement of 
the Agriculture Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project (AVACYEP) in Mozambique. 

I. – Strategic Thrust & Rationale  
 

1.1.  PRSP and CSP priorities, Key Development Issue(s) project  
 
1.1 The Mozambican Government has been making efforts to transform the agriculture sector which 
culminated in the preparation of the National Investment Plan for the Agrarian Sector (PNISA -2014 to 
2018, currently under review to extend it up to 2022). Through PNISA, the Government identified 6 
Agricultural Growth Corridors to promote agricultural development, namely: (i) Pemba-Lichinga corridor 
that is suitable for the production of potatoes, wheat, beans, maize, soybeans, cotton, tobacco and poultry; 
(ii) Nacala corridor with potential to grow cassava, maize, cotton, fruits, poultry and peanuts; (iii) Zambezi 
Valley corridor that can produce rice, maize, potatoes, livestock, poultry and cotton; (iv) Beira corridor for 
maize, wheat, vegetables, soybeans, rice, livestock and poultry; (v) Limpopo corridor for rice, vegetables, 
livestock and poultry; and (vi) Maputo corridor that would focus on rice, vegetables, livestock (red meat) 
and poultry. While these corridors are not necessarily aligned to the transport corridors, some have achieved 
a degree of development in terms of infrastructure, institutions and agricultural development, while others 
have not commenced any form of development. 
 
1.2 Under the effort of contributing to the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy and also supporting the 
implementation of the Government’s 5-Year-Investment Plan, the Maputo and Limpopo corridors have 
been selected for the implementation of this project considering their high potential for unlocking the 
development of approximately 450,000 ha of arable land, out of which 110,000 ha are suitable for irrigation 
development. The target staple commodities include horticulture and livestock (red meat), and are 
considered as priority commodities in both the Maputo and Limpopo Development Corridors, especially in 
the large irrigation schemes of Baixo Limpopo and Chókwé (Gaza Province) and the Sabié-Incomati 
(Maputo Province). The main constraints the horticulture value chain faces are related to the availability of 
appropriate seeds, pest control and processing; while for livestock the challenges are related to health 
(disease control), nutrition (feed stock production) and markets (value addition and processing).  If these 
limiting factors are addressed, both value chains can contribute to the improvement of the quality of life, 
nutrition and income of the local people, in particular youth and women, through the creation of business 
opportunities and decent employment for both groups along the priority agricultural value chains.  
 
1.3 The investments will also complement previous Bank financed projects such as the Massingir Dam 
Agriculture Rehabilitation and Emergency Projects, Baixo Limpopo and climate Resilience project 
(BLICRP), Sustainable Land and Water Management Project (SLWMP) and Drought Recovery and 
Agriculture Resilient Project (DRARP), all of which have invested in irrigation and livestock infrastructures 
and processing facilities for horticulture. The project also incorporates the Technologies for African 



 

2 
 

Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), an initiative to help African countries significantly increase 
agricultural and livestock productivity and production rapidly and at scale by adopting existing 
technologies, including high yielding and climate resilient seed varieties. The project is also well in line 
with the Government’s poverty reduction efforts looking to support increased agricultural production and 
employment promotion (on a national scale) with particular attention given to youth and women. The 
project is furthermore aligned with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), particularly in its operational 
focus areas (private sector infrastructure) and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security). The 
project also aligns with the Banks Climate Change Plan (CCAP 2, 2016-2020) which promotes the 
implementation of climate smart agriculture. Furthermore, the project is therefore expected to provide an 
enabling economic environment for private sector development and participation. 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement  
 
1.2.1 The project will be implemented in two provinces of Maputo and Gaza, which have potential for 
horticulture and livestock (red meat) production. These provinces are covered by three of the largest 
irrigation schemes in the country, namely Chókwé, Baixo Limpopo and Sabie, and also accounts for the 
largest number of livestock heads in Mozambique. The interventions under the High 5 are aligned with the 
Government 5-year Plan of promoting agriculture production and productivity, that will increase 
employment as well as improving competitiveness of the national economy. The AVACYEP is in line with 
the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-2022), Agricultural Transformation in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) 
under the Bank’s High 5, including TAAT and Enable Youth Action Plans in order to transform the 
agriculture sector to enhance the country competitiveness and develop domestic clusters of agri-business 
and integrated value chains that can increase domestic value addition, generate jobs and attract FDI and 
know-how. The AVACYEP will also contribute to the second pillar of the new Country Strategy Paper 
2018-2022, under preparation, through the envisaged increased agriculture productivity as a result of the 
improved water and land management activities. The new CSP 2018-2022, currently under preparation, 
focuses on two strategic pillars that have been approved by CODE: Pillar I infrastructure development; and 
Pillar II Agriculture.  
1.3.  Donor Coordination 

 
  

Sector Size 
GDP Export Labor 

[Agriculture/CC] 26% 20% 80% 

Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**  

Organization % contribution out of  a total of Total 250.4 million UA/ Year 
       2016-2017    2014-2015 2012-2013  

WB 53% 45% 24%  
USAID 7% 9% 25%  

EC 10% 13% 13.4%  
AfDB 14% 18% 8.4%  
JICA 10% 7% 7.2%  

Others 6% 8% 22%  
     

Existence of Thematic Working Groups [Y] 

Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches [N] 

ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** [M] 
* as most appropriate ** Years [yy1 to yy2] *** for this sector or sub-sector   
**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement    



 

3 
 

1.4. Comments on Donor Coordination  
 
1.4.1 An active thematic donors’ group for the Agriculture sector named the Agriculture and Rural 
Economic Development Group (led by the World Bank), in which the AfDB is member meets on a regular 
basis.  Other members of the group are: IFAD, USAID, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland/SDC, JICA, Ireland, 
Austria, Italy, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, UK/DFID, Norway, European 
Commission, FAO, UNDP, DFID, and Belgian.  Most of these are providing support to the agriculture 
development through the Development Strategy of the Agrarian Sector (PEDSA) 2011-2020, the National 
Investment Plan for the Agriculture Sector (PNISA) and the Integrated Plan for Agriculture 
Commercialization (PICA).  Related to climate change and environment issues, the Bank regularly 
participates in the meetings of the Environment Group, led by the UN.   

II. –  Project Description  

2.1.  Project Components 
 
2.1.1 The overall objective of the proposed Project is to contribute to rural poverty reduction by ensuring 
food, income, and nutrition security in a sustainable manner. The specific objectives are to (i) increase 
horticultural crop production through value chain improvement, (ii) contribute to the introduction of best 
practice technologies to improve productivity in the red meat (cattle and goats) value chain, (iii) establish 
incubation centers for youth and women in order to promote entrepreneurship and agribusiness with the 
goal of creating an appropriate and conducive environment for business development through advisor 
services and transfer of technologies to the beneficiaries of the program; (iv) through the aforementioned 
activities, enhance resilience to climate change and climate variability and risks. 

Table 2.1 Project Components 

nr. Agriculture Value 
Chain  Development  

Est. cost 
(USD 

million) 

Component Description 
 

1 Sub-component 1.1:  
Horticulture Value 
Chain Development   

5,100.00 1.1.1 Improve Horticulture infrastructure: Install 30 irrigation kits (5ha 
each) and 20 irrigation kits (10ha each). Provide assorted horticultural 
inputs (improved seeds, fertilizers and agro-chemicals) and farm tools 
including shade nets for crop production.1.1.2 Facilitate value addition 
through agro-processing of vegetables.  Facilitate horticulture products 
packaging and labelling and Facilitate marketing linkages using 1.1.3 MIC. 
Training: Facilitate training of trainers and farmers; and value addition 
through agro-processing of vegetables, horticulture products packaging, 
labelling and marketing  

1 Sub-component 1.2: 
Red Meat Value 
Chain: Technologies 
for African 
Agricultural 
Transformation  

5,100.00 1.2.1: Improved Animal Health: through renovation and construction of 
vaccination infrastructure; establishment of veterinary checkpoints and; 
provision of vaccines for tick-borne disease and parasites.1.2.2 Increased 
Animal Production: by promoting practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs); 
selection of goat genetic material within current flocks; introduction of 
improved breeds for specific markets; introduction of private sector driven 
business model for fattening and animal processing. The project will also 
promote animal asset management by establishing protocols for 
traceability (for disease and control of theft), branding and veterinary 
control points (for disease and theft monitoring). 
1.2.3.Production and conservation of Nutritious Feed and Forage: to 
improve the production and accessibility of quality feed and forage, by 



 

4 
 

establishing planned use of natural resources (including grazing and 
browsing resources); integrated production of feed and forage in 
conventional food crop production, through the use of irrigation schemes 
where available for cultivation of high quality forage (brachiaria, mucuna 
and other highly nutritious varieties of forages); implementation of FEAST 
for monitoring inventory and uptake of feed resources; promotion of forage 
production and support to National Research Institute (IIAM) for effective 
seed distribution system for forage seeds; introduction of hay bale making 
and ration formulation to young entrepreneurs; construction of 
multipurpose boreholes for water provision.  
1.2.4 Private sector led Value Addition and Marketing:  Construction of 
marketing facilities closer to high goat volume areas or areas with high 
demand; rehabilitation and construction where needed of livestock hub 
(abattoirs, dip tank, vet clinic, and market centre), and; rehabilitation of 
slaughter slabs and mini abattoirs; support to establish private sector 
management of marketing infrastructure. 
2.5 Enhanced Capacity Building: of animal health worker, para-veterinary 
agents, laboratory officers, and relevant government technicians. This will 
include: training and equipping 20 – 30 para-vets; training 5 agro-dealers 
to stock vet medicines, and provision of starter kits; organize and train 
farmers on high quality forage production (in the irrigation schemes); ILRI 
facilitated-technology transfer to IIAM on forage seed production and 
multiplication (seeds and training); training and equipping youth and 
community on mechanization hay bale making; build capacity 
of  extension workers to use Feed Assessment Tool (FEAST); capacity 
building feed formulation; capacity building of lab staff for use of nitrogen, 
and; establishment of ICT-driven platform to improve knowledge and 
skills on livestock value chain. 

… Sub-Component 1.3: 
Youth and Women 
Empowerment:  

4159.00 1.3.1 Capacity Development: Implement a comprehensive capacity 
development for about 2000 youths and women in agriculture production, 
agribusiness, post-harvest loss reduction, animal health services, and 
entrepreneurial skills across the red meat and horticulture value chains.  
1.3.2 Promote innovation accelerations of agriculture production through 
the introduction of new technologies using the existing youth incubation 
centres.  1.3.3 Establish a youth investment fund or financing mechanism 
(grant, soft loans, and risk Guarantee Fund) for financing youth led 
agribusinesses.  Partner with public and private stakeholders involved in 
youth employment promotion for effective transition, market access and 
other financing servicing and business to business networking.  1.3.4 
Provision of  production starter kits (goats, and infrastructure for red meat 
value chains, seeds, fertilizer and appropriate irrigation and land 
preparation  equipment for the horticulture value chain):   

2 Project Coordination 
and Monitoring and 
Evaluation 

2900.00  

2 Sub-component 2.1: 
Project Coordination 

2.1.1 Establish and support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) including 
recruitment of PCU staff, procure vehicles and office equipment for PCU 
and facilitate annual financial and procurement audit. 

 Sub-component 2.2: 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation: 

2.2.1Prepare and operationalize the Project Implementation Manual and 
the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system; prepare project annual 
work plans and budgets; progress review meetings; baseline survey and 
beneficiary impact assessment. 

 Sub-component 2.3  
Capacity Building 

2.3.1 Facilitate community/famer sensitization and mobilization into 
groups (associations/cooperatives); support to GAPI, FDA, and IPEME 
and Produce brochures with best practices. 

 
  



 

5 
 

2.2.  Technical solution retained and other alternatives explored  
 

Table 2.2:  Project Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 
Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Focus on cattle value 
chain 

There is a long-standing history of 
research on cattle while small 
ruminants have been relatively 
neglected by international and local 
research  

� There is growing demand for small ruminant meat 
production, especially goats. Meat consumption in 
Mozambique, as in many other parts of Africa, are met by 
imports. The urban population can benefit from local small 
ruminant production, whilst increasing incomes of various 
actors across the meat value chain. Hence this project’s 
focus on small ruminants. 

 A non-integrated 
value chain solution 
for enhancing 
productivity for the 
small ruminants 
sector.   

The challenges of smallholder 
livestock producers in Mozambique 
spans across the spectrum, from 
health, breeding and production, 
feed and forage to value addition 
and marketing 

� Focusing on only one segment of the value chain will be 
insufficient to increase productivity and production 
volumes.  In order to increase productivity, it is key to 
address both supply and demand constraints of the small 
ruminants’ value chain.  

Construction of Agro-
Processing Center 

Government or community 
management of the Agro-
Processing Center 

x Lack of flexible and market oriented management. 
x Lack of private sector linkage 

Providing finance 
services through local  

Use the existing financial services 
to provide financial resources to 
youth and women 

� Bank guarantees are the limiting factor for women and 
youth access to financial services. 

� The Banks do not offer any capacity building on financial 
managements services  

2.3.  Project Type   
 
2.3.1  The project is a stand-alone investment operation with a source of funding mainly coming from 
the African Development Fund blended with Government financing. The Project is one of the three 
selected interventions planned for 2018 under the new CSP for Mozambique 2017-2022.  

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  
 
2.4.1  Project Cost and Financing Arrangement  
 
The Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is UA 12.24 million, which will be financed 
by (i) ADF Grant of UA 11.0 million (89.6%%) covering all major Project activities, and also taxes and 
duties; (ii) the Government contribution of UA 0.73 million (6.0%) through in-kind (monetary value) for 
existing Government staff salaries participating in Project activities, office space, and office utilities;(iii) 
beneficiaries in-kind contribution of UA 0.24 million (2.0%) through specific labour during installation of 
the irrigation systems, agricultural production activities and also valuable time for attending training 
sessions; and (iv) AfDB TAAT contribution (Grant) of UA 0.3 million (2.4%). The price contingencies 
were based on projected local and foreign inflation rates of 5% and 2% per annum, respectively. The 
physical contingencies ranged from 0% to 8% (works) based on (i) common technical practices, and (ii) 
available Engineer’s cost estimates. Taxes and duties cover the total amount of UA 740.500,00 
corresponding to 6% of the total project costs. This is motivated by the need to ensure seamless project 
implementation in an environment of tight budgetary space for the Government, a full case for the ADF to 
cover duty and taxes, in line with the Policy on Expenditure Eligible for Bank Financing is formulated in 
Appendix IV. Summary of the Project costs by components, sources of financing, expenditure categories 
and schedule by component are presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6 and the details are in PAR Volume II 
Technical Annex B.2.  



 

6 
 

Table 2.3:       Summary Project Cost Estimates by Component 
Component Name 

(MZN '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Total Base 
Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs 

1. Agriculture Value Chain 
Development 284,615.9 520,787.1 805,403.0 3,177.0 5,612.4 8,789.4 64 78 
2. Institutional Support and 
Project Management 183,070.1 35,057.9 218,128.0 2,043.5 391.3 2,434.8 16 22 
Total BASELINE COSTS 467,686.0 555,845.0 1,023,531.0 5,220.5 6,003.7 11,224.2 53 100 
Physical Contingencies 11,552.0 25,809.0 37,361.0 128.6 288.1 416.7 69 4 
Price Contingencies 38,940.8 14,813.9 53,754.7 434.7 165.4 600.1 28 5 
Total PROJECT COSTS 518,178.8 596,467.9 1,114,646.7 5,783.8 6,457.2 12,241.0 53 109 

 
Table 2.4: Sources of Finance 

Source of Financing 
Total Amount (UA '000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Taxes & Duties Total 
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

ADF Grant 6,162.3 95.4 4,072.0 80.7 740.5 100.0 10,974.8 89.6 
Government - - 730.8 14.5 - - 730.8 6.0 
Beneficiaries - - 240.5 4.8 - - 240.5 2.0 
TAAT/ILRI Grant 294.9 4.6 - - - - 294.9 2.4 
Total 6,457.2 100.0 5,043.3 100.0 740.5 100.0 12,241.0 100.0 

 
Table 2.5: Project cost by category of expenditure [amounts in million UA equivalents] 

Category of Expenditure 
Amount (MZN '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For’gn 
Exch 

Foreign Local Total Foreign Local Total  

 A. Investment Costs               
1. GOODS               
Vehicle 30,212.0 -0.0 30,212.0 337.2 -0.0 337.2 100 
Equipment 17,547.9 5,174.2 22,722.1 195.9 57.8 253.6 77 
Subtotal 47,759.9 5,174.2 52,934.1 533.1 57.8 590.9 90 
2. WORKS               
Horticulture-Related Infrastructure 208,302.0 19,500.0 227,802.0 2,325.2 217.7 2,542.9 91 
Livestock Infrastructure 131,930.2 23,568.4 155,498.6 1,472.7 263.1 1,853.3 85 
Youth and Women Empowerment 46,600.0 81,810.8 128,410.8 520.2 913.2 1,433.4 36 
Subtotal 386,832.2 124,879.2 511,711.4 4,318.0 1,394.0 5,712.0 76 
3. SERVICES               
Training - 59,882.1 59,882.1 - 668.4 668.4 - 
TAAT-Related Technical Support 21,944.4 1,368.0 23,312.4 245.0 15.3 260.2 94 
ILRI TAAT Grant-Contribution 23,938.0 - 23,938.0 267.2 - 267.2 100 
Survey and Studies 9,387.9 5,130.0 14,517.9 104.8 57.3 162.1 65 
Institutional Support - 47,300.0 47,300.0 - 528.0 528.0 - 
Financial Audit 6,258.6 - 6,258.6 69.9 - 69.9 100 
Consultancy 41,724.0 - 41,724.0 465.7 - 465.7 100 
Subtotal 103,252.9 113,680.1 216,933.0 1,152.6 1,269.0 2,421.5 48 
4. Duties & Taxes - 61,044.5 61,044.5 - 681.4 681.4 - 
Total Investment Costs 537,845.0 304,778.0 842,623.0 6,003.7 3,402.1 9,405.8 64 
B. Recurrent Costs               
1. OPERATING COST               
Personnel_Govt Staff/NBF - 16,050.0 16,050.0 - 179.2 179.2 - 
Personnel_PCU Staff - 58,608.0 58,608.0 - 654.2 654.2 - 
Daily Subsistence Allowance - 11,250.0 11,250.0 - 125.6 125.6 - 
Operation and Maintenance - 76,612.4 76,612.4 - 855.2 855.2 - 
Subtotal - 162,520.4 162,520.4 - 1,814.1 1,814.1 - 
2. Duties & Taxes - 387.6 387.6 - 4.3 4.3 - 
Total Recurrent Costs - 162,908.0 162,908.0 - 1,818.5 1,818.5 - 



 

7 
 

Category of Expenditure 
Amount (MZN '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For’gn 
Exch 

Foreign Local Total Foreign Local Total  

Total BASELINE COSTS 537,845.0 467,686.0 1,005,531.0 6,003.7 5,220.6 11,224.3 53 
Physical Contingencies 25,809.0 11,522.0 37,331.0 288.1 128.6 416.7 69 
Price Contingencies 14,814.0 38,940.8 53,754.7 165.4 434.7 600.0 28 
Total PROJECT COSTS 578,467.9 518,148.8 1,096,616.7 6,457.2 5,783.9 12,241.1 53 

 
Table 2.6: Expenditure schedule by component [amounts in million UA equivalents] 

 
Item Description 

Amount (UA '000) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total 
1. Agriculture Value Chain Development 3,399.3 3,333.8 1,395.3 330.5 330.5 8,789.4 
2. Institutional Support and Project Management 727.4 428.9 440.5 379.8 458.4 2,435.0 
Total BASELINE COSTS 4,126.7 3,762.7 1,835.8 710.3 788.9 11,224.4 
Physical Contingencies 154.9 147.3 80.0 15.5 19.1 416.8 
Price Contingencies 54.7 158.6 148.1 99.4 139.1 599.9 
Total PROJECT COSTS 4,336.3 4,068.6 2,063.9 825.2 947.1 12,241.1 
Amount for Taxes and Duties (already included) 337.2 247.6 111.4 16.2 28.1 740.5 

2.5.  Project’s Target area and population  
 
2.5.1  The activities of the project will be undertaken in two provinces, Gaza and Maputo. In each of the 
provinces two districts are selected to participate in the project. In Maputo, the project will be implemented 
in the districts of Moamba and Namaacha, while in Gaza the selected districts are Chókwè and Chonguene. 
The selected communities are those that are cultivating horticulture and livestock owners. They will be the 
direct beneficiaries of the activities under the project. The total direct beneficiaries of the project will be 
circa 20,000 individuals, of which about 60% will be women. The project will target 4000 households to 
increase the production of an additional 20,000 small ruminants in four districts in two provinces - Moamba 
and Namaacha districts (Maputo Province), and Chonguene, Massingir and Chókwè districts (Gaza 
Province). The indirect beneficiaries will be in the range of 20,000 people. With an average of 5 persons 
per household this would result in improved livelihoods for approximately 100,000 rural dwellers.   
 
2.5.2 Public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA), the Provincial and 
District directorates of Agriculture and Food Security, Veterinary Services, IIAM, the Agriculture 
Development Fund (FDA), the National Institute for Small and Medium Enterprises (IPEME) and the 
Office for Supporting Economic Production (GAPI) will benefit from the project interventions in terms of 
capacity building. Other indirect beneficiaries are agro processors, traders, entrepreneur, various service 
providers, NGOs, etc. In addition to infrastructure and improved agricultural practices, innovative 
techniques needed for quality maintenance of infrastructure, and conservation and processing of food 
products, will be developed.  

2.6.  Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1   Project Identification  
 
The investment in integrated agricultural development in the Lower Limpopo and Sábiè-Incomati regions 
within the Limpopo and Maputo Corridors, will respectively have a component for leveraging the existing 
infrastructure to increase agricultural productivity and producers’ access to markets. Increasing agricultural 
productivity, strengthening its resilience to climate shocks and building agriculture value chains, are all 
areas where the Government of Mozambique is looking forward to working with the AfDB.  



 

8 
 

The Value Chains and Youth Empowerment Project emerged from the need to promote a more competitive 
and inclusive agribusiness in the Maputo and Gaza provinces through increasing agricultural productivity 
and animal production, by providing rural infrastructure to support production (irrigation, storage facilities), 
use of improved agricultural inputs (certified seeds and fertilizers), practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs), vaccinations, agro-processing, access 
to market and promotion of the value chain development. The project also emerged in order to tackle the 
investment made at the Massingir Dam to promote irrigation development for the production of food crops 
with the aim of improving food security, contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy in 
the region, and wealth creation for the rural population including women and youth. It is expected that the 
private sector will fully participate in supporting the smallholders and the emerging farmers throughout-
grower or contract farming approaches, supply of agricultural inputs, agro-processing, marketing the 
agricultural produce, and financing agricultural activities.   

2.6.2   Project Preparation and Appraisal  
The project design was prepared following constant consultations with beneficiaries, government 
authorities, NGOs and development partners in Maputo and Gaza provinces.  While in the field, numerous 
interactions/consultations were conducted at the provincial and district levels; site visits to the selected 
districts and mini-workshops were held; and consultations with government, non -government and 
private organizations as well as community representatives near and within  some of the targeted 
communities were carried out to modify and fine-tune the project proposal. The Bank also deployed 
designed resources to fine-tune into AVACYEP, existing designs from the most recently implemented 
projects, i.e. Sustainable Land and Water Management Project and Baixo Limpopo Irrigation and Climate 
Resilience Project, in order to adjust proposed infrastructures to the implementation sites. The consultation 
also involved the provision of agricultural inputs to match farmers’ needs and their financial limitations to 
ensure sustainability of activities and meet the outcomes. Consultations were also carried out with a number 
of Government authorities and other development partners that participate in different development donor 
programmes.   

2.6.3    Project Implementation  
 
2.6.3.1  The proposed AVACYEP is based o n  a  fully participatory approach involving capacity training 
of members of the community and substantial training through demonstrative processes. The Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) at the project headquarters and the provincial technical staff will be responsible 
for the monitoring of project results including output and outcome indicators on a participatory fashion. 
Data collection and evaluation tasks would be performed by all the institutions involved in the project or in 
partnership with other relevant institutions under close supervision of the Monitoring and Evaluation expert 
of the project.  The community members will thus develop the capacity to maintain the community 
infrastructure, to be installed with support from the Agriculture Departments. 

2.7.  Bank Group Experience, Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

The overall performance assessment of the Bank’s portfolio in Mozambique conducted in 2017 is 3.30 on 
a scale of 1-4. The portfolio is comprised of 19 projects (17 public projects, 2 private sector projects and 1 
multinational project). There are no projects at risk. Learning from recent Project Completion Reports 
(PCR’s) and the ongoing Bank Projects in Mozambique which have informed the design features of the 
AVACYEP include the need to: a) improve the project design process with consideration to existing 
capacity within the country so as to ensure timely implementation; b) project readiness and quality at entry 
for both regional and national operations; c) Rationalize the number of conditions necessary to declare the 



 

9 
 

Grant effective in order to reduce implementation delays; d) increase capacity of implementing agencies 
especially in the project management); e) enhance the supervision of projects, particularly monitoring and 
evaluation to minimize delays in completion; and, f) delays in provision of counterpart funds, partly owing 
to late approval and release of funds by Government. For the closed Projects in the last 5 years, the PCRs 
are up to date with all the reports prepared and posted on the Bank website.  

2.8. Key Performance Indicators  
The key performance indicators for the project have been outlined in the Result Based Logical Framework.  
Special emphasis in order to assess the changes in the livelihood and nutrition levels within the household 
will be placed on the targeting indicators that should be monitored and those related specifically to women 
as they carry the majority of agriculture activities in the project area. Regular implementation progress will 
be measured through bi-annual Bank supervision missions led by Mozambique Country Office, Quarterly 
Progress Reports, and annual technical and financial audits.  The M&E of the PIU will collect and analyze 
project data to monitor performance. The main performance indicators disaggregated by gender will be 
monitored from the baseline scenario of the log frame include among others: (i) Area developed with 
irrigation kits; (ii) N° of farmers and livestock owners adopting new production technologies (including 
climate compatible technologies); (iii) N° of processing facilities and marketing service providers; (iv) N° 
of surface and subsurface reservoirs, water troughs, multifunctional boreholes slaughter-houses, disease 
control centers, processing facilities and feed stock sites; (v) N° of business plans and proposals approved 
for financing (50% of which owned by females) within the incubation program, including access to financial 
mechanisms; and (vi) number of women & men trained with basic agriculture and livestock skills. All 
indicators selected for the project will help to enhance agricultural performance in the Maputo and Gaza 
Provinces in particular, and in Mozambique in general. The Bank’s various supervision missions and 
periodic activity reports will reflect the level of achievement of the indicators.  

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 .  Economic and Financial Analysis  
 
The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 
28% and the Economic Net Present Value is estimated at USD 220 million at an opportunity cost of 10%. 
The economic values for the production inputs and equipment were developed using a standard conversion 
factor of 0.95, taking into account the taxes in the country. The economic prices used for the horticultural 
and red meat products were the prevailing market prices in the country.  
 
Sensitivity analysis using economic prices showed that a 5% decrease in capital costs marginally increased 
the ENPV to USD 222 million while maintaining the EIRR at 28%. On the other hand, a fall in the product 
prices by 3% reduced the ENPV to USD 93 million and EIRR to 16%.  Refer to Annex 3 on details on 
sensitivity analysis.  
 

FIRR, FNPV (base case) 24.81 % : USD 141 million  
EIRR, ENPV (base case) 28 % : USD 220 million  

 

Note: detailed calculations are available in Appendix in the Volume II, Technical Annex ….. 
 

The financial analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as well as the entire project level. 
This has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual beneficiaries, and aggregated for 
the project as a whole, on a with – and - without project basis. The analysis was carried out for on the 



 

10 
 

horticulture value chains focusing on five priority horticultural crops namely tomatoes, cabbages, 
cucumber, onion and pepper and red meat value chains, the latter focusing on beef and goat meat. The 
analysis is based on the assumption that the participating households will be producing horticultural crops 
under irrigation system and rearing of beef animals and goats under improved management systems. The 
project is expected to increase agricultural productivity through the provision of inputs and irrigation 
facilities, multipurpose boreholes, agro-processing and packaging equipment, livestock equipment and 
infrastructures for disease control and improved sanitation, extension services and institutional 
strengthening and capacity building. The analysis takes into account the current and incremental production 
under the improved management and assumes full production levels from year 3. The analysis shows that 
an average net income (gross margin) per farming household participating in the project will increase from 
USD 22.182 under the existing situation (without project) to USD 31,966 under project situation. The 
discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave a Financial Internal Rate of 
Return (FIRR) of 24.81%, and a Financial Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 141 million at an opportunity 
costs of 12%.  
 
Sensitivity analysis was conducted on the price changes on for the horticultural and red meat products and 
capital investments in the project. The results showed that a decrease in the prices of produce by 3% resulted 
into a reduction of the FIRR to 14.17% with FNPV of USD 28.30 million. This shows that the revenue is 
very sensitive to changes in the prices. It was also noted that a decrease in the capital cost by 5% resulted 
into an increase in the FIRR to 25.02% and FNPV increased to USD 142.50 million.  

3.2.  Environmental and Social Impacts  
 
3.2.1  Based on the proposed project scope the environmental and social (E&S) classification was 
validated as a Category 2 according to the African Development Bank’s Environmental and Social 
Assessment Procedures (ESAP). Hence an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was 
prepared and disclosed on the Bank’s website before 20th of June 2018.  This classification and attendant 
requirement is commensurate with the project classification stipulated by the country’s Regulamento Sobre 
Processo de Avaliação do Impacto Ambiental – Decreto No.54/2015. The principal objectives of conducting 
this environmental and social assessment and planning was to ensure that the project integrates mechanisms 
to reduce environmental impacts along the entire value chain, from production, marketing to product value 
addition/manufacture, usage and disposal. 

3.2.2  Environmental and Social Assessments indicate that although the project will have some site 
specific negative impacts, it is also posed to have numerous positive impacts among them: (i) improved 
production and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that will contribute to increased 
income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local economy of the Gaza and Maputo 
Province; (ii) improved access to irrigation kits that will foster water management and reduce the 
vulnerability of farmers to precarious weather conditions, ensuring all year round agricultural activities; 
(iii) improved agronomic practices and technologies for selected crops and improved varieties that are 
adapted to different climatic conditions; and (iv) improved agricultural production, productivity and market 
linkages that will foster job creation along the value chains. 
 
3.2.3 The negative impacts will stem from a number of activities in the infrastructure development and 
value chain components of the project. The potential negative impacts of the project include those 
associated with the construction of the infrastructure development, and agriculture production and value 
chain activities. Construction activities may result in (i) losses of vegetation cover due to site clearing, soil 
erosion, landscape degradation; (ii) noise, vibration and emissions from operation of machinery that may 
impair air quality and induce health implications: (iii) generation of wastes (including construction wastes); 



 

11 
 

(iv) disruption of water flows and hydrologic cycle which may impact activities of other water users. During 
operation phase, agriculture activities of value chain actors may lead to (i) increased use of agrochemicals 
including pesticides and fertilizers, which may contribute to soil and water (surface and groundwater) 
contamination, and increase health-risks of people exposed to pesticides, and (ii) waste and effluents from 
processing and marketing facilities.  These impacts are site specific and can be readily managed with the 
application of well-defined measures elaborated in the ESMP. Some of the mitigation measures to be 
implemented include (i) refilling the exposed or excavated soil soon after completion of works and avoiding 
or minimizing compaction of soils, (ii) establishing sustainable water management systems, and (iii) 
capacity building of value chain actors to promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture 
technologies such as integrated soil fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM), 
Waste-to-Energy techniques, and other sustainable land and water management practices.  

3.3.  Climate Change  
 
3.3.1  Agriculture production in Mozambique is vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and 
change.  Drought, floods and storms are increasing in frequency and intensity, while average temperatures 
during the growing season are rising. Crop failure, loss of livestock, reduction in productivity of pastures 
and outbreaks of pest and diseases are exacerbated by extreme climatic events.  Furthermore, severe floods 
and storms damage infrastructure (road, market and storage infrastructure) that support agriculture value 
chain development).  
 
Cognizant of the national commitment to combat climate change, the projects is being prepared taking into 
consideration the various National Strategies, Plans and Institutions relevant to Climate Change among 
them; (i) the Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)   which articulate the actions to be undertaken to 
adapt  to the inevitable impacts of climate change and to contribute to the global mitigation agenda . (ii) the 
National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation strategy 2013-2030 (2012)  which identifies adaptation 
and climate risk reduction  and low carbon development as national priorities (iii) National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) (2007) and the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR), aim to 
coordinate the elaboration and implementation of an action plan for adaptation to climate change for various 
economic and social development sectors, with an emphasis on disaster risk reduction, early warning 
systems, agriculture, fisheries, energy, water  resources, ecosystems, and coastal zones.  
 
In relation to the climate risk screening the project is category 2, it is potentially vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change and requires the identification and integration of practical climate risk management 
measures in project design. In this regards, the proposed AVACYEP will address critical climate adaptation 
needs of the smallholder farmers and other value chain actors in the project area. Some of the priority areas 
of action include (i) increase access to seeds adapted to local conditions (ii) promote good agriculture 
practices such as sustainable land management for increased agricultural yields; (iii) facilitate climate 
proofing of infrastructure, (iv) build capacity for agricultural planning and extension services to facilitate 
dissemination of climate information to farmers, and (iv) promote livelihood diversification.  Overall, the 
project will facilitate climate resilience along the selected value chains by promoting climate smart 
agriculture and improved agriculture technologies. 
  



 

12 
 

3.4.  Gender  
 
3.4.1 Agriculture is the most important economic sector for the wellbeing of rural households in 
Mozambique. As such, agriculture is linked to the income and consumption levels of rural households, and 
influences their food security, poverty, and malnutrition status, among other characteristics. Smallholders 
continue to dominate the agrarian sector, with 3.86 million households engaged in small-scale agriculture, 
out of a total of 4.268.585 farms, predominantly farmed by women. Gender mainstreaming in agriculture 
is guided by the Agriculture Gender Strategy. The strategy seeks to guarantee access and control of the 
resources, benefits, rights and equal opportunities, between women and men, and to increase food security 
and household revenue of men and women, with the ultimate goal of contributing to reduction of poverty 
and sustainable development.    

3.4.2 Key gender equality challenges in rural agriculture include i) Access to land- The Mozambican Land 
Law (Lei de Terra) provides for equal access to land for men and women but majority of women still do 
not have security of tenure for the land they work on.  Many are unaware of the registration process and 
access to land is still based on gender structures where women’s claims are usually socially embedded in 
their relations to their male relatives the project will therefore support land registration for women. ii) 
Access to affordable financial solutions- whilst women are the main household financial managers, they 
are often an overlooked target client for financial services providers. Although un- and underserved by 
formal financial institutions, women in Mozambique save using informal methods such as xitique (group 
savings) making them viable customers for local financial services. The project will therefore support 
business coaching, incubation and linkages to financial services for youth and female agripreneurs. Building 
on existing savings groups the project will support the strengthening of community based financial schemes 
to promote financial inclusion in rural areas. iii) Limited production capacity and value addition- both 
women and men in Mozambique are involved in the horticulture and red meat value chains, albeit with 
different patterns between male- and female-headed households. While women generally participate at all 
levels of the chains they face production related challenges and are minimally involved in value addition. 
The project will therefore support increased productivity for women and youth through the provision of 
starter kits for horticulture and red meat value chains including training and coaching in agribusiness, 
animal health, and training of community based extension services workers and creating linkages to formal 
extension services. 

3.5. Involuntary Resettlement 
 
3.5.1  The project is not expected to trigger any form of involuntary resettlement. 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1.  Implementation arrangements  
 
4.1.1   The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA) will be the Executing Agency (EA) for the 
Project which will be implemented in Gaza and Maputo Provinces, through MASA’s Directorate of 
Planning and International Cooperation (DPCI). A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be set up at the 
MASA, for the day to day effective implementation of the Project activities over a period of five (5) years. 
The MASA institutions such as the National Irrigation Institute (Instituto Nacional de Irrigação/INIR), the 
National Directorate of Agriculture and Silviculture (Direccão Nacional de Agricultura e 
Silvicultura/DINAS), Fund for Agriculture Development (Fundo de Desenvolvimento Agrário/FDA), and 
National Directorate for Agricultural Extension (Direcção Nacional de Extensão Agraria/DNEA), National 



 

13 
 

Directorate of Veterinary (Direccão Nacional de Veterinária / DINAV) and National Institute for 
Agricultural Research of Mozambique (Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária de Moçambique / IIAM) 
will be responsible for technical implementation in the areas linked with their mandates. Some of the 
components, i.e. Youth and Women Empowerment will be outsourced. The PCU will be constituted of a 
Project Coordinator (PC), Project Accountant, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, Procurement 
Specialist and support staff. For effective implementation, the agriculture offices in Gaza and Maputo 
Provinces will be provided with logistical support. The PCU will also be responsible for the overall 
monitoring and supervision of ESMF/ESMP implementation. The Project activities will be supported by 
MASA Technical Council that will compose the Project Steering Committee (PSC) which will be set-up, 
by the Government, to provide oversight responsibility and oversee Project compliance with sector policies 
and strategies. The PSC will comprise MASA Permanent Secretary and senior officials from DPCI, FDA, 
DNEA, DNP, INIR, DNE, IPEME (Institute for Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises), and GAPI 
(Small Scale Investment Support Office), DNS and IIAM. The PC will be secretary to the PSC. 
 
4.1.2  Financial Management, Disbursement and Auditing Arrangement: 
 
4.1.2.1  Financial Management: The overall conclusion of the FM Assessment is that MASA’s (through 
the Department of National Planning and Cooperation, DNPC) capacity to handle the FM aspects of the 
project satisfies the Bank’s minimum requirements as per the Bank FM guidelines. The Ministry has 
handled donor-funded (APSA- World Bank, PROSUL- FIDA, PASF- Austria, PSP- IFAD and PADR- 
Italy) projects. The DNPC is generally adequately staffed. The Ministry utilizes a functional computerized 
accounting system (e-SISTAFE) to record and process transactions, complemented by use of spread sheets 
for financial reporting purposes for projects. The control environment from budget preparation, execution, 
monitoring and reporting were found to be adequate. There is a functional internal audit unit which will 
further strengthen the internal controls within the ministry including the project. In that regard, the Bank 
will make use of the existing systems within MASA (while closely monitoring and providing assistance as 
required) under the overall responsibility of the Director, Department of Finance and Administration, to 
handle the project’s FM including accounting for the project resources and submitting the required financial 
reports to the Bank. In accordance with the Bank’s financial reporting and auditing requirements, the project 
will be required to prepare and submit to the Bank Interim Quarterly Progress Report (IQPR) no later than 
45 days after the end of each quarter. In addition, the project will be required to prepare separate project 
annual financial statements which will form the entry point for external audit due diligence. The overall FM 
residual risk for the project is assessed as Moderate. (The detailed FM assessment is attached as Annex B4).  
 
4.1.2.2  Auditing arrangement: The MASA has been audited by the Tribunal Administrativo (TA) bi-
annually. The TA is constitutionally mandated to audit all public institutions in Mozambique, however 
given the capacity constraints, some of the audits especially in Bank funded projects have been audited by 
private audit firms competitively recruited with the involvement of the TA. Specific for the project, a 
separate audit report will be prepared for the project annually with the audit carried out by an independent 
external auditor recruited in accordance with the Bank’s requirements. The audit will be conducted in 
accordance with a Bank approved audit Terms of Reference with the costs of the audit financed from the 
grant. The annual audited financial statements including the auditor’s opinion and management letter will 
be submitted to the Bank not later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. 
 
4.1.2.3 Disbursement Arrangements: Flow of funds to finance the institution follows the national treasury 
and appropriation procedures with controls over the use of funds generally adequate. The entity operates 3 
bank accounts with adequate controls over access to the funds and up to date recording of transactions. The 
review noted that donor-funded projects funds have been managed generally satisfactory. However, the 
institution lacks practical experience in managing Bank funds flow. Specific to this project, payments will 



 

14 
 

be primarily by direct payment method where the Bank will pay contractors/consultants and suppliers 
directly based on satisfactory performance in accordance with the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. 
Disbursements would be made upon preparation and submission of all relevant documentations by DPCI 
to the Bank’s Disbursement Division, through the Bank’s Country Office in Mozambique. In addition, a 
Special Account denominated in USD and its associated MZN denominated project operating account shall 
be opened at the Central Bank, and will be limited for use in paying for the small operating project expenses 
that are recurring in nature. A Disbursement Letter will be issued by the Bank. 
 
4.1.3 Procurement Arrangements:  
 
4.1.3.1 Borrower Procurement System (BPS):  
 
Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of consulting 
services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 
Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015, and following 
the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out 
following: 
 

x Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 
under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations, namely, Decreto 5/2016 de 8 de Março – 
Regulamento de Contratação de Empreitadas de Obras Públicas, Fornecimento de Bens, e Prestação 
de Serviços ao Estado (Regulations for Contracting of Public Works, Supply of Goods and 
Consultancy & Non-Consultancy Services to the State), using the national Standard Solicitation 
Documents (SSDs) as amended to be in consistent with the new law, using the national Standard 
Bidding Documents (SBDs) or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” 
for various group of transactions to be entailed under the project. 

x Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant 
Bank Standard Solicitation Documents SDDs, for contracts that are indicated in Annex B5, Para. B 
5.5, or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for a specific transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) 
in case BPM have been found to be the best fit for purpose for a specific transaction or group of 
transactions. 

Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: the assessment of procurement risks at the Country, 
Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were undertaken3 
for the project and the output has informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS, Bank or Third 
party) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The 
appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed 
in Annex B5, Para. 5.2. 
 
4.1.3.2 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development:  
 
Procurement Risk Assessments were undertaken for this project by conducting an exhaustive assessment 
covering the risks associated with the country, sector and project environments as well as the Executing 
Agency responsible for the implementation of the Project’s procurement activities.  
  
Most of the issues/ risks associated with the procurement activities for implementation of the project have been 
identified and mitigated. The mitigation measures have been discussed and agreed with the Executing Agency 
                                                 
3 See Technical Annexes for details 



 

15 
 

MASA and included in the PRCA action plan proposed in above. The overall Project Procurement Risk Rating 
(PPRR) is at time of Appraisal is: 
 
Table 4.2 Overall Project Risk Rating at Appraisal 

Items  H  S  M  L  
Overall Project Procurement Risk  
Country Risks      
Sector Risks      
Project Specific risks      
Executing Agency Risks      

 
4.1.3.3. Summary of the Procurement Arrangements for the Project 

The procurement arrangements for the various components, elements, and items, under the different 
expenditure categories to be financed by the Grant and procured using BPS and BPM are summarized in 
Table 4.3 below. Large-value contracts, each group of similar transactions/contracts, the different 
procurement regimes, estimated costs, oversight requirements, and the timeframe as agreed between the 
Borrower and the Bank, are documented in the Procurement Plan. 
 
Table 4.3: Summary of Procurement Arrangements 

  BPS   
 Project Components/Categories  Shop  OCB 

(ICB)  
OCB 

(NCB) 
OCB 
(SL) 

Shop Total 

1 Goods  1,784,8 465.4  38.9 2289.1 
2 Civil Works  2,407.8 1,424.2   3832.0 
3 Consulting Services (Firms)  

 

   488.4  488.4 
4 Consulting Services (Individual)   

 

   1,961.8  1961.8 
5 Training 1,864.8     1864.8 
6 Operating Costs  

 

563.9     563.9 

 
 

4.2.  Governance  
 
GoM has been implementing a number of reforms to enhance governance, transparency and accountability. 
There have been major structural and functional reforms with emphasis on policy and institutional actions 
including public financial management system, decentralization and capacity building all in an effort to 
ensure accountability and transparency in Government operations. The Project will be utilizing qualified 
staff to ensure economy and efficiency of project procurement and financial management process. 
Furthermore, the governance structure of the project provides for a statutory body like the MASA Conselho 
Consultivo and Conselho Tecnico (Consultative Council and Technical Council) as the steering committee, 
which gives oversight policy direction for the implementation of the project. The Bank will follow up on 
governance through regular field supervision missions, audit reports, Annual WorkPlan and Budget 
(AWPB), progress reports and procurement plans. The Bank is effectively on the ground with the Country 
Office (COMZ) in Maputo and thus close interaction and follow up will be undertaken at the Country level to 
ensure that implementation of Project activities are on course. The COMZ Sector Experts and from RDGS 2 
will give a quarterly schedule of implementation progress to the Country Manager and the Manager of RDGS 2 
. 
  



 

16 
 

4.3.  Monitoring  
  
4.3.1 The monitoring and evaluation specialist will be responsible for the internal monitoring and 
evaluation of project activities and logical framework indicators, working in liaison with the technical 
experts on the project implementation team. The Project Implementation Unit at the project headquarters 
and the province levels will be responsible for the monitoring of project results including output and 
outcome indicators. Data collection and evaluation tasks will be performed by all the institutions involved 
in the project or in partnership with other relevant institutions.   

4.3.2 The PIU will work closely with relevant Ministries Directorates and Agencies of government and 
research institutes for the purposes of data collection, and monitoring and evaluation of the project. The 
PIU will be recruited and staffed with a qualified M&E Specialist, who will benefit from tailored capacity 
building programs to acquaint him/her very well with the scope and nature of the project, and the 
methodology to be followed. The project will support the deployment of an M&E and Management 
Information System (MIS) that will facilitate performance monitoring and impact evaluation against the 
specified indicators, including gender tracker and environmental safeguards related indicators. While the 
performance monitoring process facilitates informed decision-making, the outcome assessment will provide 
information on whether the project has achieved its development objectives. 

Table 4.4 Monitoring Milestones 

Timeframe Milestone Monitoring Process/feedback Loop 
07/2018 Grant Approval Board of Directors 
08/2018 Grant Signature Grant Agreement 
08/2018 Grant Effectiveness Bank/GoM – Bank letter to GoM 
09/2018 Project Launch Mission Bank/GoM 
09/2018 First Disbursement Bank/GoM: Open a Bank Account by GoM 
06/2020 Mid-Term Review Bank/GoM 
2018-2023 Supervision Missions Bank 
11/2023 Project Completion Report GoM/Bank 

4.4.  Sustainability  
  
Use of simple technologies that are appropriate for the rural farmers ensures that adoption and replicability 
is assured. The project design is based on feasibility studies as well as stakeholders consultations to ensure 
ownership and sustainability. Community participation and capacity building will further bolster the 
abilities of the various groups to continue project activities even after completion. The market activities 
offer additional sources of income and therefore greater capacity for the horticulture farmers and livestock 
owners to continue with the activities after conclusion of the project. The project will establish 
communities’ led-committees for overseeing infrastructure operation and maintenance as well as for 
enhancing community participation and ownership. The committees will be technically supported by the 
National water and agriculture agencies. The infrastructure to be installed for irrigation and water harvesting 
was selected based on the national plans from both MASA and Ministry of Public Works, Housing and 
Water Resources (MOPHRH). Therefore, the infrastructure will be owned both by the communities and the 
relevant Government agencies and token amounts paid for their day to day operations. 

4.5.  Risk management  
The Project assumes (i) that the Government will continue with its commitment to social and political 
consensus and macroeconomic stability; (ii) Mozambique will have no restriction on water extraction for 



 

17 
 

irrigation; (iii) no restriction on private sector/NGO participation in water harvesting infrastructures and 
setting up of livestock. The current risks include the following: 
 

Table 4.5 Risk and Mitigation 
 

N° Risk Level of 
Occurrence 

Mitigation 

1 Limited business and technical skills of 
targeted youth and women and MSMEs 
in value chain management 

M Project includes business and technical 
skills training for targeted beneficiaries  

2 Farmers with no interest to adopt new 
technologies  

M Promoting stakeholders participation, 
engagement and integration 

3 Adaptability of selected seeds L Research and demonstrative activities, 
extension and capacity building 

 

4.6.  Knowledge building  

The AVACYEP will allocate resources to systematically document and publicize new lessons, especially 
on the adoption technologies for small ruminants and Youth Empowerment components that are less 
documented. The outcome of this project will be carefully monitored and documented. Furthermore, the 
Project will be financing number of studies in particular related to build a knowledge implementation of 
FEAST for monitoring inventory and uptake of feed resources; promotion of forage production and support 
to IIAM for conducting research on effective seed distribution system for forage seeds; introduction of hay 
bale making and ration formulation to young entrepreneurs; construction of multipurpose boreholes for 
water provision. All project related studies and research would be made readily available on the AfDB 
websites for wider dissemination. Finally, the third approach is to bring agro-processing to the farm level 
by farmer and women/youth groups, all of which will also be documented. Contracted service providers 
will train beneficiaries, especially women, on value addition and post-harvest operations including cleaning, 
sorting, drying, cutting and packing produced vegetable. The successes of these practices will also be 
documented. 

V. – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1.  Legal instrument  
The project will be financed pursuant to: (i) an ADF grant agreement between the Borrower and the ADF;  

5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 
 
5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force of the ADF: The grant agreement shall enter into force 
on the date of signature by the Recipient and by the Fund.  
 
5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Bank to make the first 
disbursement of the Grant shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Protocol of Agreement: 
 
The Borrower shall provide:  
 
(i) Evidence of the recruitment, designation or appointment of staff (Project Coordinator, Project Accountant, 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and Procurement Specialist) for the project implementation 
unit with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund; 



 

18 
 

5.3.  Undertaking 
The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and 
report to the Bank on a quarterly basis, as part of the quarterly progress report. 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies 
x This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
x Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A  

VI. – RECOMMENDATION  
Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposed ADF Grant of Eleven Million 
Unit of Account (UA 11.00 million) to the Republic of Mozambique for the purpose of implementing the 
Agricultural Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this 
report. 



























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 

SAVANNAH-BASED AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS 

DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT  

(PADECAS) 

 

 

COUNTRY:  CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

PROJECT BRIEF 
 

Client Information 

 
BORROWER:    Central African Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

 

Financing Plan 

 
Source 

 
Amount 

 
Instrument 

AfDB 
UA 1.28 million  

UA 7 million 

ADF Grant 

TSF Grant 

IFAD UA 12.8 million Grant 

Government and 
Beneficiaries 

UA 1 million  Counterpart Funds 

TOTAL COST UA 22.1 million  

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 

 
 

 

Time Frame – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Not Approval July 2018 

Project Approval October 2018 

Signing of Grant Agreement December 2018 

First Disbursement February 2019 

Completion/Last Disbursement December 2023 

 
 

  



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

1. The Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project 
(PADECAS), jointly financed with the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 

seeks to sustainably grow food and beef production. PADECAS, which will span five years (2019-

2023) and cost UA 22.1 million (CFAF 17.3 billion) including an UA8.28 million grant from the 

Bank, will be implemented in the Prefectures of  Lobaye, Ombella-Mpoko and L’Ouham Péndé. The 

project will target around 60,000 households with over 500,000 direct beneficiaries.  

2. The agricultural sector employs 66% of the labour force and accounts for 23% of GDP. The 
agricultural and livestock sectors together employ 63% of poor households. Thanks to the agricultural 

sector assessment and ongoing operations, the project intervention will target five promising sectors: 

cassava, beans, maize and rice for plant production and cattle for animal production. The value chains 

approach was adopted to boost productivity and agriculture production through the introduction of 

innovative technologies that will enhanced the competitiveness of the sectors. The project will also  

involve the development  of infrastructure to support the sector. Lastly, the project aims to boost 

inclusive development in the sectors, particularly by encouraging the involvement of women and 

young people and improving access to affordable financing and the marketing of productions.  

3. CAR went through an unprecedented political and security crisis between 2012 and 2015. 
Two years after a return to constitutional order and the establishment of all democratic institutions, 

the security situation remains extremely fragile. Indeed, less than 40% of the territory is controlled 

by the Central African State. The crisis had devastating effects on the agricultural and livestock 

sectors,  and led to food and nutritional insecurity as well as increased poverty. In this context, 

improving agricultural and livestock production became an urgent priority for the Government. 

4. PADECAS stems from the CAR Government’s desire to make the agriculture and livestock 
sectors participate actively in the quest for economic growth capable of generating jobs and 

substantial incomes for rural communities. The project is perfectly in line with the Bank’s Ten-Year 

Strategy (2013-2022), especially 2 of High-fives: “Feed Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for 

people in Africa. It is also consistent with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 

2016-2025; the Strategy to Address Fragility and Strengthen Resilience in Africa (2014-2019); the 

Youth Employment Strategy in Africa; and the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) Programme which seeks to disseminate agricultural technologies to boost 

productivity and agricultural production in the selected five sectors.  

5. PADECAS will experiment on a pilot basis: (a) new technologies for increasing 
productivity; (b) inclusive funding mechanisms; and (c) youth entrepreneurship. In addition, a 

mechanism will be put in place to monitor dynamics of the food and cattle sub-sectors as well as the 

initiative designed to extend social protection to rural areas. The sum of these interventions will serve 

as pilot experiments for the Bank in the Central African Republic and generate invaluable knowledge 

for the future development of agricultural sub-sectors in the country and elsewhere in Africa. These 

interventions will be documented and will enable the Central African Government to redirect and 

better entrench its agro-pastoral development policies and strategies.



 

v 

 

PADECAS : RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 
Country and Project Name: Central African Republic (CAR): Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project (PADECAS) 
Project Goal: Sustainably increase productivity and food and cattle production in CAR 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  

Indicator  

(including CSIs) 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Contribute to improve the food 
and nutritional security of the 
population 

Rate of food and nutritional security 48% 
 
 

40% 
 

Annual and statistical reports of 
CAR Ministries in charge of 
Planning and Agriculture and 

Rural Development   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 : Agricultural 
productivity and production 
increased 

Increase in productivity  
- Cassava                                                                                                      
- Rice 
- Maize  
- Beans  
 
Milk production 

 
 

 
8t/ha 

1.5t/ha 
0.85T/ha 
0.86t/ha 

 
1.5 liters/day 

 
 

 
10t/ha 
4t/ha 

1.5t/ha 
 1.3t/ha 

 
10 liters/days 

Annual and statistical reports of 
CAR Ministries in charge of 
Planning and Agriculture and 

Rural Development   

Risk: looting of project assets by 
armed groups 
 
Mitigation: Continued mediation 
efforts; fragility mitigating actions 
planned in the project 

Outcome 2 : Agro-pastoral 

production increased 

rate of increase of livestock 5% 10%  

Outcome 3 : Jobs created for 

youth and women 

Number of jobs created for youths/women 

Gender-disaggregation suggested.   
NA 1,500 permanent 

jobs and 3,000 
temporary jobs 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1 Development of 
plant and animal sub-sectors 
Output 1.1 New technologies are 
customized by beneficiaries  
 

 
 
1.1.1 Number of households adopting the 
new technology 

 
0 

 
 
 

 

 
18000 

Project progress reports Risk: Degradation of the security 
situation 
 
Mitigation: The project has 
targeted security-accessible areas 
and the Government with the 
support of the international 
community is continuing the Output 1.2 Rural infrastructures 

are rehabilitated 
1.2.1 Number of km of rural roads 
rehabilitated 

0 
 

 

498 km  



 

vi 

 

Output 1.3 Rural infrastructures 
are created 

1.3.1Number of processing 
units/multipurpose platforms installed 

0 8 dialogue to bring peace to the entire 
national territory 
 
Risk Extreme weather events 
 
Mitigation: Integration adaptation 
measures into activities (ex: 

introduction of seed varieties 
adapted to extreme climate risks, 
integrated approach to agriculture 
and livestock farming, 
establishment of a concerted 
system of warning and control and 
capacity building of stakeholders 
involved in the implementation of 

activities 

1.3.2 Number of processing units (small-
scale cheese factories) established 

0 12 

1.3.3 Number of warehouses, depots, 
drying facilities, input shops, markets 
constructed 

0 4  

    

 
Output 1.4 Cows are inseminated 
artificially 

 
1.4.1 Number of cows inseminated 

0 500  

 
Output 1.5 Women and youths 
are integrated in the agricultural 
value chains 

 
1.5.1 Number of women 

 
0 

 
240,000 

 

1.5.2 Number of youths 0 140,000  

 
Component 2 
Institutional support, 
improvement of governance and 
capacity-building 
Output 2.1 

Structuring of farmers’ 
associations guaranteed 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2.1.1 Number of structured associations 

 
 
 
 
 

 

0 

 
 
 
 
 

 

1,500 

 

 
Output 2.2 
Capacity of research institutes 
and agricultural board 
strengthened 

2.2.1  Number of ICRA laboratories 
rehabilitated (Bakere and Boukoko) 

0 2  

    

    

 

Output 2.3 
The Groupements Agri 
Multiplicateurs des semences 
(Seed Multipliers Association - 
GAM) and Seed Producers 
Networks 

(REPROSEM) supported 

 
2.3.1 Nbre de groupement REPROSEM 

 
0 

 
100 

 

Output 2.4 

Mutualistes Groupements 
d’intérêt Pastoraux (Pastoral 
Interest Groups - GIP) supported 

2.4.1 Number of pastoral interest groups 

(GIP) 

0 4  

     



 

vii 

 

     

Output 2.5 Agriculture sector 
governance strengthened 
 
 

2.6 Entrepreneurial skills 
development mechanism 
improved 
 
 
 
Output 2.9  
Capacity of community workers 
and nutritional health agents 

strengthened 

2.5.1-Private seed producers’ platform put 
in place  
 

0 
 

1 
 
 

  

 
2.6.1 Number of businesses created  
 
2.9.1 Number of trainings on nutrition held 

to train health workers  
2.9.2 Number of people sensitized on 
nutrition, hygiene and HIV/AIDS, 70% of 
them women  

 
0 
 

0 

 
 

0 

 
500 

 
2 

 
 

15000 

 
 
 
 

 
 
Reports of the Ministry of 
Health, UNICEF surveys 

  



 

viii 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

 

COMPONENTS 

 

RESOURCES  

Component 1 : 
 Improved seed production and seed conservation technologies 
 Improvement of production technical itineraries 
 Deployment of technologies for production, processing, packaging and storage of products 
 Supply of inputs and agricultural tools 
 Rural roads to opening up production areas 
 Socio-economic infrastructure to support the value chaines 
 Rehabilitation and strengthening of irrigated perimeters 
 Increased livestock productivity through artificial insemination 
 Rehabilitation of pharmaceutical depots and supply of veterinary drugs 
 Strengthening the epidemiological surveillance network for livestock farming 
 Financial and technical support for the establishment of processing units for women and young people 
Component 2 
 Study on the structuring of agricultural sectors and on the needs for skills and related professions 
 Strengthening improved seed multiplication and transfer system in the real world 
 Capacity building of support institutions 
 Creating conditions for the integration of young people and women in the sectors 
 Farm school to train young people in agricultural entrepreneurship 
 Support to agricultural entrepreneurship and training in management tools 
 Establishment of Seed Private Enterprise Platform 
 Adding value to products, technologies related to nutrition and demand  
 Strengthening the capacity of community relays and health workers in nutrition 

Component 3 

 Monitoring of project and ESMP implementation 
 Project administrative, accounting and financial management 
 Preparation of annual work plans and budgets, progress reports 
 Procurement of project goods, works and services 
 Project Audit 
 

Component 1 (UA 16.9 million) 
 
Component 2 (UA 2 million) 
 
Component 3 (UA 3.32 million) 

FAD: 1.28 MUC 
TSF: 7.0 MUC 
IFAD: 12.8 MUC 
Counterpart in kind: 1 MUC 



 

 

ix 

 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 

 
  

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Board Approval 
                     

2 Signature of Grant Agreement 
                     

3 Grant Effectiveness 
                     

4 First Disbursement 
                     

5 Project Commencement                      

6 
Signing of Conventions and Establishment of Protocols with 
Research Institutions 

                     

7 Signing of Contracts 
                     

8 
Commencement of Works (roads, various infrastructure and 
PI) 

                     

9 Implementation of Protocol of Research Institutions 
                     

10 Implementation of Capacity-Building Activities 
                     

11 Mid-Term Review 
                     

12 Audits 
                     

13 Government’s Completion Report 
                     

14 Completion of Activities 
                     

15 Closing December 2023 
                     



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO AWARD A TSF AND 

ADF GRANT TO CAR TO FINANCE THE SAVANNAH AGRICULTURAL VALUE 

CHAINS DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT  

(PADECAS) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to award 

UA 7.0 million and an ADF grant of UA 1.28 million to the Central African Republic (CAR) to 

finance the Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project in 

(PADECAS). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

 National Context 

1.1.1 The outbreak of the March 2013 crisis 
led to the most serious security, political and 

humanitarian crisis in CAR's history. This 

political crisis gave rise to a difficult three 

years’ political transition, supported by the 

international community. The return to 

constitutional order, notably with the elections 

of February 2016, made it possible to form a 

Government regrouping several political 

parties. With the exception of the Senate, all 

republican institutions were set up within the 

constitutional period. The last reshuffle of the 

Government in September 2017 was 

representative, taking into account all the 

sociological and political diversity of the 

country, including representatives of armed 

groups. 

1.1.2 On the security front, the presence of 
the UN peacekeeping force (MINUSCA) of 

nearly 12,000 men has stabilized the country, 

despite the fact that less than 40% of the 

territory is controlled by the Central African 

Government. Community tensions and regular 

clashes between armed groups are common 

across the country. In addition, the formation of 

several armed groups, who now clash for 

control of some areas of the country's mineral-rich territory, hold back hopes of a swift 

appeasement of the situation. On the other hand, in rural areas, especially those with significant 

mineral resources, insecurity remains persistent and could continue until disarmament of armed 

groups is effective. Several mining sites have been taken over by these groups and the resulting 

looting of resources is funds the war and further weakens the capacity of the state to meet the 

urgent needs of the population. 

1.1.3 Despite this relatively volatile security situation, the Central African authorities remain 
strongly committed to implementing the Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and 

Repatriation (DDRR) program, whose success is a key element of the Government's strategy to 

Text box 1: Summary of the main fragility factors in 

CAR 

The key factors of CAR’s  persistent fragility are many, 
complex, and intertwined. The country’s violent political 
history, malfunctioning institutions, previous failed 
disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration 
programmes and social exclusion have hindered social 

and national cohesion. The main challenges the country 
must tackle include: 

Restore security throughout the national territory and 

consolidate peace and national cohesion. Despite the 

return to constitutional order in 2016 and the 

establishment of key democratic institutions enshrined in 

the Constitution, insecurity persists and inter-community 

confrontations have continued in several localities of the 

country. Today the CAR Government controls only a 

very small part of its territory, and armed groups have 

split into numerous uncontrolled rebel factions, which 

has multiplied criminal activities. 

Limited productive capacity of businesses and their 

financial situation depressed by the plunder and 

destruction of their production tools. CAR is particularly 

vulnerable to external shocks because of poor economic 

diversification, including specialisation in primary 

products. Developing the private sector is crucial for the 

expansion and diversification of the economy. 

Poor development of economic infrastructure (transport, 

energy, ICT, water and sanitation). In the context of a 

vast landlocked country like CAR, the availability of 

infrastructure in quantitative and qualitative terms is a 

major factor for reducing fragility and poverty.  

 



 

2 

 

work for an inclusive peace. The process launched on August 30, 2017, allowed, the collection 

of weapons, the insertion of more than 200 ex-combatants in the socio-economic process and the 

incorporation of more than 200 others in the national army. 

 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.2.1 The country's medium-term development and socio-economic objectives are contained 
in the National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding (RCPCA, 2017-2021), adopted in October 

2016. This plan aims to create the foundations for 'sustainable and inclusive economic and social 

development, in particular through' the restoration and extension of the State throughout the 

national territory and massive public investment, in order to consolidate peace. 

1.2.2 PADECAS activities align with the pillars of the RCPCA. In addition, the project is in 
line with the two pillars of the CAR Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2017-2021 Country Strategy 

namely: (i) Support for agriculture development and for social inclusion support infrastructure; 

and (ii) Strengthening of institutional capacity and governance. The project is also in line with 

the National Agricultural Investment and Food and Nutritional Security Programme (PNIASAN) 

and the National Employment and Vocational Training Policy Framework Paper (PNEFP).  

 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

1.3.1 The agricultural sector employs 66% of the labour force and accounts for 23% of GDP; 
livestock is practiced by more than 80% of the rural population. The two sectors occupy 63% of 

poor households, and are thus crucial for improving food security and reducing poverty. The 

security crisis led not only to the loss of all inputs for agricultural and livestock production and 

the destruction and plunder of socio-economic facilities (storage facilities, markets, 

slaughterhouses, agricultural processing centres, etc.). The necessary support services for 

agricultural and livestock activities also declined during the crisis years. For example, only 4% 

of communes indicate that trade in inputs as fertilizers, seeds and phytosanitary products is 

conducted in their headquarters, which represents a 10% drop compared to the pre-2013 crisis 

period. Approximate 41% report the existence of veterinary services in their communes, 

representing a nearly 60% drop compared to the pre-2012 crisis situation.  

1.3.2 The food security situation remains disturbing. According to the 2016 National Food 
Security Survey (ENSA), about half of the population (48%), making up 2.1 million people, live 

in food insecurity. The crisis takes a heavier toll on women since 22% of urban women declare 

that their income sources are aid, gifts and family transfers, against 14% of men. For their part, 

rural women mostly depend on petty trading, agriculture and processing of natural products. The 

main income-generation- related constraints mentioned by households are the lack of capital to 

invest (61%), the lack of job opportunities (31%) and the lack of land /production equipment 

(27%).  

1.3.3 AfDB’s comparative advantage to implement PADECAS is that the project is in line 
with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022), especially 2 of High-fives: “Feed Africa” and 

“Improve the quality of life for people in Africa. It is also consistent with the Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025; the Strategy to Address Fragility and 

Strengthen Resilience in Africa (2014-2019); the Youth Employment Strategy in Africa; and the 

Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Programme which seeks 

to disseminate agricultural technologies to boost productivity and agricultural production in the 

selected five sectors. 

 



 

3 

 

 Donor Coordination 

1.4.1 In CAR, aid is the main source of financing for Government programmes. Aid 
coordination has been strengthened under the RCPCA. A Technical Secretariat has been 

established to monitor the implementation of TFP commitments. The Bank, through COCF 

played a key role in putting this mechanism in place. 

 
Table 1: Partners’ Intervention in the Rural Sector 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Scope (in 2018) 

GDP Exports Jobs 

Agriculture and rural development 22.8% 36.9% 66% 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF Billion)** 

Government (2010-2013 average) Donors  

CFAF 174.901 billion (5% of total 
expenditure) (*) 

AfDB CFAF 14.298 billion (2018-2021) 

World Bank CFAF 15.091 billion (2017-2021) 

IFAD  CFAF 16.208 billion (2018-2021) 

FAO  CFAF 2.5 billion 

EU CFAF 13 billion 

UNDP CFAF 3.001 billion 

 Others CFAF 0.838 billion 

Level of Aid Coordination 

 Existence of thematic working groups [Yes, established during RCPCA] 

 Existence of an overall sector programme  
[Yes, (i) The PNIASAN; (ii) Regional Agricultural Development 
Programmes; (iii) 2016-2018 Agricultural Recovery Roadmap; (iv) 
2017-2021 Livestock Roadmap. 

 AfDB’s role in aid coordination Active member (not leader) 

(*) Sources: RCPCA; Ministry of Rural Development; Ministry of Livestock and Animal Health.   

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

 Project Components 

2.1.1 PADECAS complements IFAD's Agropastoral Production Revival Project (PREPAS). 
It will be implemented through three components as follows: (i) Development of agricultural and 

animal sectors; (ii) Institutional support to the agricultural sector; and (iii) Project Coordination 

and Management. 

2.1.2 Component 1 aims to develop value chains for the cassava, maize, rice, bean, and 
bovine value chains. The project will introduce technologies to improve the productivity, 

processing and marketing of agriculture products. Through this component, the project will 

support farms and groups through an approach focused on the development of a strategy for the 

inclusion of women and youth in selected activities. The project will contribute to the 

establishment of the necessary agricultural and rural infrastructures that will allow the opening 

up of the production areas, as well as the storage, marketing of plant and animal productions. 

This component also aims to provide livestock farmers with the knowledge, skills and material 

resources to increase livestock productivity and production. 

2.1.3 Component 2 supports coordination and dialogue among actors in value chains through 
capacity building of support institutions (the Central African Institute for Agronomic Research 

(ICRA), the National Agency for Development of Agricultural Livestock (ANDE), National 

Federation of Central African Herders (FNEC), Central African Agency for Agricultural 

Development (ACDA)) and through support for partnership between stakeholders, including 

public-private partnerships. The Project will support the preparation, adoption and 

implementation of detailed policy documents, with the aim of improving governance and 



 

4 

 

enabling an effective transformation of the rural environment. These supports will target in a 

non-exhaustive way, seeds being the most decisive factor of production on which the efficiency 

of the other inputs depends. The project will work with the International Labor Office (ILO) to 

create conditions for youth and women's participation in value chains. 

 

2.1.4 Component 3 provides technical, administrative and financial management of the 
project. 

2.1.5 A Summary of the activities for each of the components is provided below. 

 
Table 2 : Description and Costs of Project Components 

No 
Component 

Cost 

(MUA)1 
Description 

1 
Development of vegetable 
and livestock sub-sectors  

16.9 

 Improved seed production and seed conservation technologies 
 Improvement of production technical itineraries 
 Deployment of technologies for production, processing, 

packaging and storage of products 
 Supply of inputs and agricultural tools 
 Rural roads to opening up production areas 
 Socio-economic infrastructure to support the value chaines 
 Rehabilitation and strengthening of irrigated perimeters 
 Increased livestock productivity through artificial insemination 
 Rehabilitation of pharmaceutical depots and supply of 

veterinary drugs 

 Strengthening the epidemiological surveillance network for 
livestock farming 

 Financial and technical support for the establishment of 
processing units for women and young people 

2 Institutional support 2 

 Study on the structuring of agricultural sectors and on the needs 
for skills and related professions 

 Strengthening improved seed multiplication and transfer system 
in the real world 

 Capacity building of support institutions 
 Creating conditions for the integration of young people and 

women in the sectors 
 Farm school to train young people in agricultural 

entrepreneurship 
 Support to agricultural entrepreneurship and training in 

management tools 
 Establishment of Seed Private Enterprise Platform 
 Adding value to products, technologies related to nutrition and 

demand  
 Strengthening the capacity of community relays and health 

workers in nutrition 

3 
Project coordination and 

management 
3.3 

 Monitoring of project and ESMP implementation 
 Project administrative, accounting and financial management 
 Preparation of annual work plans and budgets, progress reports 
 Procurement of project goods, works and services 
 Project Audit 

 
 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 Discussions with the ministries responsible for agriculture and livestock and various 
stakeholders allowed for the consensual adoption of the project’s technical design centred on 

support for the vegetable and cattle sub-sector with private sector participation. The option 

adopted is to introduce proven technologies in the different value chain segments to increase 

their productivity and agricultural production. In addition, the project aims to stimulate and 

support private initiative and lend impetus to inclusive sub-sector development by encouraging 

                                                             
1  These costs do not include unallocated sums.  



 

5 

 

the involvement of women and youths and improving access to sustainable and customized 

financing. 

 

Table 3: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection 
Titre   Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Integrated rural 

development project 

A rural development project 

encompassing all sub-sectors 

A traditional rural development project that 

does not rely on market-oriented and non-

market-related sectors will have limited 

effects on the incomes and employability of 

rural communities. young people and 

women 

Use of natural 

breeding 

Use of natural and uncontrolled 

breeding 

The results of natural breeding are usualy 

modest. The choice to use artificial 

insemination to improve cattle productivity 

is based on numerous advantages offered, 

namely:  

 Better disease control under tropical 
conditions;  

 Post-weaning performance improved 
 Carcass value improved and  
 More productive dairy replacement 

heifers 

Development of 

livestock as a 

dominant sector 

Implement project activities focused 

on intensive stockbreeding (imported 

breeds, close veterinary monitoring, 

feeding based on concentrates and 

cultivated fodder)  

 Veterinary treatment and intensive 
feeding cannot be afforded by most 

stockbreeders 

 Poor adequacy between human and 
institutional capacity and the practice of 

intensive stockbreeding 

 

 Project Type 

This intervention is an autonomous investment project.  

 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement  

2.4.1 The indicative project cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at about UA 
22.1 million (CFAF 17.3 billion), 52% of which in foreign exchange and 48% in local currency. 

The project financing includes UA 7 million, or CFAF 5.5 billion, by a TSF grant; UA 1.28 

million or CFAF 1.6 billion by an ADF grant; UA 12.8 million or CFAF 10 billion by an IFAD 

grant; and the rest, UA 1 million or CFAF 784 million constitutes the in-kind contribution of 

Government and beneficiaries. Project activities will span a period of five (5) years. The 

summary of project costs, financing distribution and expenditure schedule is presented in Tables 

4-8. 

2.4.2 The IFAD co-financing comes in the form of a project that will be implemented 
concurrently with PADECAS. IFAD is in the process of developing the project concept note 

which, once approved, will enable the preparation mission to undertake the studies for the 

proposed infrastructure. According to IFAD’s provisional schedule, these studies will be 

conducted at the end of 2018 or at the latest beginning of 2019. 

  



 

6 

 

Table 4: Estimated Costs by Component 

COMPONANT 

($US, 000) (UCA000) 

% 

FE 

% 

Base 

Cost 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange Total 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchang

e 

Total 

1. Development of vegetable and 

livestock sub-sectors 8 824,56 12 814,58 21  639,14 6 258,55 9 088,35 15 346,91 59 75 
2. Institutional Support 1 602,80 1  133,24 2 736,04 1 136,74 803,72 1 940,46 41 9 

3. Project Coordination and Management 4 308,80 174,90 4 483,70 3 055,89 124,04 3 179,93 4 16 

Base Cost 14 736,17 14 122,72 28 858,88 10 451,18 10 016,11 20 467,29 49 100 

Physical Contingencies 524,54 1 246,59 1 771,13 372,02 884,10 1 256,12 70 6 

Financial Contingencies 266,90 311,01 577,91 189,29 220,57 409,86 54 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15 527,60 15 680,31 31 207,92 11 012,49 11 120,79 22 133,27 50 108 

 

Table 5: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

 

Tableau 6: Schedule of Payments by Category  (amounts are in ‘000 UA) 

Components 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 TOTAL 

1. Development of vegetable and livestock sub-

sectors 2 240,56 6 537,46 5 079,36 2 039,11 963,74 16 860,22 

2. Institutional Support 1 132,11 518,51 141,27 119,78 106,32 2 017,99 

3. Project Coordination and Management 775,01 640,20 608,58 613,27 618,00 3 255,06 

TOTAL 4 147,68 7 696,17 5 829,21 2 772,16 1 688,06 22 133,27 

 

Table 7: Sources of Financing 

Source of Finance 

(UC, 000) ($US, 000)  

% Total Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total 

TSF 5 044,9 1 956,8 7 001,7 7 113,3 2 759,1 9 872,4 31,6 

FAD 379,5 898,3 1 277,9 535,2 1 266,7 1 801,8 5,8 

Government 1 086,6 0,0 1 086,6 1 532,1 0,0 1 532,1 4,9 

IFAD 4 501,5 8 265,6 12 767,1 6 347,1 11 654,5 18 001,6 57,7 

TOTAL 11 012,5 11 120,8 22 133,3 15 527,6 15 680,3 31 207,9 100,0 

 

Table 8: Project cost by category and sources of financing 

  

Expenditure Category 

($US, 000) (UA, 000) 
% 

Dev

. 

% Base 

Cost 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total Local 

Currenc

y  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total 

Investment         

Works 4 905,61 11 446,43 16 352,04 3 479,16 8 118,03 11 597,19 70 57 

Goods 656,63 2 071,59 2 728,22 465,70 1 469,21 1 934,91 76 9 

Services  5 017,02 604,70 5 621,72 3 558,17 428,86 3 987,04 11 19 

Operational 4 156,90 - 4 156,90 2 948,16 - 2 948,16 - 14 

Base Cost 14 736,17 14 122,72 28 858,88 10 451,18 10 016,11 20 467,29 49 100 

Physical Contingencies 524,54 1 246,59 1 771,13 372,02 884,10 1 256,12 70 6 

Financial Contingencies 266,90 311,01 577,91 189,29 220,57 409,86 54 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15 527,60 15 680,31 31 207,92 11 012,49 11 120,79 22 133,27 50 108 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORY 
Source of Finance (UA, 000) % 

TSF  FAD IFAD Government  Total 

I. INVESTMENT 5 065,4 1 277,9 12 767,1 - 19 110,4 86,3 

A. SERVICES 3 053,9 - 959,1 - 4 013,0 18,1 

B. Goods 1 979,8 76,4 - - 2 056,2 9,3 

C. Works 31,7 1 201,5 11 808,0 - 13 041,3 58,9 

II. OPERATIONAL 1 936,3 - - 1 086,6 3 022,9 13,7 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 7 001,7 1 277,9 12  767,1 1 086,6 22 133,3 100,0 



 

7 

 

 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 PADECAS will intervene in the prefectures of Lobaye in the southwest; Ombella 
Mpoko in the center-west and Ouham Pandé (Bozoum) in the north-west. With regard to support 

to the vegetable and animal sectors; the project area includes the following: (i) for Ombella-

Mpoko: Bimbo, Boali, Bossembele, Damara-Bogangolo; and (ii) for Lobaye: Boda-Mbaiki and 

Boganda-Boganangone. Added to this is Bozoum and Sakai for rice. The choice of these zones 

is justified by their accessibility to the security plan. The project will target about 30,120 

households to be added to the other 30,000 households of the PREPAS Project, making a total 

of 60,120 households with more than 500,000 direct beneficiaries. 

2.5.2 The main areas of the project, Ombella Mpoko and Lobaye, cover an estimated 
beneficiary population of about 1.5 million inhabitants, or 32% of the total population of the 

country. The young make up 61% of this population while women make up 50%. The prefecture 

of Ouham Pandé, which is predominantly young (63% of the total population) and female (51% 

of the population), is estimated at more than 60,000 inhabitants. Agriculture, which mobilizes 

more than 85% of the population, is the predominant sector for the prefecture's economy. Fishing 

Livestock and trade are also practiced. 

2.5.3 A landlocked area whose economy is essentially based on agriculture, the Préfecture of 
Lobaye has enormous potentialities that remain poorly exploited. In fact, of the nearly 2.3 million 

hectares of arable land, only 2% are cultivated each year. The region has a dense hydrographic 

network, 1.750 million ha of forest, 2.75 million ha of pasture and 2 800 km of road and rural 

roads of which only 12% are accessible by vehicle. The prefecture of Ouham Péndé, like the 

whole country, enjoys considerable assets. Its abundant rainfall and very fertile lands that 

facilitated the development of groundnut economy, earned it its former name of "the lung of the 

Central African economy." 

2.5.4 Lobaye belongs to the Guinea forest zone with 9 months of rainy season and 3 months 
of dry season and annual rainfall exceeding 1,600 mm. Mean annual temperature is 23° with 

relatively low thermal amplitude. Ombella Mpoko occupies the Guinean forest zone to the South, 

the Sudano-Oubanguian zone in the Centre and the Sudano-Guinean zone to the North. Peak 

rainfall varies between 1,200 to 1,500 mm per year. Temperatures range between 23 and 24°C, 

making the thermal gap low. Ouham Péndé (Bozoum) sits astride the Sudano-Oubanguian and 

Sudani-Sahelian climates. Rainfall ranges between 900 and 1,200 mm per year. This zone is 

typified by relative humidity with a more contrasted regime and longer periods of sunshine in 

the year, considering the country’s latitudinal position. Mean annual temperature is 25°C while 

the annual thermal amplitude is 6°C. 

 Participatory Approach in Project Identification 

2.6.1 This project was designed using an integrated participatory approach to improve 
beneficiary ownership and build the resilience of the rural poor. PADECAS design is the result 

of popular consultations (meetings and discussions) with stakeholders (rural population, NGOs, 

institutions, etc.) who expressed their views and concerns about the project’s objectives and 

technical choices during the identification, preparation and appraisal phases. Thanks to the 

participatory approach adopted, stakeholders supported the project objectives and technical 

choices. This same approach, used during the formulation stage, will be continued during project 

implementation. Different agricultural sector actors, State agents, the Chamber of Agriculture, 

NGOs, commercial banks as well as MFIs (micro-finance institutions) were all consulted.  

  



 

8 

 

 Consideration of Bank Group Experience  

2.7.1 The Bank’s portfolio is being implemented in an unstable security context, 
characterised by the occupation of three-quarters (¾) of the country by rebel factions. In these 

circumstances, project activities will preferably by located in safe areas to guarantee proper 

implementation with real impacts for the beneficiary population. The July 2017 review noted 

shortcomings in terms of project commencement time frames. The above lessons are reflected 

in the project design. This can be seen in the targeted choice of value chains and consequently a 

better concentration in terms of geography and actors. Government also took measures for final 

design studies to be completed and for the coordination team to be established as soon as possible 

to facilitate the commencement of the project.  

 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 In the long term (2030), the key performance indicator is the rate of food and nutritional 
insecurity and the poverty rate. The rate of food and nutritional insecurity is expected decrease 

to 40% from 48% in 2016. In the medium term (in terms of outcomes), PADECAS will 

contribute to increase agricultural production marketed from 8 to 10t/ha for cassava; 1.5 to 4t/ha 

for rice; 0.85 to 1.5t/ha for maize; and 0.86 to 1.3t/ha for red beans. For animal production, 

additional milk production will increase to 10 liters/day from 1.5 liters per day in the optimal 

year of production. Commercial operators’ incomes (producers, agripreneurs, cooperators, 

collectors, processing operators, traders, etc) will also increase by over 100%. Similarly, the 

project will bring the creation of 1,500 permanent jobs and 3,000 temporary jobs, including 75% 

for women and youths through the creation of about 500 local businesses, making it possible to 

improve the quality and living conditions of the poor. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 
 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 Economic and financial performance concerned the trading results of the main selected 
foodstuff and animal products (milk and cheese) based on models integrating both project 

support for each value chain segment (production, collection, marketing and processing) and the 

promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship, especially for the youth.  

3.1.2 In terms of profitability, the project posts a satisfactory rate of economic rate of return 
(ERR) of 19% and a net present value (NPV) of CFAF 10.728 billion at 12% capital opportunity 

cost. A test was conducted to measure ERR sensitivity test to cost and revenue fluctuations. It 

revealed that raising investment costs or reducing project revenue by 10% will not have a very 

significant impact on the  economic rate of return of at least 13%. In contrast, this rate is sensitive 

to a simultaneous variation of 10% of costs and revenue. Indeed, if costs increase while revenue 

drops, the effect will be to reduce ERR to 12.4%.  

3.1.3 The real situation is far better because other economic benefits exist which are not 
quantified. These can be summarized as follows: (i) the upstream effects of additional revenue 

on providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, consultancy firms); (ii) the downstream effects of 

the generation of additional revenue on producers, traders and processing operators, most of 

whom are women. Foreign exchange costs will also reduce thanks to the significantly smaller 

import bill of food products in the balance of trade; and wealth will be created in the country due 

to the higher GDP induced by the generation of additional value added. For households, the 

project’s benefits include better feeding of vulnerable groups (children, women of child-bearing 

age and the elderly), a reduction of the medical bill and the painfulness of the work of the 

agricultural labour force, especially the female workers. 



 

9 

 

 Environmental and Social Impact  

Environment  

3.2.1 PADECAS is classified in Category II. The implementation areas for the infrastructures 
are defined and the project will not involve the resettlement of populations nor the restriction of 

their access to resources or means of life. considering the limited scope of the facilities that will 

be constructed and/or rehabilitated. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

was prepared from 6 to 21 August 2018 and posted on the Bank’s website on 3 September 2018. 

The PADECAS infrastructure will not generate any major negative environmental and social 

impacts. Most will not only provide an answer to real social issues (fight against unemployment, 

socio-economic integration of underprivileged persons, diversification of agricultural and 

pastoral production etc.), but also improve the beneficiary population’s living conditions and 

boost the rural, semi-urban and even national economy.  

3.2.2 No irreversible or large-scale negative impact was reported. Most impacts are 
temporary and time-bound (local nuisances and the dangers confronting workers and the public) 

during the construction phase (flow of waste water from slaughtering areas and the proliferation 

of solid and liquid wastes.). Possible negative impacts include: (i) air pollution by balls and rice 

sounds, transportation of construction materials (sand, gravels), carbon monoxide emissions 

from gasoline-driven rice hulling machines ; (ii) soil pollution linked to cattle and the 

immoderate use of fertilizers and/or pesticides by framers); (iii) risk of water pollution by the 

worksite, use of pesticides and fertilizers, wastes from slaughtering areas); (iv) destruction of 

plant cover; and (v) destruction and moving away of wildlife. 

3.2.3 To prevent these risks, the ESMP already developed will guide the various stakeholders 
in managing the impacts resulting from the activities in question. The cost of implementing the 

ESMP is 70,000,000 XAF. The project management unit will be responsible for the 

implementation of the ESMP. 

3.2.4 At the institutional level, the monitoring of the ESMP is under the responsibility of the 
Directorate General for the Environment and includes the monitoring, impact control and 

evaluation activities. The coordination of the monitoring of the implementation of ESMP is 

ensured by the Ministry in charge of the environment in collaboration with the administrative 

and local authorities of the project area, the Ministries in charge of Agriculture and Livestock 

and as well as local civil society organizations working in the project areas. 

Climate Change Adaptation 

3.2.5 The sectors considered the most vulnerable to climate change in CAR are in order of 
importance: agriculture, health, fishing, energy, water resources, livestock, forestry, wildlife, 

habitat, transport and industry. Although there is no baseline data on GHG emissions in project 

zones, a rise in these emissions is to be expected due to the development of agriculture, intensive 

stock-breeding, and increased road transport due to the production of agricultural and livestock 

products and sub-products and their evacuation to markets.  On the other hand, two mitigation 

actions will be carried out : (i) setting up of rice hulling units running on an energy-mix (gasoline 

and solar power) which can reduce CO2 emissions by 50% to process paddy into polished rice; 

and (ii) planting of hedges to demarcate areas allocated for intensification of stock-breeding as 

these will contribute to the sequestration of part of the carbon emitted. Other actions to be carried 

out  include: (i) the establishment of prairies for cattle fodder; (ii) the introduction of varieties of 

rice, maize, beans and cassava that are adapted to extreme weather risks; and (iii) the restitution 

of crop residues to cultivated soils.  The use of green fertilizers, the reduction of work on land 

and sprinkling of organic fertilizers will contribute to replenish the soil’s carbon stocks. 



 

10 

 

3.2.6 Weather vagaries (floods, late arrival of the rainy season, prolonged drought, etc.) will 
negatively affect the production level and hence, the products of processing. To remedy this 

situation, the project will need to set up on a concerted basis an early warning and control system 

to monitor these vagaries and build the capacity of stakeholders involved in the implementation 

of activities. As recommended, these actions are consistent with the Strategic and Operational 

Plan for CAR’s Climate Change Response for the 2017-2020 period. 

Gender   

3.2.7 Agriculture and livestock breeding are the main activities in the project intervention 
area. Although these activities employ men, women and youths, it should be noted that men 

control these two sub-sectors since cultivated land and cattle herds are mostly owned by them. 

The plant and animal sub-sectors have great economic potentials to create wealth and generate 

significant revenue.  That is why women and youths are excluded from their control. The 

discrimination women suffer in both sub-sectors is further heightened by social roles which 

determine the position of the woman. She is considered as a chattel belonging to her husband’s 

lineage if she is married or that of her father if unmarried. On the strength of that, she is 

recognized to have the right to only use but not to own property of any kind.  

3.2.8 Although empirical data shows that women and youths are present in different 
segments of the selected value chains, no reliable statistical data exists for characterizing their 

involvement in these sub-sectors. PADECAS will support the conduct of preliminary surveys on 

the participation of women and youths in the plant and cattle value chains. The aim is to collect 

as much information as possible to prepare strategies for action. Therefore, the project will help 

to prepare a gender profile in the selected value chains. Besides, the project plans to construct 

markets for agricultural and dairy products mostly controlled by women.  

Social  

3.2.9 PADECAS will have a sure impact on the population’s food insecurity, seen in 
increased production and better product quality from the five sub-sectors concerned. It will also 

improve the nutritional status of the direct beneficiaries of the support comprising about 60,000 

households including 55,000 children who are under 5 years old and 22,000 pregnant women 

and breast-feeding mothers who are the most vulnerable to malnutrition. Improving the 

nutritional status of women and children will contribute to reducing mortality and morbidity in 

the project areas. Indirectly, all nutrition-sensitive activities such as water/sanitation 

interventions will also contribute to the better nutrition of the population.  

3.2.10 The success of PADECAS’ advocated approach consisting in concentrating activities 
by intervention site will induce a process of self-satisfaction and popular support among the 

population. Due to proximity, this will allow for endogenous development throughout the project 

area, the only factor that can, in the medium-term, roll back poverty, unemployment and rural 

exodus. Youth and women’s entrepreneurship will help to reduce unemployment in the project 

area and increase the incomes of the most vulnerable segments of the population.  

 

IV. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION  
 

 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 PADECAS will be placed under the joint supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development. MARD will supervise the project and, as such, coordinate interactions 

with other sector ministries, technical and financial partners as well as coordinate monitoring 



 

11 

 

and evaluation activities in relation to PREPAS. National-level consultation will be handled by 

a National Steering Committee (CNP) which will be established by a joint order of MADR and 

MESA. At the devolved level, consultation will be done within sub-prefectural Consultative 

Committees (CC) which will approve investment plans at their level and supervise 

implementation in order to ensure that they are aligned and consistent with regional strategies 

and other sector interventions. 

4.1.2 The project will be managed by the PPF Coordination Unit under way for the Support 
for the CAR Agricultural Transformation Strategy and Youth Agriculture and Agri-Business 

Entrepreneurship Promotion (PASTAC-PEJA) whose capacity will be strengthened by recruiting 

new experts. An Order of MADR to broaden the mandate of the PASTAC-PEJA Coordination 

Unit into the PADECAS Management Unit (UCG) must be signed before project 

commencement. Three area offices will be created in the project area within the sub-prefectures 

of Boda, Bouali and Damara. 

 Procurement Arrangements 

4.2.1 Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework :All procurement of goods, works and 
consultancy services financed with Bank resources will be done in accordance with the 

Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Funded Operations (AfDB Policy), October 2015 edition 

and the Methodology for the Implementation of the Procurement Policy of the African 

Development Bank. Details of procurement performance (system, cost, schedule, method, 

review type) agreed between the Borrower and the Bank are described in Technical Annex B.7.  

4.2.2 Procurement implementation: Project procurement will be carried out by a 
procurement expert of the Project Management Unit to be recruited through an open call. This 

expert will be recruited as soon as the project commences in order to carry out procurement 

activities as defined in Technical Annex B7 with the support of a Procurement Assistant, civil 

servant of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development to be appointed. To this end, the 

Central African Government has submitted to the Fund a request to authorize early actions for 

the following acquisitions: recruitment of an administrative and financial manager, a 

procurement specialist and an expert in monitoring and evaluation. 

4.2.3 Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment (ERCA): In order to take the 
specificities of the project into consideration, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sector 

and project level; and (ii) the capacity of the executing agency. The results of these assessments 

concluded that the risk level for procurement is high and made it possible to determine that all 

project procurements will be carried out according to the Bank’s system, subject to the 

application of the mitigation measures proposed in paragraph 5.9 of Technical Annex B.5. 

 Financial Management  

4.3.1 The evaluation concluded that the Project Coordination Unit does not have the 

adequate and satisfactory financial management capacity to provide, with reasonable 

assurance, accurate and complete information in a timely manner on the status of the 

project as required by the Bank. The initial level of fiduciary risk related to aspects of 

financial management is considered high due to: (i) the absence of a manual of procedures 

incorporating the specificities of the PADECAS project; (ii) the size of the current fiduciary team 

which is not adequate to manage project funds. In fact, apart from the accountant, the team does 

not have an administrative and financial manager; (iii) lack of refresher training for the existing 

team (revised SYSCOHADA, cash management, disbursement procedures, internal control, 

etc.), this situation may cause the project to risk significant errors in the financial statements for 

the 2018 financial year; (iv) the absence of accounting software; and (v) the absence of an 



 

12 

 

independent internal inspection mechanism within the Unit (internal audit and / or financial 

controller). As a reminder, some of these weaknesses were identified by the evaluation mission 

of the PPF of July 2017, without a satisfactory evolution being observed. Arrangements have 

been formulated to reduce this level of risk. 

4.3.2 Financial Management Arrangements: The fiduciary responsibility for the 
implementation of the project lies with the Central African Republic through the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development. The Coordination Cell set up under the PPF will be 

responsible for the overall coordination, technical coordination and financial management of the 

project. 

4.3.3 Financial management of the project will be ensured through the implementation of the 
following system: (i) development of the manual of administrative, financial and accounting 

procedures in order to integrate the improvements provided by the new provisions of the revised 

SYSCOHADA standard. It should also describe the organization chart of the project with all the 

actors involved in its implementation, the roles and responsibilities and activities of each actor, 

(ii) organize training in the revised SYSCOHADA, cash management and internal control for 

the benefit the entire Project fiduciary team; (iii) recruitment of an administrative and financial 

manager; (iv) validation of financial reporting formats within three months of effectiveness to 

improve the quality and timeliness of financial statements required by the Bank, (v) in the 

absence of an internal auditor, ensure the involvement of the financial controller of MADR in 

the chain of validation of expenditure and disbursement. In addition, the Coordinator should be 

personally involved in the proper functioning of the internal control system. Before the 

disbursement of resources for capacity building, ensure the implementation, and control by users, 

management tools for the periodic establishment of accounting, budget, and financial reports and 

financial statements closing date. 

 Disbursements  

4.4.1 Disbursement of the FAD and TSF resources under the project will be done pursuant to 
the provisions of the Disbursement Handbook in force at the Bank. For ADF resources: the direct 

payment method for the payment of goods and works. For TSF resources: (a) the special account 

method (for operating expenses, capacity building activities, and the management of certain 

partnership agreements) and (b) the direct payment method for the payment of works , goods 

and service contracts. 

4.4.2 The opening of the XAF-denominated special account for TSF resources, for 
PADECAS, under the responsibility of MADR will be carried out in a local bank deemed 

acceptable to the Bank. All supporting documentation for project expenditures (all funding 

combined) will be filed and maintained in a secure location and in accordance with the Law. 

These supporting documents must be available and accessible for review / audit / audit by 

periodic Bank supervision missions, external audits and internal audits. 

 Audit Arrangements 

4.5.1 Pursuant to the general conditions of the Bank, an annual audit of financial statements 
including, will be performed by an independent audit firm which will be recruited on a 

competitive basis. MADR’s PMU will be responsible for recruiting the independent audit firm 

with the support of the Unit’s Procurement Expert. The selection of the firm will be done 

according to Bank procedures. The auditor’s terms of reference will comply with the model in 

force at the Bank, and submitted for the latter’s approval.  



 

13 

 

4.5.2 The contract with the auditor will not exceed three years and the acceptance by the 
Bank of the first audit report is a prerequisite for the auditor to continue his work. The scope of 

the audit will cover all project activities, all sources of funding, as well as the activities of the 

value chain development fund. Audits reports shall be transmitted six months after the end of the 

fiscal year at the latest. 

 Project Monitoring and Evaluation   

4.6.1 The basic tool for monitoring and evaluation of this project is the logical framework 
that details the impact, effect and product measurement indicators. The PADECAS monitoring 

and evaluation officer who will be recruited after approval by the Bank of his qualifications and 

experience will be placed under the authority of the coordinator. He/she will be responsible for 

the monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the implementation of the ESMP. He/she 

will also be responsible for establishing a diagnosis and baseline situation for the project as well 

as developing specific tools for planning and data collection 

4.6.2 The PMU will be required to provide the Bank with a quarterly report showing progress 
in implementing the approved program and annual budget. This report should include the 

following information for each activity: the physical objectives, the level of achievement and the 

explanation of any discrepancies, the expected costs and actual costs, and the explanations of 

any discrepancies, the financial data of the project. The Bank will carry out two (2) supervisory 

missions per year to assess progress in terms of realization of products and effects as well as 

administrative and financial performance. The mission will then make recommendations to 

improve project implementation. A performance status report will be written after each 

supervision mission. A review will be scheduled mid-term and a project completion mission at 

the end. The project implementation schedule is summarized below. 

Table 9: Project Implementation Schedule 

Time Frame Milestones Responsible Body 

October 2018 Board approval Bank 

December 2018 Signing of Grant Agreement Beneficiary / Bank 

March 2019 First disbursement Beneficiary/Bank 

December 2021 Mid-term review Bank/Borrower 

June 2020 Submission of first audit report Borrower 

December 2023 Project completion Bank/ Borrower 

 Governance 

4.7.1 The multi-sector good governance challenges (environment, agriculture, livestock etc..) 
to be tackled include lengthy time frames and transparency in procurement, the establishment of 

a reference framework for planning investments, transparency in the financial management of 

works maintenance associations and obstacles to the implementation of sub-regional and 

regional policies. However, the management of public resources and the state of corruption in 

the country require that greater attention be paid to procurement mechanisms. In this framework, 

PADECAS should be implemented to strengthen local institutions and improve citizen control 

through better involvement of civil society and farmers’ organisations. 

 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The fact of carrying out activities that meet stakeholder demands, global sub-sector 
needs and priority national and local guidelines while empowering national partner institutions, 



 

14 

 

is the main guarantee of the project’s sustainability. Since the selected value chains indeed exist 

already, the project places emphasis on strengthening their segments and on integrating them 

with a view to upgrading and professionalizing these sub-sectors. Besides, the targeted value 

chain actors (producers, stock-breeder, transporters, processing operators, research, supervision 

and support/advice structures, etc.) participated in project design and are committed to being part 

of its implementation and steering. The involvement of sub-prefectural consultative committees 

makes project ownership possible at the decentralized level. 

4.8.2 The works will be managed and maintained by the beneficiaries or communes. The 
sustainability of the project largely depends on the quality of the works and adequate 

management and maintenance conditions. It also depends on the level of ownership by actors 

and beneficiaries as well as the desire and commitment displayed by Government and devolved 

structures, mostly sub-prefectures, to provide long-term support for the management of 

structures and facilities constructed by the project. There are plans to mobilize technical 

assistance support under PREPAS to define a viable model for the management of all 

infrastructure that will be constructed as part of AfDB and IFAD projects to ensure their 

profitability and sustainability.  

4.8.3 Project actions will also serve to lay the foundations for the promotion of 
entrepreneurship within small foodstuff and market-gardening cooperatives as well as animal 

production cooperatives. In the same vein, project actions in areas such as capacity-building in 

entrepreneurial culture, business management, organisational dynamics of beneficiary groups 

and the management and maintenance of works will stimulate the emergence of small and 

medium-sized enterprises also taking into consideration the technical, financial and 

organizational dimensions. They will also foster inclusive and responsible growth. All these 

support packages taken together constitute additional guarantee of the sustainability of outputs 

while enabling the dynamic initiated to continue after the project ends. 

 Risk Management  

4.9.1 The risks that could limit the achievement of project objectives are related to: (i) the 
deterioration of the country's political and security situation and its spread in the project area; 

(ii) looting of project assets by armed groups; (iii) extreme weather events. The risks identified 

above will be mitigated by strengthening the efforts of the Government and the International 

Community to fight against insecurity and by integrating the adaptation dimension into the 

project activities. 

 Knowledge Building 

4.10.1 PADECAS will experiment on a pilot basis: (a) new technologies for increasing 
productivity; (b) inclusive funding mechanisms; and (c) youth entrepreneurship. In addition, a 

mechanism will be put in place to monitor dynamics of the food and cattle sub-sectors as well as 

the initiative designed to extend social protection to rural areas. The sum of these interventions 

will serve as pilot experiments for the Bank in the Central African Republic and generate 

invaluable knowledge for the future development of agricultural sub-sectors in the country and 

elsewhere in Africa. These interventions will be documented and will enable the Central African 

Government to redirect and better entrench its agro-pastoral development policies and strategies. 

  



 

15 

 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

The project will be financed through two Instrument ADF and TSF awarded to the Central African 

Republic each with its own grant agreement. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Involvement 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Grant Effectiveness: Grant effectiveness shall be subject to the 
signing of the Grant Agreement. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to the First Disbursement: In addition to grant effectiveness, the 
first disbursement shall be subject to the Borrower fulfilling the following conditions to the 

satisfaction of the Bank: 

a) Provide to the Fund the decree from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development extending the mandate of the Coordination Unit of the CAR 

Agricultural Transformation Strategy and Youth Agriculture and Agri-Business 

Entrepreneurship Promotion  to a Project Management Unit; 
 

b) Provide to the Fund evidence of the hiring of the Administrative and Financial 
Officer, the Procurement Specialist and Project Monitoring and Evaluation Expert, 

whose experience and qualifications have been deemed acceptable by the Bank; 

Provide to the Fund evidence of the establishment of the three antennas of Boda, 

Boali and Damara; and 

 

c) Provide the Fund with evidence of the development of the Administrative Procedures 
Manual, financial and accounting. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower must in addition: 

a. Execute the Project in accordance with the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP), the Fund's Safeguard Policies and applicable national 

legislation in a manner satisfactory to the Fund, in form and substance; 
 

b.  Prepare and submit to the Fund, as part of the Project Reporting referred to in 
Section 7.01 of the Grant Agreement, quarterly reports on the implementation of 

the ESMP, including identified deficiencies and corrective actions taken thereon 

been brought; 
 

c. Refrain from any action that would impede or impede the implementation of the 
ESMP, including any amendment, suspension, waiver and / or cancellation of any 

provision thereof, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the 

Fund; 

 

d. Cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project 
or any change in its scope results in unforeseen displacement and / or resettlement 

of populations; and undertakes not to start working in the area affected by the 

implementation of the Project provided that all Persons Assigned by the Project 

are compensated and / or resettled in accordance with the Resettlement Plan 

prepared; 



 

16 

 

 

e. Provide evidence of revised SYSCOHADA training, cash management and 
internal control for the benefit of the entire Project fiduciary team; and 

 

f. Implement the Project, and ensure that each of its contractors and / or agents 
implement the Project in accordance with the provisions of the Anti-Corruption 

Policies. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 The project complies with all Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposal to award a TSF 

grant not exceeding UA 7.00 and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 1.28 million to the Central 

African Republic subject and in accordance with the conditions set out in this report.



 

























































 

 

 

 

 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR YOUTH EMPLOYMENT AND 

SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS 
 

COUNTRY : BURKINA FASO 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT  
Date: August 2018 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  


Project Information Sheet 

 

 

Client Information 

DONEE   : Burkina Faso 

 

TITLE OF PROJECT :  Support Project for Youth Employment and Skills  

     Development in Rural Areas  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY  : Ministry of Youth Affairs, Vocational Training and 

 Integration (MJFIP) 

 

PROJECT AREA :  Burkina Faso 

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

 

ADF  

 

Government                          

 

10.30 

 

1.144 

 

ADF grant 

  

Counterpart funds 

TOTAL COST 11.444  

 

Key Financial Information of the AfDB 

 

Grant Currency 

 

UA 

Interest* Type NA 

Interest Rate Margin* NA 

Commitment Charge* NA 

Other Charges* NA 

Maturity  NA 

Grace period NA 

FRR, NPV (baseline scenario) NA 

ERR (baseline scenario) NA 

 

 

Time Frame – Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Approval of the concept note 

 

April 2018 

Project approval 19 September 2018 

Effectiveness November 2018 

Last disbursement December 2023 

Completion December 2023 



 

 

iv 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

 

General Project Overview: The rural sector has enormous agro-pastoral and environmental 

potential, comprising: 9 million hectares of arable land, about 59% of which is cultivated; 

233,500 ha of irrigable land, about 30% of which is currently exploited; 500,000 ha of mud 

plains that are relatively easy to develop; and enormous potential for the development of 

irrigation, fishing and aquaculture. The above-mentioned high potential, existing prospects of 

diversifying crops and increasing yields, and the existence of a local and sub-regional market 

represent opportunities for stimulating the agricultural and rural sectors.   

 

By intervening in four regions of the country (North, Centre-North, Boucle du Mouhoun and 

Centre-West), the project will create enabling conditions for more inclusive economic growth 

that can reduce youth unemployment and under-employment. Its purpose is to ensure a closer 

match between young people's professional qualifications and the required labour market 

profiles by: (i) strengthening the existing technical and vocational training available to young 

people in rural areas; and (ii) developing the entrepreneurial skills of young people wishing to 

establishing their own businesses in sectors with real job creation potential.  

 

Component 1 is aimed at supporting the entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates 

trained in agriculture and agribusiness, while Component 2 targets skills development to boost 

the employability and entrepreneurship of rural youth, regardless of whether they are graduates 

or not. The total project cost, net of taxes, is estimated at UA 11,444 million, including UA 

10.30 million that will come from the ADF. The project will be approved in September 2018, 

for a five-year performance period. 

 

The Bank’s Value added: The Bank’s value added arises from the implementation of the Jobs 

for Youth in Africa Strategy (2016-2025), which seeks to promote employment and 

entrepreneurship with a view to ensuring inclusion; strengthening human capital; and creating 

sustainable links on the labour market. The project seeks to support the entrepreneurship of 

young graduates in agribusiness, in line with the Enable Youth initiative which is one of the 

flagship programmes of the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa and Jobs for 

Youth in Africa Strategy. Furthermore, the project will create appropriate conditions for skills 

development by improving the existing vocational training and apprenticeship system for rural 

youth in sectors that have a real job-creation potential. 

 

Knowledge Management: The various studies to be conducted and the strategic plans to be 

formulated in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship will lead to the 

implementation of relevant measures for strengthening the national mechanism. Formulation 

of the strategic plan to develop a single fund that finances the projects by youths and women, 

as well as the economic and financial feasibility study for the Vocational Training 

Centre/Incubation Centre (CFP-CI) will improve the effectiveness of public funds and 

operationalize the incubator of the Assessment and Vocational Training Centre of 

Ouagadougou (CEFPO). In the area of technical and vocational education and training (TVET), 

the project plans to formulate a strategic plan for the National Vocational Training Agency and 

conduct studies on the establishment of incubators in vocational training centres. These 

activities have a strategic impact on knowledge development and will ultimately improve the 

effectiveness of the country’s vocational training system. A monitoring/evaluation mechanism 

is planned under the project to capitalize on knowledge and leverage the lessons that will be 

learned from it. The knowledge and lessons learned will be published on the Bank's websit e 

and in project reports, publications and videos.



 

v 

 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  

                                                
1  The term “youth” covers young people (girls and boys) as well as women. 

Country and Project Title: Burkina Faso: Promotion of Youth Employment and Skills Development in Rural Areas (PADEJ-MR) 

Project Goal:   Improve youth employability and entrepreneurship1 in the agricultural, forestry and livestock sectors as well as in promising sub-sectors in rural 

areas. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/ 

MITIGATING MEASURES Indicator (including 
ISCs) 

Baseline 
Situation 

Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Contribution to 

the reduction of 

youth under-

employment in 

rural areas 

 

2. Rural sector 

contribution to the 

economy  

1. Under-employment rate 

in the agricultural sector 

 

 

 

 

2. Annual growth rate of 

the agricultural sector 

value added. 

64% (in 2017) 

 

 

 

 

 

2.6% (in 

2017) 

50% (in 2023)  
 

 

 

 

 

5.7% (in 2023) 

Continuous 
Multi-sectoral 

Survey (CMS) 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. 

Entrepreneurship 

opportunities in 

agribusiness have 

been exploited by 

the youth. 

1.1. Additional number of 

businesses created or 

consolidated by young 

graduates in agriculture and 

agribusiness. 

 

0 

 

350 (including 50% 

by women) 

 

 

 

Implementation 

report  

 

Progress report 

of the Business 

Creation Centre 

(CEFORE).  

Risk 1: Insecurity linked to terrorism 

 

Mitigatiing measure 1: Strengthening of 

the security mechanism in the project 

area. 

 

2. The 

employability and 

integration of rural 

youth have been 

improved. 

2.1. Additional number of 

young beneficiaries of 

training/apprenticeship 

programmes who have 

obtained a job or created 

their own business. 

 

 

 

 

0  800 (650+150) 

(including 50% by 

women) 

Implementation 

report. 



 

vi 

 

 

 Component 1: Support to the entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates in the areas of agriculture and agribusiness 
O

U
T

P
U

T
 

Output 1.  
Awareness-raising 

to change the 

perception of 5,000 

youths vis-à-vis 

agriculture.  

 

Number of young 

graduates sensitized to 

agribusiness 

 

 

Exchange and 

information-sharing visits 

1.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

 

1.2 -0 

1.1-5000 (including 

50% by women) 

 

 

1.2 -5 

 

 

Implementation 

reports 

Risk 2: Shortage of medium or long-term 

resources to finance the development of 

the newly-created businesses. 

 

Mitigating measure 2: In addition to the 

planned funding mechanism (seed funds), 

implement a partnership strategy with 

financial intermediaries to guide young 

entrepreneurs who have undergone the 

incubation process  

 

Risk 3: A regulatory environment that is 

not conducive to the development of 

agricultural entrepreneurship  

 

Mitigating measure 3: Implementation of 

the law pertaining to the investment code 

for the agricultural, forestry, livestock 

and fisheries sectors 

Output 2. 

Incubation of 

young graduates. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.1 Number of incubators 

with which the project will 

sign agreements or 

performance contracts 

 

2.2 Number of young 

higher education graduates 

who have benefited from 

incubation services  

 

2.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 -0 

 

 

 

2.1- 4 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2- 350 (including 

50% by women) 

Implementation 

reports 

 

 

 

Output 3. Business 

development 

 

3.1. Funding mechanism 

(seed fund) established 

 

3.2. Number of budding 

businesses funded.  

 3.1 -0 

 

 

 

3.2 -0 

 

3.1- 1 

 

 

 

3.2- 500 

 

Implementation 

reports. 

 

Component 2: Skills development to promote the employability and entrepreneurship of rural youth  

Output 1. 

Strengthening of 

the technical and 

vocational 

education and 

training (TVET) 

mechanism. 

 

 

1.1 Number of 

training/apprenticeship 

institutions strengthened. 

 

1.2 Number of institutions 

that include training 

modules on business and 

entrepreneurship. 

1.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

1.2 -0 

 

 

 

1.1-10 (6 VTCs and 

4 RPCs 

 

 

1.2-20 

 

 

 

 

Implementation 

reports. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

vii 

 

 Output 2. Skills 
improvement for 

the youth. 

 

2.1 Number of young non-

graduates who have 

benefited from skills 

training in vocational 

training institutions. 

2.1 -0 

 

 

 

 
 

2.1-1300 (including 

50% by women) 

 

Implementation 

reports 

 

 

 

 

Output 3. 

Professional 

integration of the 

youth. 

 

 

 

 

3.1 Number of young 

people who obtain a job 

after their training. 

 

3.2 Number of young 

people who benefit from 

TVET and have created 

their own business. 

3.1 -0 

 

 

 

3.2 -0 

3.1-650 (including 

50% by women) 

3.2-150 (including 

50% by women). 

 

Implementation 

reports 

Risk 4: Quality of education and its 

consistency with market needs  

Mitigating measure 4: Implementation of 

apprenticeship-integration agreements 

between training centres and employers’ 

organizations 

 Component 3: Project management and coordination   

 

An operational 

mechanism for  

management and 

coordination has 

been established 

and it guarantees 

smooth 

implementation. 

Quarterly monitoring 

reports 

Audit reports validated 

Cumulative disbursement 

rates 

Strengthening of 

employment support and 

monitoring units at MJFIP 

 20 

 

 

5 

 

100% 

(2023) 

 

Implementation reports  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES 

Component I: Support to the entrepreneurship of young higher education 

graduates in the areas of agriculture and agribusiness. 

 

Component II: Skills development to promote the employability and 

entrepreneurship of rural youth. 

Component III: Project management and coordination. 

 

Financing sources: UA 11.444 million  

ADF loan: UA 10.30 million 

Government: UA 1.144 million 



 

viii 

 

Project Implementation Schedule  

 Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
 Quarter Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                           

 Appraisal                              

 Negotiation and approval of the grant                            

 
Signature of the loan agreement and fulfilment of first 
disbursement conditions 

                          

 Publication of General Procurement Notice                           

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                           

 Establishment of the project team                           

 Project launching mission                            

 Procurement of property (vehicles, computers, etc.)                           

 Agreements with partner structures                           

3 
SUPPORT TO THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP OF YOUNG 

GRADUATES 
                    

    
  

 Implementation of awareness-raising strategy                           

 Selection of incubators                           

 Selection and incubation of the youth                           

 Mentoring and coaching for the preparation of business plans                           

 Creation of youth businesses                           

 Establishment of the project team                           

 Funding of projects                            

4 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT                           

 Preparation of various studies                           

 
Award of contracts for the rehabilitation/creation of VTCs and 
RPCs  

                    
    

  

 
Award of contracts for the rehabilitation/creation of VTCs and 

RPCs 
                    

    
  

 Equipment of VTCs and RPCs                           

 Design and adaptation of training modules and material                           

 Establishment of a test incubator within VTCs and RPCs                            

 Training and support for professional integration                           

5 PROJECT COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT                            

 
Establishment of the accounting system and manual of 
procedures 

                    
    

  

 
 Preparation of the baseline situation and establishment of the 

M/E system 
                    

    
  

 
Management, monitoring/evaluation and communication 
activities 

                    
    

  

 Annual accounts audit                           

 Midterm review                           

 Completion report                            



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING THE AWARD OF A 

GRANT TO BURKINA FASO TO FINANCE THE SUPPORT PROJECT FOR YOUTH 

EMPLOYMENT AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendation concerning a proposal to award a grant of 

UA 10.30 million to Burkina Faso to finance the Support Project for Youth Employment and Skills 

Development in Rural Areas (PADEJ-MR). 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

 Project Linkage with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1 PADEJ-MR is perfectly consistent with the National Economic and Social Development Plan 

(PNDES, 2016-2020), which focuses on three strategic pillars, namely: (i) reforming institutions and 

modernizing the administration; (ii) developing human capital; and (iii) boosting sectors that guarantee 

economic growth and jobs. Pillars 2 and 3 focus respectively on education, vocational and technical 

training, health, access to drinking water and sanitation, improving agricultural productivity, and 

increasing value added in the agri-food and service industries. 

1.2 The project is also consistent with the National Strategy for the Development of Agricultural 

Entrepreneurship (SNDEA, 2017-2026), which is the framework document for promoting agricultural 

entrepreneurship in Burkina Faso. The promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship is intended to address 

the low agricultural productivity resulting mainly from extreme vulnerability to agro-climatic conditions, 

land insecurity and especially difficulties in accessing funding, inputs and agricultural equipment.  

Similarly, the project is consistent with the 2018-2020 Three-Year Action Plan of the Ministry of Youth, 

Vocational Training and Employment (MJFIP) which lays emphasis on conducting a series of priority 

actions to achieve the integration of young people into the economic circuit.  

1.3 The project is consistent with: (i) the Long-Term Strategy (LTS) 2013-2022 through its 

operational priorities “Skills and technologies” and “Private Sector Development”; (ii) the Human Capital 

Strategy 2014-2018 whose overall objective is to improve employment skills; and (iii) the Jobs for Youth 

in Africa Strategy, whose flagship programmes include the promotion of rural micro-entreprises and agri-

business by young graduates. The project is fully in line with the Bank's High-5s, notably “Feed Africa” 

and “Improve living conditions for the people of Africa”. Lastly, it ties in well with Pillar II of the Bank's 

Country Strategy Paper (CSP, 2017-2021) to support agricultural sector development for inclusive growth. 

Lastly, the project is included in the indicative programme of the CSP. 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.2.1 The rural sector has enormous agro-pastoral and environmental potential, comprising: 9 million 

hectares of arable land about 59% of which is cultivated; 233,500 ha of irrigable land, about 30% of which is 

currently exploited; 500,000 ha of mud plains that are relatively easy to develop; and enormous potential for 

the development of irrigation, fishing and aquaculture. The above-mentioned high potential, existing 

opportunities to diversify crops and increase yields, and the existence of a local and sub-regional markets all 

constitute opportunities for stimulating the agricultural and rural sectors.   

1.2.2 The country also has a diverse regulatory framework (framework law on agriculture, forestry, 

livestock, wildlife and fishery activities; law on rural land tenure; investment code for the agriculture, 

forestry and livestock sectors, etc.), offers many opportunities for developing agricultural entrepreneurship 



 

2 

 

and is endowed with an abundant and accessible agricultural labour-force. However, there are many 

obstacles to job creation and entrepreneurship, namely: (i) low levels of training and skills, especially 

among the youth; (ii) a wide discrepancy between the profiles of job-seekers and the economy’s potential; 

(iii) a weak culture of entrepreneurship; and (iv) a large informal sector, characterized by precarious and 

very low-paid jobs. Furthermore, according to the diagnosis carried during the preparatory studies of the 

project, youth employment in the agricultural, forestry and livestock sectors is constrained by many 

challenges, including: (i) access to financing; (ii) better ownership of the process to establish a legal and 

regulatory framework for agricultural entrepreneurship; (iii) support for stakeholder professionalization; 

and (iv) strengthening of stakeholder capacity throughout the value chain. 

1.2.3  These issues are central to the challenges that the Bank intends to address through this operation. 

The Bank's comparative advantage in this operation resides in its experience in Burkina Faso’s agricultural 

and social sectors which it has financed through several investments. These experiences have provided 

the Bank with expertise in skills development, promotion of agricultural value chains and improvement 

of youth employability in rural areas. The Bank's value added in this new operation resides in promoting 

the business spirit and entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates in agricultural value chains 

with a view to creating a critical mass of young farmers through incubation and establishing a financing 

mechanism that will reduce risks associated with establishing a business in the agricultural sector. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 The Government has established 14 sectoral dialogue frameworks (SDFs) as part of PNDES 

implementation. The dialogue framework is led by the FAO in the rural sector; and by Italian cooperation 

in the employment sector. The AfDB is a member of these two dialogue frameworks. Furthermore, since 

2009, technical and financial partners (TFPs) have set up a harmonization mechanism in the form of a 

troika, which serves as a consultative entity and interface with the Government. The AfDB was the lead 

agency of TFPs from 2013 to 2014. 

1.3.2 This operation complements other Bank projects and those of other partners under appraisal or 

implementation (see Annex III). The employment sector benefits from the support of bilateral and 

multilateral financial partners for the implementation of projects and programmes to improve 

employability and employment. The Bank intends to continue its coordination and complementarity efforts 
with these and other partners during the implementation of this project. 



 

3 

 

Sector or Sub-sector* GDP   Sector share in total budget   

Education/Training  7%2 21.51 % 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (in UA million) 

Government (average 

2016 and 2017) 
Donors Period 

1115  World Bank 34.8 2013-2019 

  Switzerland 7.02 2019-2023 

 
Donor pool (Switzerland, AFD, 

Austria, Monaco, Luxembourg) 
22.09 2018-2022 

  European Union via Expertise France 5.87 2017-2020 

 
Norway/Netherlands 

(Job booster) 

7.56 (5.4 from Norway 

and 2.1 from the 

Netherlands) 

2018-2022 

 
UNDP-Luxembourg 

 
1.25 2017-2020 

Aid Coordination Level  

Existence of thematic working groups 
 

Yes 

Existence of a global sectoral programme for vocational training 

and the rural economy 

 

Yes 

Existence of a sectoral programme for employment 
 

Yes 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Components   

2.1.1. The project seeks to create conditions conducive to more inclusive economic growth that can 

reduce youth unemployment and under-employment. This will be done mainly by mainstreaming 

employment into sector policies and developing young people’s skills in conjunction with the productive 

sector. The project focuses on three complementary components.  

2.1.2. The first component is aimed at supporting entrepreneurship among young higher education 

graduates in agriculture and agri-business with a view to: (i) encouraging them to create and develop 

businesses within the agricultural value chain; and (ii) providing them with the skills and support 

necessary for them to succeed in this sector and to build a respectable professional career through a quality 

incubation process and a seed funding mechanism for their business projects. 

2.1.3  Component 2 focuses on skills development to promote the employability and entrepreneurship 

of rural youth, be they graduates or not. The aim is to improve the matching between young people's 

vocational qualifications and the profiles required by the labour market by: (i) strengthening the existing 

technical and vocational training available to young people in rural areas; and (ii) developing the 

entrepreneurial skills of young people who wish to establish their own businesses in sectors with real job 

creation potential. 

                                                
2  Education budget as percentage of GDP. Source: Statistical yearbooks of education sector, Burkina Faso  



 

4 

 

2.1.4 The third component supports project management through actions pertaining to institutional 

support and knowledge development to ensure proper project implementation. 
 

Table 2.1 

Project Components 

Components 
Cost estimate 

(UA million) 

Description of components 

 

Support to the 

entrepreneurship 
of young higher 

education 

graduates in the 
areas of 

agriculture and 

agribusiness 

4.81 (42%) 

The activities planned under this component are presented, in 

chronological order, as follows: 

(i) Awareness-raising for 5,000 youths (50% being women) to change 
their perception of agriculture This activity is necessary to demonstrate to 

young people that agriculture is not only about tilling the land, it  also  

includes many opportunities to create businesses in which they can make 
a career and flourish as in any other sector. To that end, the project will 

conduct information and awareness campaigns using relay workers and 

organize exchange and experience-sharing visits. 

(ii) Incubation of 350 young university graduates (50% of whom are 
women) to provide them with intensive support to ensure the success of 

their businesses: training, support, access to markets and funding, contacts 

with partners, etc. This activity will be conducted by a public incubator, 
namely the AFP-PME, and private incubators selected and contracted for 

this purpose. The following criteria will be used to select partner 

incubators: similarity of targets with the project; convergence of 

intervention areas; relevance of the candidate selection and incubation 
methodology; and the ability to connect incubates to the market. These 

criteria will be evaluated for the AFP-PME and for the private incubators. 

(iii) Business development through the establishment of a seed fund 
accessible to young entrepreneurs undergoing incubation processes to 

fund the early developmental stages of their (often pre-commercial) 

businesses. This seed fund will be entrusted to the Burkina Faso Fund for 
Economic and Social Development (FBDES) (see text box on the FBDES) 

on an agreement basis, with the objective of financing 500 young 

entrepreneurs (350 higher education graduates and incubates, and 150 CFP 

and CPR graduates who have also benefited from incubation).   

Skills 
development to 

promote the 

employability 
and 

entrepreneurship 

of rural youth 

5.20 (45%) 

The main activities scheduled are: 

(i) Strengthening of the technical and vocational education and training 

(TVET) system through the rehabilitation and equipment of 6 VTCs, 

namely Gourcy (North), Tougan, Boromo, Toma and Solenzo (Boucle du 

Mouhoun) and the provincial ANPE centre of Koudougou (West Centre); 
and 4 RPCs, namely Kodougou (Boucle du Mouhoun), Goundi (West 

Centre), Kongoussi (North Centre) and Bonam (North Centre). 

(ii) Improvement of young people's skills through training in the priority 
occupations found in the PNDES (agriculture, forestry and stockbreeding; 

construction and public works, handicrafts and emerging trades) adapted 

to the needs of the labour market with a target of 1,300 young people, 50% 

of whom are women. 



 

5 

 

Components 
Cost estimate 

(UA million) 

Description of components 

 

(iii) Professional integration of 650 young people (50% of whom are 

women) with access to employment and 150 young entrepreneurs. The 
objective of integrating 650 young people into the labour market will be 

achieved through: (i) the effective implementation of the national strategy 

for the integration of trained PSCs; (ii) capacity-building support for 
integration stakeholders on the mastery of labour market needs and job 

niches; (iii) support for the development of a partnership between training 

centres (through the supervisory ministries) and enterprises (through 

employers’ organization); and (iv) traceability and monitoring of VTC and 
RPC graduates. Furthermore, the project will select 150 young people 

(50% being women) among the 1,300 trained and desirous of building 

their own business and grant them access to two incubation centres that 

will be created (in 1 VTC and 1 RPC) to support them in their projects. 

Project 

management 
and coordination 

1.14 (10%) 

The main activities to be conducted are: Administrative and financial 
management, planning and monitoring-evaluation, coordination, 

procurement, audit, communication, monitoring of cross-cutting issues 

such as gender and environment.   

2.2 Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The project was designed to address the issue of youth integration more effectively through: (i) 

the integration of young higher education graduates into the agricultural value chain as entrepreneurs; and 

(ii) the improvement of employability in growth sectors. The option chosen is twofold, namely: (i) creating 

a critical mass of young entrepreneurs with higher education degrees within the agricultural value chain 

by strengthening their entrepreneurial capacities through incubation and facilitating their access to start-

up capital through a seed fund; the success of these young entrepreneurs and their role as “leaders” will 

serve as a model for raising awareness among other young people, thus creating a virtuous circle that 

should contribute in developing the employment potential of the agricultural sector; and, (ii) improving 

the supply and quality of vocational training for rural youth in order to fill the skills gap in certain 

promising sectors and limit training inefficiencies. Ultimately, skills training for promising occupations 

will help to combat under-employment and low productivity in rural areas and thus maintain or even 

attract young people to rural areas with high economic potential through decent work and income. 

2.2.2  This option was preferred for its capacity to cover the entire ecosystem (agricultural value chain, 

incubation, seed funds) and its potential impact on youth entrepreneurship in a sector (agriculture) 

generally considered as unattractive and unpromising for young graduates and the rural world that is often 

equated with poverty and exodus.  

 

  



 

6 

 

 

2.2.3  The following alternatives were also explored; but rejected for the above-mentioned reasons. 

 

Alternatives Brief Description  Reasons for Rejection 

Supporting 

access to funding 

for businesses 

without an 

incubation 

process 

This approach would entail 

granting loans to companies 

selected according to certain 

criteria and from a fund 

established within the banking 

system 

- Given the high failure rate of new businesses (over 85% go bust 
before the third year), these loans have a very low repayment 

rate. 

- Financial support for companies does not always lead to growth; 
only a rigorous selection of entrepreneurs with the potential to 

succeed, as well as intensive support through incubation, can 

guarantee viability and sustainability. 

- This approach would focus more on the enterprise than on the 
entrepreneur, unlike the adopted option which guarantees a better 

chance of generating a critical mass of entrepreneurs within the 

agricultural value chain. 

Capacity-

building for the 

TEVT system 

This approach would entail 

strengthening the capacities of 

VTCs/RPCs in order to increase 

the supply and quality of 

training: 

- Training in the trades alone is insufficient, since it does not take 
into account the fact that many trained young people do not have 

the capacity to engage in entrepreneurship. That is why the 

training is combined with an incubation process. 

 

2.3 Type of Project  

2.3.1 PADEJ-MR is an autonomous operation in the form of a grant for an investment project. At this 

stage, the project approach is the most appropriate way to guarantee the achievement of results and ensure 

the effective and efficient use of resources. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Mechanisms 

2.4.1 The total project cost, net of taxes and customs duties, is evaluated at UA 11.44 million. This 

cost comprises UA 3.892 million (34%) in foreign exchange and UA 7.552 million (66%) in local 

currency. It is financed by an ADF grant of UA 10.30 million and a Burkina Faso Government contribution 

of UA 1.14 million (10%). ADF financing consists of UA 10.30 million from the ADF 14 country 

allocation. 

2.4.2 Costs were determined on the basis of information obtained from official structures, national 

market stakeholders and the Bank's experience in financing similar activities. They included a 3% 

provision for price increase in accordance with the standards of the Central Bank of West African States 

(BCEAO) and a 5% provision for physical contingencies. Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below present project 

costs by component, financing source and expenditure category and Table 2.6 presents the expenditure 

schedule by component. 

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.3 

Estimated Costs by Component 

Components 
In CFAF thousand In UA thousand 

F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

1. Support to the entrepreneurship of young 
higher education graduates in the areas of 

agriculture and agribusiness 
1,226,000 2,451,918 3,677,918 1,570 3,140 4,710 

2. Skills development to promote the 
employability and entrepreneurship of rural 

youth 
1,363,500 2,465,578 3,829,078 1,746 3,157 4,903 

3. Project coordination and management  110,000 772,500 882,500 141 989 1,130 

BASELINE COST 2,699,500 5,689,996 8,389,496 3,457 7,286 10,743 

Physical contingencies (5%) 54,900 62,420 117,320 70 80 150 

Financial contingencies (3%) 50,985 145,455 196,440 65 186 252 

PPF advance3 234,285  234,285 300   300 

TOTAL 3,039,670 5,897,870 8,937,540 3,892 7,552 11,444 

The exchange rates used are indicated in the introduction to this report (page i).  

 

Table 2.4 

Financing Sources 

Financing 

Sources 

CFA.F UA thousand Total (in 

UA) 
% 

F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. 

ADF 2,877,670 5,166,149 8,043,819 3,685 6,615 10,300 90% 

GOV’T 162,000 731,721 893,721 207 937 1,144 10% 

TOTAL 

PROJECT 

COST 

3,039,670 5,897,870 8,937,540 3,892 7,552 11,444   

 

Table 2.5 

Project Costs by Expenditure Category 

 

a) Costs by expenditure category for all funding  

Expenditure Category CFAF     UA     

  F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

A. GOODS 558,000 208,400 766,400 715 267 981 

B. SERVICES 366,500 3,595,030 3,961,530 469 4,603 5,073 

C. WORKS 750,000 925,000 1,675,000 960 1,184 2,145 

D. FUNCTIONING 0 986,566 986,566 0 1,263 1,263 

E. MISCELLANEOUS4 

(funding) 
1,000,000   1,000,000 1,280   1,280 

BASELINE COST 2,674,500 5,714,996 8,389,496 3,425 7,318 10,743 

Physical contingencies 

(5%) 
54,900 62,420 117,320 70 80 150 

Financial contingencies 

(2%) 
50,235 146,205 196,440 64 187 252 

PPF advance 234,285   234,285 300 0 300 

TOTAL 3,013,920 5,923,620 8,937,540 3,859 7,585 11,444 

                                                
3  PPF approved on 25/05/2016. It has made it possible to carry out preparatory studies. 
4  Miscellaneous refers to resources destined for the Seed Fund 



 

8 

 

b) Costs by expenditure category for the ADF 

 

Expenditure Category CFAF     UA     

  F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

A. GOODS 408,000 133,400 541,400 522 171 693 

B. SERVICES 366,500 3,461,000 3,827,500 469 4,432 4,901 

C. WORKS 750,000 925,000 1,675,000 960 1,184 2,145 

D. FUNCTIONING 0 488,318 488,318 0 625 625 

E. MISCELLANEOUS5 

(funding) 
1,000,000   1,000,000 1,280   1,280 

BASELINE COST 2,524,500 5,007,718 7,532,218 3,233 6,412 9,645 

Physical contingencies 

(5%) 
47,400 54,170 101,570 61 69 130 

Financial contingencies 

(2%) 
45,735 130,012 175,747 59 166 225 

PPF advance 234,285   234,285 300 0 300 

TOTAL 2,851,920 5,191,899 8,043,819 3,652 6,648 10,300 

 

Table 2.6 

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in CFAF thousand) 
Components 32% 25% 26% 12% 5%     

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total Percentage 

1. Support to the 
entrepreneurship of young 
higher education graduates 
in the areas of agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1,365,197 1,420,076 773,433 186,548 10,000 3,755,255 42% 

2. Skills development to 
promote the employability 

and entrepreneurship of 
rural youth. 

956,520 692,173 1,378,579 709,459 321,539 4,058,270 45% 

3. Project coordination and 
management.  

295,950 142,780 163,380 133,510 154,110 889,730 10% 

PPF advance. 234,285         234,285 3% 

TOTAL 2,851,952 2,255,029 2,315,393 1,029,518 485,649 8,937,540   

 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area (PA) selected in accordance with the Government's proposal was defined based 

on the following criteria: (i) high agricultural, forestry, livestock and fisheries (AFLF) potential as well as 

economic potential; (ii) exposure to climate risks; (iii) a high proportion of young people in the region; 

(iv) a high poverty rate in the locality; and (v) the existence of training or financing structures in the region. 

Hence, the Project will be implemented in the following areas: North Region, Boucle du Mouhoun Region, 

Centre-West Region and Centre-North Region.  The beneficiaries of the project are mainly: (i) young 

people living in rural areas; (ii) trained young people, whether qualified or less qualified; and (iii) young 

higher education graduates. The target age bracket is between 15 and 35 years for men and up to 50 years 

for women. Lastly, the project will benefit the following target population: (i) 5,000 young people in terms 

of awareness-raising to guide them towards agricultural value chain professions; (ii) 500 young 

entrepreneurs (350 young university graduates and 150 young people from TVET structures who will all 

                                                
5 Idem  



 

9 

 

benefit from incubation services); (iii) 1,300 young people trained in VTCs and RPCs, at least 50% of 

whom will be able to find jobs on the market; and (iv) 1,500 young people who may be employed in the 

500 enterprises created. 

2.5.2 In addition to age (young people between the ages of 15 to 35 years for men and up to 50 years 

for women), the selection criteria will be as follows: (i) for access to incubation services and the seed fund, 

the criteria will be those set by partner incubators; they will be based on the entrepreneurial potential of 

the candidate, the innovative nature of his project and its development and job creation potential; (ii) for 

access to technical and vocational training system, the criteria will be those already in force, albeit with 

an improvement through consultation between the supervisory Ministries (Agriculture and Employment) 

and employers in order to identify sectors, needs, qualification types, etc.  

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1 Project preparation followed a participatory and iterative process that facilitated the consultation 

of all stakeholders. Indeed, consultations were held with public sector institutions (Ministries concerned); 

the private sector (companies, employers); NGOs/CSOs (umbrella farmers’ organizations); as well as 

technical and financial partners active in vocational and technical training, and business creation and 

support. The diagnostic study led to the conduct of surveys among youth and women “entrepreneurs” and 

“potential entrepreneurs” in order to identify the various constraints and expectations regarding the 

project. The stakeholders insisted on: (i) better targeting of young beneficiaries by focusing on their 

entrepreneurial potential; (ii) better handling of the issue of access to funding; (iii) better coordination 

between various stakeholders; and (iv) the quest for synergy with ongoing initiatives. The stakeholders’ 

recommendations were factored into project design, mainly through: (i) the establishment of a rigorous 

mechanism to be initiated by the incubation centres for the selection of young beneficiaries; (ii) the 

establishment of a seed fund; (iii) the strengthening and management of a national consultation framework 

between public and private operational stakeholders (employers, financing structures), and; iv) 

complementarity with ongoing youth employment initiatives. 

2.6.2 This participatory approach followed during project formulation will be continued during project 

implementation. The monitoring-evaluation process will also involve the various stakeholders for the 

proper conduct of project actions. A gender-sensitive information and communication system will also be 

established to regularly disseminate information on project implementation results. 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

2.7.1 As of 30 April 2018, the Bank Group’s active portfolio in Burkina Faso comprised 18 projects 

worth a total of UA 454.04 million in commitments. Of these commitments, UA 69,22 million covers 

agriculture through five projects and one PPF. The total disbursement rate is 39.66%. The portfolio review 

conducted in March 2018 found the overall performance satisfactory. The Bank’s previous interventions 

in the social and agricultural sectors focused on developing rural infrastructure; enhancing food security; 

addressing inequalities; supporting income generation and access to basic social services; improving 

access to and quality of basic education; and building the capacity of the education and training sector. 
Completion reports have been prepared for all these projects. These various reports showed that the 

performance of these operations was generally satisfactory and their impact on the ground was perceptible. 

2.7.2 The main lessons learned from these projects are: (i) the importance of ensuring good quality at 

entry by carrying out studies during the project preparation phase; (ii) the need for appropriate targeting 

of beneficiaries; (iii) the need to take gender into account; and (iv) the need to set up an effective internal 

and external monitoring and evaluation system. These lessons have been factored into this project through: 

(i) the mobilization of a PPF to carry out diagnostic and baseline studies of the project; (ii) the conduct of 



 

10 

 

a rigorous selection of beneficiaries based on their entrepreneurial spirit as well as the innovativeness and 

job creation potential of their project; (iii) the proposal of incentive measures and actions to encourage 

women to contribute to and benefit from the project's spin-offs; (iv) the setting up of a monitoring-

evaluation mechanism involving the various structures and partners of the project as well as the 

strengthening of employment support and monitoring units; and (v) the setting up of an innovative and 

adapted support and financing mechanism. Lastly, the conditions precedent to first disbursement for 

portfolio projects have been met or are well on track. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The main performance indicators are those included in the logical framework, whose monitoring 

shall be coordinated by the project monitoring/evaluation expert in conjunction with all partners and 

associated structures. Particular emphasis will be placed on targeting the most relevant parameters that 

can be monitored and collected internally, and all indicators will be disaggregated by gender, with the 

objective of reaching 50% of women for each indicator. 

2.8.2 Monitoring will specifically cover: (i) the under-employment rate in rural areas; (ii) the number 

of young people reached through awareness-raising; (iii) the number of young people who have benefited 

from incubation services; (iv) the number of businesses created; (v) the number of jobs created by the 

incubated businesses; (v) the number of training establishments strengthened; (vii) the number of young 

people trained in TVET and starting their own business; and (viii) the number of young people who 

obtained employment after their training. A monitoring/evaluation mechanism will be established as soon 

as the project is initiated. 

III. Project Feasibility 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

Table 3.1 

Key Economic and Financial Figures* 
 Baseline Scenario Key assumptions for calculating the economic viability of the project 

NPV (in CFAF billion) 
Opportunity cost of 12% 

61.9 

 4% unemployment rate for VTC/RPC trainees 

 Risk rate of 10% for the cash-flow of newly created businesses 

 Mortality rate of 23% for business three years after their creation 

 At least 6% of the incubated youth from VTCs/RPCs have access to the 
 seed fund 

IRR  
(Internal rate of return) 

32.8% 

(*) The assumptions for calculation are discussed in detail in Technical Annex B7.  

3.1.1 The project is economically viable. Indeed, it alone will help to place 1,300 young people trained 

in vocational training centres (VTCs) and rural promotion centres (RPCs) on the job market to exercise 

trades with high employment potential desired by employers. Furthermore, it will facilitate the creation of 

500 businesses by young people (350 higher education graduates and 150 VTC/RPC graduates) who will 

in turn be able to create 1,500 jobs. Furthermore, the project will sensitize 5,000 young people to the 

agricultural and agribusiness professions. 

3.1.2 Overall, the net present value (NPV) of the project is CFAF 62 billion (which is indicative of its 

viability), and the internal rate of return (IRR) is 33% (which is well above the opportunity cost of capital 

set at 12%). The sensitivity tests conducted suggest that the IRR would vary within a range of 28% to 34% 

depending on the reasonable assumptions used.6 

                                                
6  These results are detailed in the Technical Annex B.7. It should to be noted that the economic rate of return (ratio of the o perating income to amount of 

capital invested), has not been explicitly calculated for the project. The reason is that the notions of equity or net results are not very relevant in component 



 

11 

 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental Impact: The activities planned under the project mainly focus on awareness-

raising and capacity-building; the setting up of incubators (structures which receive and guide project 

proponents); increased access to technical and vocational training; support and coaching; facilitation of 

access to finance, etc. Most of these activities will take place in existing facilities (training centres) and 

will not have any direct negative impact on bio-physical and human environments. Implementation of the 

project will not lead to community displacement or the loss of assets or access to resources. Moreover, it 

presents very low risk of accidents, waste generation and non-compliance with working and safety 

standards. 

3.2.2 The sharing and dissemination of best practices as well as awareness-raising on compliance with 

hygiene and quality standards for future agricultural entrepreneurs will enhance the positive impact of the 

project. Actually, the project will generate very little direct adverse impact. In accordance with the national 

legal framework, namely Decree No. 2015-1187 of 22 October 2015 on conditions and procedures for 

conducting and validating environmental and social assessments and its Annex 1, the project, by its nature, 

is not subject to an environmental and social impact assessment. However, it has provided for the 

establishment of a Seed Fund to facilitate young entrepreneurs’ access to funding that is tailored to their 

situation, but which could generate some adverse environmental and social effects if certain measures are 

not taken. The potential negative impacts will be on a medium to small scale, and will concern certain 

agricultural projects submitted for financing by the Fund. Such risks essentially pertain to deforestation to 

create rights of way; as well as worksite pollution and nuisances (noise, dust, safety, etc.) during the 

execution of certain works, owing to non-compliance with certain security and hygiene best practices, etc. 

3.2.3 The project is classified under Category 4 (FI B) in accordance with the Bank's environmental 

and social procedures. Category 4 projects relate to loans or grants awarded by the Bank to financial 

intermediaries, which onlend or invest in sub-projects that may have adverse environmental and social 

effects. 

3.2.4 The Burkinabé Economic and Social Development Fund (FBDES), which is responsible for 

managing the Fund, is required to apply the Operational Safeguards (SO) and equivalent Bank procedures 

to their sub-projects and to comply with national environmental and social requirements. It is also required 

to locally publicize the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) of the project which is 

being designed. The ESMS provides guidelines for establishing an environmental and social selection 

process and for determining the activities eligible for Seed Fund financing, depending on the scale and 

nature of their potential impacts on the environment. Furthermore, the ESMS defines the monitoring and 

surveillance framework, the institutional measures and provisions, as well as the capacity-building needs 

and other assistance to be provided before, during and after project implementation. 

3.2.5  Climate Change: The target areas are the Boucle du Mouhoun, North, Centre-North and Centre-

West regions. These areas remain characterized by enormous pressures on natural resources and recurrent 

droughts which sometimes alternated with periods of heavy rainfall that severely aggravate the 

vulnerability of ecosystems and communities. However, given the nature of the project and the main 

activities and sectors targeted (capacity-building, coaching, awareness-raising, support, etc.), the risks and 

vulnerabilities associated with climate change that could arise from project activities are very few. These 

activities are not likely to generate direct negative impacts or major risks for natural environments. Some 

suggested measures to optimize the positive impacts of the project will enhance resilience to climate 

change through the implementation of a series of activities including improving value chains that will help 

                                                
2 of the project where most young people who are trained will enter the job market as self-employed workers in the informal or simple wage sector, such 

that it would not be possible to determine what the amount of their equity would have been (especially for the self -employed). 

 



 

12 

 

to enhance agricultural production systems, reducing extensive practices, applying agricultural best 

practices and introducing innovative techniques. 

3.2.6 Social Impact: The popular uprising that rocked Burkina Faso in 2014 was rooted, inter alia, in 

the social tensions inherent in youth unemployment and under-employment. A few years later, the 

relevance given to the issue of employment and the development of young people's skills in rural areas 

are such that the activities of this project constitute a guarantee of more inclusive growth in the country. 

With regard to the positive effects of the project, a significant social impact will eventually be achieved 

in terms of a reduction of the risks of social exclusion by improving the employment situation of young 

people (decline in the youth unemployment and underemployment rate). More generally, the expected 

project implementation effects will help to reduce the poverty rate estimated at 40.1% in 2014 (Sources: 

INSD, EMC 2014) and which will decrease to 35% in 2020 according to PNDES projections. 

3.2.6.1 By creating jobs for young people, including women, the project will increase their autonomy 

and raise household incomes. This will enhance the economic context in the project area and the country 

as a whole. Furthermore, the increase in agri-food production and the promotion of agri-food processing 

and marketing will improve the nutritional situation of Burkina Faso’s vulnerable population in particular. 

Finally, the project will help to curb rural exodus by keeping young people within their communities while 

enhancing regional and local potential in agricultural value chains, public works and innovative trades. 

3.2.7 Gender: Gender analysis in Burkina Faso shows wide disparities and inequalities between men 

and women in most sectors of economic and social life. In terms of employment, the net activity rate in 

the first quarter of 2014 stood at 67.9% for the whole country, 76.8% for women and 60.2% for men. In 

both urban and rural areas, this rate was higher for men than for women. For instance, it was 71.7% for 

men compared to 58.1% for women in urban areas and 78.9% for men compared to 61% for women in 

rural areas.7 When women hold salaried employment, they tend to work at the lower end of the scale. This 

is essentially due to the socio-cultural strictures that define the role of men and women in society, because 

education and the family tend to shape the future of girls and boys from birth.  

3.2.7.1 To address this situation, the project plans to take into account all aspects of the gender 

dimension. Accordingly, incentive measures and actions are proposed to encourage women to contribute 

to and benefit from the project. The project has extended the age of beneficiaries from 16 to 50 years for 

women compared to 15 to 35 years for men, and plans to raise awareness in the project area by targeting 

women. Personalized and group coaching activities will also be initiated for women to guide them in the 

establishment of their businesses. It has also been proposed that mentoring and reference model (role 

model) activities will be organized to motivate young women to enrol in vocational training courses 

traditionally considered to be the preserve of men. Parental awareness campaigns to prevent and combat 

early marriages are also envisaged in order to keep girls in school for as long as possible so that they can 

achieve the level of education and training deemed necessary for professional integration. The project is 

classified in “category 2” according to the Bank's gender marker system. The detailed gender analysis and 

categorization requirements are presented in Technical Annex B.8. 

3.2.8  Resettlement: The project will not lead to community displacement or restriction of access to 

resources or livelihoods. 

                                                
7 National Survey on the Workforce in the Public and Formal Private Sectors (ENMO) in Burkina Faso  



 

13 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional arrangements for project implementation: With reference to the new general 

regulations for development projects and programmes signed on 15/02/2018 (Decree N° 2018-

092/PRES/PM/MINEFID), this project will be attached to the professional integration budgetary 

programme of the Ministry of Youth, Vocational Training and Integration (MJFIP). Accordingly, the 

Director General for Vocational Integration and Employment (DGIPE) is responsible for the budgetary 

programme and is de facto the Project Coordinator. It will be supported by a Project Officer, a procurement 

expert, an administrative and financial officer, an accountant, an expert in youth employment, and an 

expert in monitoring/evaluation responsible for cross-cutting issues (gender and environment). A 

description of the profiles of key PMU personnel can be found in Annex C1. The project will establish 

agreements/protocols with implementing structures, namely; the technical services and the other 

implementing partners selected (AFP-SME, FBDES, FONAENF, DGPER, DGFP, DGFOMR, ONEF). 

These conventions will lead to the establishment of an annual schedule of activities to be carried out by 

each structure, with precise budget and performance indicators. 

A reporting mechanism and a review committee serving as a supreme policy body will be established. 

4.1.2 The review committee shall assume the functions devolved to the Project Steering Committee in 

accordance with the new general regulations for development projects or programmes implemented in 

Burkina Faso. Specifically, it shall: (i) review and adopt the project implementation plan; (ii) review and 

adopt the periodic activity and financial reports; (iii) review and adopt the annual activity programmes, 

budgets and procurement plans; and (vi) approve  project financial statements. 

4.1.3 Ongoing monitoring of project implementation, including the results to be achieved, is a major 

challenge for the project. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will ensure the establishment of a 

monitoring/evaluation mechanism. On the Bank side, COBF will manage the implementation of the 

project supervision missions. Moreover, the PMU will prepare and submit quarterly and annual progress 

reports. The budget for monitoring/evaluation activities will be covered by the project's operating budget. 

4.1.4 Procurement Arrangements: Goods (including services other than those of consultants) funded 

by the Bank under the project shall be procured in accordance with the Procurement Framework for Bank 

Group-funded Operations, October 2015 edition, and in accordance with the provisions set out in the 

Funding Agreement. Specifically, procurements will be conducted according to: 

i) The procurement system (PS) of the Donee: Procurement methods and procedures 
(PMP) applicable to the Donee's procurement system, including its implementing laws and 

decrees, in particular Law No. 039-2016/AN of 02 December 2016 on the general public 

procurement regulations and Decree No. 2017-0049/PRES/PM/MINEFID on procedures for the 

award and settlement of public contracts and the delegation of public services, as well as its 

various implementing texts. This will be done using National Standard Bidding Documents 

(NSBDs) or other bidding documents as approved during project negotiations for low-value and 

low-complexity routine works and goods contracts under the project and generally available in 

Burkina Faso. Details on the thresholds are found in Annex B.5. 

  



 

14 

 

ii) Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): The Bank's standard BPMs, 
based on the relevant standard bidding documents (SBDs) for contracts above the thresholds 

specified in Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2, will be used for larger, more complex and high value goods 

and works contracts, as well as consultancy services, for which the country’s fiduciary risk is 

deemed to be substantial. 

4.1.5 Assessment of procurement risks and capacity (APRC): An assessment of the national, sector 

and project risks and of the capacity of the executing agency (EA) to manage procurements was conducted8 

under the project and the results were used as a basis for choosing the procurement system (Donee or 

Bank) used for given activities or a set of similar activities under the project. The appropriate risk 

mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA action plan indicated in paragraph B.5.9. of Annex 

B5. 

4.1.6 Financial Management  

4.1.6.1 Financial management and disbursements: Despite the reforms undertaken since 2013 to improve 

the public finance management system in Burkina Faso, the latest PEFA 2017 shows that certain 

weaknesses persist and continue to hamper budgetary effectiveness and efficiency. Indeed, wide variations 

are always observed between the initial and the final budget, both in terms of amount and the composition 

of revenue and expenditure. This situation, which undermines the credibility of the budget, mainly stems 

from shortcomings in the planning and budgetary framework. A few sectors do not yet have sectoral 

policies. Furthermore, some ministries and institutions have not formally appointed their programme 

managers. In this context, the creation of a PMU for PADEJ-MR within the Directorate General for 

Vocational Integration and Employment (DGIPE) is necessary in accordance with Decree No. 2018-0092 

on the general regulation of development projects and programmes implemented in Burkina Faso. 

Moreover, capacity-building must be organized for the PMU on project management and the Bank's rules 

and procedures. To ensure the effective financial implementation of PADEJ-MR, the Ministry of Youth, 

Training and Vocational Integration will undertake a number of actions immediately after approval of the 

funding.9 These include:10 (i) creation of the Review Committee and the appointment of its members; (ii) 

creation of the PADEJ-MR PMU within the Directorate General of Professional Integration and 

Employment and the appointment of a Project Officer; (iii) the recruitment of financial management and 

procurement experts and the accountant; (v) the procurement of accounting software (multi-project), 

software configuration and staff training; (vi) the recruitment of an external auditor; and (vii) the opening 

of two special accounts: the first one dedicated to defrayment of the operating expenditure of the PMU 

and the second for the seed fund. Details on financial management and disbursement are provided in 

Annex B6. 

4.1.6.2 The special account method will therefore be used to finance operating expenses and the seed 

fund. To that end, two special accounts will be opened: the first special account will be used to finance 

the PMU's operating expenditure and the second will be used for the seed fund. As a condition precedent 

to the disbursement of seed funds (to be included under “Other conditions”), the Donee must provide the 

Fund, no later than three (3) months after entry into force of the financing agreement, with a partnership 

agreement signed with the FBDES to host and administer the seed fund. This agreement shall define the 

conditions justifying the use of special account resources to be submitted to FIFC.3 for approval. 

                                                
8 See the technical annexes for more information. 
9  In dialogue with the Government, initiatives will be taken by COBF to accelerate and/or anticipate the establishment of the PMU to ensure rapid 

commencement of the project. 
10  It should be noted that the budgetary programme officer has already been appointed. 



 

15 

 

4.1.6.3  Audits: Annual audits of financial statements shall be conducted by an external audit firm based 

on terms of reference approved by the Bank. Audit reports shall be transmitted to the Bank at mo st six 

months after the end of the fiscal year under review. 

4.1.6.4 Disbursement arrangements: Grant resources shall be disbursed in accordance with the Bank's 

Disbursement Manual once the Protocol Agreement becomes effective and the conditions precedent to 

first disbursement have been met. The first disbursement is expected to take place at the latest within three 

months following the signature of the Protocol Agreement. The following disbursement methods will be 

applied for the disbursement of grant resources by the Bank: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special 

account method; and (iii) the repayment method. The direct payment method will be used for the payment 

of contracts for expenditure categories relating to construction, goods and services. The special account 

method will be used to finance operating expenses and the seed fund. Indeed, two special accounts will 

be opened to receive grant resources: the first one will be dedicated to financing the PMU's operating 

expenditure and the second will hold the seed fund.   

4.1.6.5 The procedures relating to the resources allocated to the FBDES shall, in principle, be recorded 

in a project procedures manual. 

4.2. Monitoring of Project Activities  

4.2.1 The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanism will make it possible to determine the level 

of physical implementation (implementation rate for the whole project and for each component) and of 

financial implementation (commitment rate and disbursement rate for ADF and State counterpart 

resources). It will be provided with information coming mainly from control / supervision missions 

(physical execution) and progress reports. The monitoring of physical and financial achievements 

(commitments and disbursements), relative to projections, will ensure that the project implementation 

schedule is respected. The evaluation will be done through periodic monitoring/evaluation surveys. The 

project monitoring-evaluation officer will be responsible for harmonizing formats and consolidating all 

partner and project reports. 

4.2.2 A harmonized gender-sensitive monitoring/evaluation framework will be developed for 

operationalizing the logical framework indicators and defining the collection, reporting, processing and 

reporting circuit. Activities scheduled under the project are summed up in the table below. These activities 

will be implemented  following the project implementation schedule. 

No Activities Entity in charge Maturity 

1 Appraisal ADF May 2018 

2 Negotiations Government/ADF July 2018 

3 Presentation of project to ADF Board  ADF   September 2018 

4 Signature of grant protocol agreement   Government/ADF September-October 2018 

5 Authorization of 1st disbursement ADF    December 2018 

6 Launching of project  Executing Agency/ADF January 2019 

7 Implementation of services PMU/Government January 2019 - December 2023 

8 Midterm review Government/ADF June 2021 

9 Completion of activities Government/ADF December 2023 

10 Completion report   Government/ADF March 2024 

11 Audits PMU Annually 
 



 

16 

 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 Burkina Faso has made significant progress over the past two years. According to the 2017 

edition of the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Burkina Faso is above the average for the whole 

of Africa, with a score of 53.7/100 and a ranking of 23rd out of 54 countries assessed. Regarding rule of 

law and accountability, it ranks among the top 10 least-corrupt African countries in 2016, according to the 

Transparency International corruption perception index. The authorities have initiated legislative reforms 

to step up the fight against corruption, mainly through the adoption in March 2015, of the law on 

prevention and repression of corruption. In November 2015, the new authorities increased the powers of 

the Supreme State Control and Anti-Corruption Authority (ASCE-LC). Since then, ASCE-LC has 

conducted an annual audit of budget management, which is published. Specialized judicial units in charge 

of economic cases were created in 2017 to speed up the adjudication of cases on corruption and related 

offences. Civil society organizations (CSOs), including the National Anti-Corruption Network 

(RENLAC) are also heavily involved in combating corruption. They act as a counterweight to the 

Government by denouncing abuses and the mismanagement of public resources. 

4.3.2 With regard to favourable project implementation conditions, note should be taken of the 

country's performance in business creation (with a score of 88/100) and promulgation of the investment 

code to create an enabling environment for the promotion of entrepreneurship in the agriculture, forestry, 

livestock and wildlife sectors; the promotion of decent jobs; boosting of the competitiveness of national 

production on the domestic and foreign markets; and the modernization of production, conservation or 

processing techniques for products from the agriculture, forestry, livestock, fisheries and wildlife sectors. 

4.4 Sustainability  

4.4.1 To ensure project sustainability, the existing system will be strengthened by providing the 

necessary support to improve not only its governance but also its effectiveness. Indeed, the prominence 

given to youth employment and skills development in national strategies augurs well for a new vision of 

employment as an essential variable in achieving highly inclusive growth. The adoption of the NP/TEVT 

and its three-year action plan 2018-2020 confirms the Burkina Faso Government’s commitment to 

implement key reforms that promote youth employment.  

4.4.2 Furthermore, the recruitment of the youth employment expert within the PMU at the MJFIP will 

lead to capacity-building for the stakeholders involved in project implementation. Ultimately, the PMU 

will make it possible to internalize certain training and employment management functions within public 

services. These capacities will contribute to the efficient management of public resources allocated to 

employment and vocational training, which are expected to increase over the next five years, including 

the share of funding raised by the private sector.  

4.4.3 Finally, to ensure the sustainability of results, capacity-building activities will be organized for 

the benefit of the various key stakeholders. The project will ensure that beneficiaries develop the proper 

skills to carry on with activities after its completion. Sustainability will all the more be enhanced as the 

Government and TFPs have shown an interest in perpetuating the project's achievements (seed funds, 

business incubators in rural areas, etc.). 

4.5 Risk Management and Mitigation  

To ensure the success of the project, mitigating measures have been scheduled to address identified risks. 

The main risks presented in the table below are indicated in the results-based logical framework matrix. 

  



 

17 

 

 

Table of Risks and Mitigating Measures 

Potential risks Mitigating measures 

Insecurity linked to terrorism 

 

Strengthening of the security mechanism in the project area 

Shortage of medium or long-term 

resources to fund young entrepreneurs. 

In addition to the planned funding mechanism (seed funds), implement a 

partnership strategy with financial intermediaries to guide young 

entrepreneurs who have undergone the incubation process  

A regulatory environment that is not 

conducive to the development of 

agricultural entrepreneurship 

Implementation of the law on the investment code for the agricultural, 

forestry, livestock and fisheries sectors  

Quality of education and its consistency 

with market needs 

 

Implementation of apprenticeship-integration agreements between training 

centres and employers’ organizations 

 

4.6 Knowledge Building  

4.6.1 PADEJ-MR will contribute to knowledge development and the strengthening of institutional 

support for youth employment and entrepreneurship. The project will also lay particular emphasis on 

Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). The various studies to be conducted and the 

strategic plans to be formulated in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship will lead to the 

implementation of relevant measures for strengthening the national mechanism. Indeed, formulation of 

the strategic plan for developing a single fund to finance the projects of young people and women and the 

economic and financial feasibility study for the CFP-CI incubator will improve the effectiveness of public 

funds and operationalize the incubator of the Assessment and Vocational Training Centre in 

Ouagadougou. 

4.6.2 With respect to the TVET system, the PADEJ-MR plans to develop a strategic plan for the 

National Vocational Training Agency11 and to conduct studies on the establishment of incubators in VTCs 

and RPCs. These activities have a strategic impact on knowledge development and will ultimately improve 

the effectiveness of the TEVT mechanism in Burkina Faso. Furthermore, the project will have a direct 

impact on young people who will benefit from technical and vocational training under better conditions. 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a grant protocol agreement to be concluded between Burkina 

Faso and the African Development Fund. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Fund Intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to grant effectiveness: The grant agreement shall become effective on its 

date of signature by the Donee and the Fund. 

  

                                                
11  In collaboration with the International Labor Office (ILO). 



 

18 

 

 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of grant resources: The Fund’s obligation to make a 

first disbursement of grant resources will be subject to the effectiveness of the grant agreement in 

accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 5.2.1 above and proof of satisfaction by the Donee of the 

following conditions to the satisfaction of the Fund:  

(i) Provide proof of recruitment or appointment of members of the project coordinating team; 
and 

(ii) Provide proof of the creation of the review committee and appointment of its members in 
accordance with the Decree (No. 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID) of 15 February 2018 

on the general regulation of development projects and programmes carried out in Burkina 

Faso.   

5.2.3 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of grant resources: The obligation for the Fund to 

make a second disbursement of grant resources shall be subject to fulfilment by the Donee of the following 

conditions to the satisfaction of the Fund: 

(i) Provide a copy of the partnership agreement with the FBDES for the hosting and 
administration of the seed fund no later than six months after entry into force of the grant 

protocol agreement;   

(ii) Provide copies of the agreements signed with the executing structures which shall enable 
the establishment of an annual schedule of activities to be conducted per structure, 

accompanied by budgets and specific results indicators for the project; and, 

(iii) Provide a copy of the manual of procedures for the administrative, accounting and financial 
management of the project validated by the Bank. 

5.2.4 Commitments: The Donee undertakes to:  

(i) Raise counterpart funds annually in accordance with the funding plan, within a national 

counterpart account opened at the Treasury; and 

(ii) Prepare and submit quarterly and annual progress reports that are satisfactory to the Fund 

in format and substance. 

5.3 Conformity with Bank policies  

The project is in accordance with the Bank’s applicable policies. It will be implemented within t he 

framework of the Bank's intervention strategy in Burkina Faso defined in the 2017-2021CSP approved in 

September 2017 by the Board, as well as the Bank's strategy for the 2013-2022 period. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors  approves the proposed grant of UA 10.30 million 

(ten million three hundred thousand) for Burkina Faso to finance the Support Project for Youth 

Employment and Skills Development in Rural Areas  (PADEJ-MR), subject to the conditions stipulated 

in this report. 



 























































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework to the Togolese
Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural
Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project


Togolese Republic

Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism
Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Togolese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Economy and Finance

Total project cost: US$35.07 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional terms, interest-free but coupled
with a service fee of 0.75 per cent per year, and a
repayment period of 40 years (unless a shorter period is
requested by the borrower), including a grace period of
10 years. Amortization of the loan principal shall be at
the rate of 4.5 per cent for the first 20 years (11 to 30),
followed by 1 per cent for the subsequent years
(31 to 40)

Cofinancier: Private sector (financial institutions)

Cofinancing amount: US$6.31 million

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$3.80 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.80 million

Financing gap: US$15.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for proposed
financing to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural Financing
Incentive Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA), as set forth in paragraph 55.

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk
Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project (ProMIFA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The West African country of Togo had approximately 7.6 million inhabitants in

2016, 77 per cent of them living below the poverty line and 75 per cent aged under
35. The country's economy is highly dependent on exports of phosphates and
agricultural products. The agriculture sector provides 60 per cent of employment
and contributes 41 per cent of GDP. Agriculture consists essentially of subsistence
family farms – with an average size of four hectares per household – with low levels
of producer integration into value chains and the market economy.

2. Although agriculture is the main sector of employment for thousands of young
people and women, financial sector operators hesitate to lend to them because of
perceived high risk. Investments and promotion of initiatives in the sector are
therefore limited. Just 0.2 per cent of financial sector resources go to agriculture,
and only 32 per cent of rural people have access to financial services. Use of
banking and financial services is very limited, with only 18 per cent of the country’s
population nationwide having a bank account. In 2017, the International Monetary
Fund indicated that the banking system lacked liquidity to provide financing to
private lenders, since the latter were funding public deficits.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme

3. The Government of Togo has just adopted a new Five-year National Development
Plan (PND) for the 2018-2022 period, with the objective of achieving strong,
sustainable and resilient growth that will provide decent livelihoods and generate
social progress and well-being. The PND also aims to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular SDG1 (no poverty), SDG2 (no hunger),
SDG8 (good jobs and economic growth) and SDG17 (partnerships for the goals).

4. Development of the agriculture sector has a central role within the PND, and the
Government has adopted specific sectoral strategies and policies, based on a
sustainable increase in productivity of organized agropastoral value chains, the
organization and professionalizing of value chain stakeholders, and facilitating
access to financial and non-financial services tailored to the needs of the small
producers and small and medium-sized enterprises in the value chains. To that end,
the Government introduced the Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism (MIFA)
and requested technical and financial support for it from IFAD.

5. Lessons learned. Togo is classified among the countries experiencing conditions of
fragility, particularly with regard to issues of governance, accountability and
institutional organization. The Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive
Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA) will capitalize on lessons learned from other
rural development projects in Togo and the subregion, in particular with regard to



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

2

the implementation of projects in countries with fragile situations. Performance of
the IFAD portfolio in Togo – and in particular its fiduciary aspects – have posed
challenges due to the weak capacities for implementation and results-based
management on the part of the participating parties. Greater attention to the
fiduciary aspects will be ensured, in particular through sustained capacity-building
and close monitoring through project oversight and the IFAD country team in Accra.

II. Project description
A. Objectives, project area and target group
6. The overall objective of ProMIFA is to contribute to poverty reduction, sustainable

and inclusive rural economic growth, and the creation of sustainable and decent
employment in rural areas, through organized and well-functioning value chains in
Togo.

7. Its development objective is to facilitate sustainable access to financial and non-
financial services tailored to stakeholders in organized, successful value chains.

8. Project area. ProMIFA will be aligned with the nationwide coverage adopted by the
Government’s incentive mechanism for agricultural financing (MIFA). Nevertheless,
its roll out in each region will be undertaken on a differentiated basis depending on
demand. For greater impact on the target group, namely women and youth,
ProMIFA will first support a limited number of key agropastoral value chains
(rice, market gardening, maize and poultry raising), which will be selected taking
into account: (i) their contribution to improving food and nutritional security of the
rural communities; (ii) the existence of demand for grains, vegetables and poultry
products from urban markets; (iii) the outlook for financial and economic cost-
effectiveness; and (iv) their potential for job creation – particularly for youth and
women – and for income generation.

9. Target group. ProMIFA will target: (i) smallholder farmers and their organizations
(cooperatives, unions and federations); (ii) vulnerable farm households; (iii) rural
small businesses and microenterprises and other actors upstream and downstream
involved in the production and distribution of inputs, marketing, processing,
handicrafts, the setting up and maintenance of farm equipment, and the provision
of other services.

10. ProMIFA seeks to reach at least 300,000 direct beneficiaries, or around 50,000 rural
households, especially rural young people (18 to 40 years of age), employed or
unemployed; and women who are producers or are active in the other segments of
the targeted value chains. Targeting and gender equality strategies will ensure that
young people of both sexes represent at least 40 per cent of the beneficiaries, and
adult women at least 30 per cent. Thus girls and adult women will account for
nearly half of ProMIFA beneficiaries.

B. Components/outcomes
11. ProMIFA’s activities will be organized into three components, namely:

Component 1: Technical support for value chain development and market
access

a) Technical support to the producers and other actors in the agropastoral value
chains: (i) overview of the selected value chains and inventory of service
providers; (ii) building of the technical/technological capacities of producers
and their organizations and of other value chain actors; and (iii) capacity-
building in financial literacy and business development services.

b) Support to the structuring of the value chains and market access:
(i) partnership strengthening within the links in the value chains; (ii) support
to interprofessional organizations; and (iii) support to the quality approach to
market access.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

3

Component 2: Support for the development of financial products and
services

12. In order to meet the demand generated by the ongoing support under component
1, ProMIFA will help facilitate access to financial services for rural communities by
increasing loans to smallholder farmers – individually or in groups – and to small
and medium-sized rural enterprises; and by improving the quality of the
agricultural credit portfolio of ProMIFA’s partner financial institutions and the
operational and financial sustainability of these institutions.

13. These results will be achieved through the following measures: (i) technical
assistance to support establishment of a financing and risk mitigation mechanism,
and the development of new products; (ii) improvement in the quality of financial
services through capacity-building of the financial institutions and development of
tailored products; and (iii) effective establishment of the financing and risk
mitigation arrangements.

Component 3: Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and
management of ProMIFA

a) Institutional support to MIFA, with a view to its consolidation: the project will
finance the support needed (technical assistance, training programmes, study
tours, learning routes, monitoring and evaluation, etc.) for the
operationalization and consolidation of MIFA and its strategic planning within
the agricultural finance environment;

b) Coordination and management of ProMIFA will be undertaken by a simplified
project coordination and management unit (PCMU) working alongside MIFA –
and closely linked to it and to the MIFA Board of Directors (BoD).

Strategy for project implementation and phasing

14. ProMIFA will be implemented in two phases, following a staggered implementation
plan. Phase 1, with a duration of two years, is the preliminary phase of preparation
for implementation and phase 2, with a four-year duration, constitutes the
implementation and consolidation phase. The midterm review will make it possible
to review progress made, as a condition for passing from phase 1 to phase 2, which
will be launched subject to confirmation of the following six performance indicators:
(i) four key need and market studies finalized; (ii) at least two financial products
pre-identified in the studies, ready to be implemented; (iii) at least five financial
institutions having signed a partnership agreement with MIFA looking to finance the
actors in the selected value chains, with a multiplier effect; (iv) at least one
cofinancier committed to joining the Government and IFAD in support of MIFA;
(v) MIFA’s decision-making bodies in place and operational, in accordance with
Presidential Decree No. 2018-090 dated 25 April 2018 or any subsequent
amendments to it, the members of the BoD have been identified, the Director
General has been named and the key personnel have been put in place and trained;
and (vi) the financial management system is in place and MIFA’s capacity is in line
with the parameters defined by IFAD.

15. Confirmation of these indicators will occur at the time of the midterm review, which
is foreseen from the end of the second year. Unless all of the above-mentioned
performance indicators are confirmed, the project may not move forward to the
next phase, and suspension or even early closure of the project and withdrawal of
support to MIFA could be envisaged by IFAD.

C. Theory of change
16. The change envisaged by ProMIFA will make it possible to solve two major

problems for agricultural and rural development in Togo: (i) suboptimal value
chains with bottlenecks, poorly structured producers’ organizations and other issues
that discourage risk-taking by the financial sector; and (ii) very poor access on the



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

4

part of the rural population and micro-, small and medium-sized agricultural
enterprises to the financing needed for the development of their economic
activities.

17. The project rationale lies in strengthening the resilience and productivity of family
farms. The holistic and inclusive approach adopted – that of enabling family farms
to perform better and increase resilience and become true market-oriented
enterprises – will generate economic growth. Indeed, all categories of relevant
public and private stakeholders will participate in the project. ProMIFA’s activities
will address all links in the value chain, from production to marketing, while
integrating measures for sustainable natural resource management and climate
change adaptation.

D. Alignment, ownership and partnership
18. Alignment. ProMIFA is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which

encourages inclusive and sustainable rural transformation and with the strategic
commitments of the Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11), while
taking into account the priority themes of nutrition, gender equality, youth and
climate change. ProMIFA is also aligned with IFAD engagement in Togo, as
described in the country strategy note 2018-2019, which focuses on two strategic
objectives, to: (i) facilitate access to employment and improve incomes for rural
youth and women through their greater inclusion in agropastoral value chains
within the structured framework of “agro-hubs”; and (ii) improve sustainable
access for the rural population (young people and women) to financial services
tailored to the development of agropastoral value chains and rural small businesses
and microenterprises.

19. Ownership. The Government is fully committed to MIFA; the latter is in fact a
central mechanism for implementation of its economic development strategy. There
is high demand for financial and in-kind support among producers, their
organizations and rural small businesses and microenterprises, which explains their
readiness to contribute payment for such services. The financial institutions are also
committed to MIFA, since it will contribute to mitigation of the risks associated with
financing the value chains.

20. Partnerships. By promoting the financial literacy of small producers and of other
actors in the agropastoral value chains and their access to short-term seasonal
loans, ProMIFA will encourage partnership-building between their organizations and
private sector actors operating upstream and downstream of production. ProMIFA
will focus on the capacity-building of the various parties involved (MIFA, the
financial institutions, the private banks and other institutions), assisting
beneficiaries in drafting business plans, and supporting financial institutions in
providing financial products that meet the needs of agropastoral value chain
stakeholders, thus enabling their access to financing over the medium term.

21. ProMIFA will also collaborate with the other initiatives under way in support of the
agricultural sector, within the framework of the National Plan for Agricultural
Investment and Food and Nutritional Security and entrepreneurship for women and
young people. A special partnership will be instituted with the National Programme
for the Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship (PNPER), cofinanced by IFAD, which
targets young rural entrepreneurs. Other partners will also be sought, notably in
the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
22. ProMIFA’s will follow a “faire-faire” and “faire-avec” approach which places the

beneficiaries at the centre of activities and gives them responsibility, particularly for
forming financial relationships with the financial institutions. Once the business plan



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

5

is drawn up and completed, with the support of the service provider, ProMIFA will
leave the project sponsor with responsibility for submitting and justifying the
project with the financial institutions. Once the funds have been obtained, ProMIFA
will provide the project sponsor with support to mobilize consultancy services for
project management within a contractual framework with the support provider,
based on a memorandum of understanding with ProMIFA.

23. To ensure that stakeholders have access to quality agricultural consultancy support,
business management services will be promoted by creating a network of skilled
rural young people interested in investing in business consultancy activities,
including keeping accounts and producing financial statements.

24. A key part of the project exit strategy will be the establishment of interprofessional
frameworks for dialogue and a mechanism to build organizational and institutional
capacity to provide quality services to members.

B. Organizational framework
25. ProMIFA will be implemented by a PCMU, which will be set up on the premises of

MIFA and will be linked to its BoD. This unit will have administrative and financial
management autonomy; it will be composed of a coordinator, an administrative and
financial manager and bookkeeper, a procurement specialist, a manager for
targeting/women/youth issues, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a secretary
and two drivers.

26. Eventually the PCMU should close, with its functions absorbed within MIFA. The
midterm review, to be held towards the end of the second year of ProMIFA
implementation, will make it possible to assess the situation and propose a plan for
the transfer of functions to MIFA, based on: (i) MIFA’s charter and composition;
(ii) its level of organizational and operational maturity; (iii) its performance in
implementation of its workplan and the level of achievement of the expected
outcomes; and (iv) its management capacity, in particular in relation to fiduciary
management, and the quality of the human resources and management
instruments (manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual
and integrated management system).

C. Planning, monitoring/evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

27. Planning. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be
carried out with the MIFA team on the basis of a critical review of the previous year
and of the progress made. All stakeholders, in particular those in the Presidential
Delivery Unit (CPES), will participate in the preparation, thereby translating it into
coherent activities that are allocated the needed resources and linked to the
objectives of the logical framework and its performance measurement framework.
The AWP/B will be approved by the Board of Directors of MIFA not later than
30 November of each year, before being submitted to IFAD for its no objection
before 31 December. The project’s progress over the course of the year will be
assessed based on the rate of progress, outputs achieved and the disbursement
rate of the activities set out in the AWP/B.

28. Monitoring/evaluation. The system will draw on internal monitoring and on
periodic internal and external evaluations, which will be carried out with the
participation of the stakeholders. Information will be collected and analysed on:
(i) progress towards the expected outcomes, as described in the project’s logical
framework, and in the performance of all the actors involved in implementing the
activities set out in the AWP/B; (ii) assessment of the relevance of implementation
approaches and strategies and specific mechanisms for coordination and monitoring
of the various components and activities; (iii) assessment of the participation of the
beneficiaries at the various stages of implementation; (iv) the relevance and
effectiveness of the targeting and the attention given to cross-cutting aspects



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

6

(nutrition, gender, youth and climate change); and (v) annual surveys to assess
impact on the beneficiaries since the midterm review. A baseline survey will be
carried out at project inception and an impact assessment is planned at completion.

29. The PCMU of ProMIFA will work closely with the MIFA monitoring/evaluation unit
and the CPES in support of periodic analyses and documentation of the dashboard
indicators, which will serve as learning and decision support tools. The teams will
benefit from IFAD’s training programmes (AVANTI and Prime).

30. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge management is an essential
function in the continuous improvement of performance and results; it aims to
capitalize on the knowledge and lessons derived from implementation experience,
so as to generate corrective measures in planning and implementation. It will be
based on (i) identification, documentation, building on and dissemination of
knowledge and (ii) networking among the practitioners, knowledge holders and
other participating parties. The monitoring and evaluation database, activity reports
and self-assessment sessions will all provide opportunities to pool the innovations
and good practices and disseminate them. Knowledge exchanges relating to
FIDAFRIQUE, recently given a new boost, will be actively promoted.

D. Administrative and financial management
31. ProMIFA’s financial management risk is deemed high prior to the establishment of

mitigation measures. The project will focus on the competitive recruitment of
qualified staff to set up an organizational, accounting and financial management
framework, accompanied by a control process and tools for transparent operational
management of the funds. In functional terms, the PMCU will have administrative
and financial autonomy, and the fact that it will initially be separate from MIFA, will
make it possible to hold it increasingly accountable, in line with the governance
principles agreed.

32. The management system described in the procedures manual will specify the
reporting and functional relationships between the officials on the administrative
and financial team. At project inception, an operational management tool will be
put in place in line with: (i) the regulatory accounting rules of the revised
SYSCOHADA accounting system; (ii) IFAD procedures with regard to project
management; and (iii) the national procedures in relation to awarding of contracts
and to personnel management. The manual will contain the management support
needed for implementation.

33. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened to receive the loan and grant
resources. Three operational accounts will be opened respectively for the
expenditures of the PCMU, the agricultural development financing facility and the
risk mitigation fund.

34. An annual external audit of the financial statements will be carried out, in
accordance with international auditing standards and in observance of the IFAD
guidelines. The audited financial statements will be made public on the official IFAD
site.

35. Although the closing date has passed, the advances provided to the Support to
Agricultural Development Project still need to be accounted for or reimbursed to
IFAD. Definitive resolution of this issue will constitute a prerequisite for
disbursement of ProMIFA funding.

E. Procurement
36. Procurement. Procurement will respect national procedures, and will comply with

standards acceptable to IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

7

F. Supervision
37. IFAD and the Government will undertake joint supervision of the project and will

organize at least one mission per year, plus thematic monitoring missions as
needed, so as to formulate recommendations for effective project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
38. The total cost of ProMIFA over a six-year period, including provisions for price rises,

comes to US$35.07 million. Its base cost is US$34.032 million. The provisions for
physical and financial contingencies come to US$1.037 million.

39. Project costs by component are as follows: (i) component 1: technical support for
value chain development and market access, US$13.4 million, or 38.3 per cent;
(ii) component 2: support for the development of financial products and services,
US$15.2 million or 43.4 per cent; and (iii) component 3; institutional support to
MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA, US$6.4 million or 18.2 per cent.



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

8

Table 1
Project costs by funding source and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Technical support for value chain development and market access
1.1: Technical support to the producers
and other agropastoral value chain
actors 2 745 22.1 2 745 22.1 4 141 33.4 550 4.4 2 235 18.0 - - 12 416 35.4
1.2: Support for the structuring of the
agricultural value chains and market
access 36 3.5 36 3.5 713 69.5 - - 185 18.0 56 5.5 1 027 2.9
Subtotal 2 781 20.7 2 781 20.7 4 854 36.1 550 4.1 2 420 18.0 56 0.4 13 443 38.3

2. Support for the development of financial products and services
2.1: Technical assistance in support to
development and establishment of the
mechanisms for financing, risk coverage
and new products 110 28.0 110 28.0 102 25.9 - - 71 18.0 - - 392 1.1
2.2: Improvement in the quality of
financial services 13 1.0 13 1.0 1 071 80.1 - - 241 18.0 - - 1 337 3.8
2.3: Mechanisms for financing and risk
mitigation - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5
Subtotal 123 0.8 123 0.8 7 172 47.1 1 250 8.2 311 2.0 6 250 41.0 15 230 43.4

3. Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA
3.1: Institutional support to MIFA 438 13.0 438 13.0 1.770 52.5 - - 727 21.5 - - 3 373 9.6
3.2: Coordination and management 407 13.5 407 13.5 1 869 61.8 - - 341 11.3 - - 3 024 8.6
Subtotal 846 13.2 846 13.2 3 638 56.9 - - 1 068 16.7 - - 6 397 18.2

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

9

B. Project financing
40. IFAD will provide EUR 6.6 million (US$7.5 million), or 21.5 per cent of the total

cost, apportioned between a loan (50 per cent) and a grant (50 per cent); the
Government (including through duties) will contribute US$3.8 million (10.8 per cent
of the total cost); the beneficiaries, US$1.8 million (5.1 per cent of the total cost);
and the private sector, US$6.2 million (18 per cent of the total cost). The financing
gap, amounting to US$15.6 million or 44.7 per cent of the total cost, will be
covered by other sources of financing, or by the next IFAD resource allocation cycle
for Togo, over the period 2019 to 2021 (IFAD11).



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

1
0

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financing source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Capital expenditure
1. Goods, services, vehicles and
equipment 173 33.2 173 33.2 81 15.6 - - 94 18.0 - - 521 1.5
2. Technical assistance and
studies 1 333 18.6 1 333 18.6 3 168 44.1 - - 1 293 18.0 56 0.8 7 183 20.5
3. Training 1 999 16.7 1 999 16.7 5 119 42.9 550 4.6 2 268 19.0 - - 11 934 34.0
4. Loans - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5

Total capital expenditure 3 505 10.6 3 505 10.6 14 368 43.4 1 800 5.4 3 655 11.0 6 306 19.0 33 138 94.5

Current expenditure
1. Salaries and allowances 152 12.3 152 12.3 935 75.5 - - - - - - 1 239 3.5
2. Operating expenses 93 13.5 93 13.5 362 52.3 - - 144 20.8 - - 692 2.0

Total current expenditure 245 12.7 245 12.7 1 297 67.1 - - 144 7.5 - - 1 932 5.5

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

11

C. Summary of the benefits and economic analysis
41. The economic analysis. Calculation of the financial return from the different

models shows that all of the models chosen (mixed market gardening, upland rice,
lowland rice and free range chickens) show a very attractive financial return. The
financial internal rate of return is positive for all of the models, with indicators of
between 17 per cent and 139 per cent. The net present value is also very positive,
between CFAF 119,000 and CFAF 8.7 million. The project’s internal economic rate of
return stands at 20.3 per cent and the net present value (at the economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6.5 per cent) comes to US$32.26 million. This result is
very satisfactory. The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results obtained are
robust. Even in the event of a decline in revenue of 30 per cent, a rise in costs of
30 per cent or a two-year delay in the appearance of profits, the rate of return
remains greater than the opportunity cost of capital (6.5 per cent), and the
minimum net present value is greater than US$17.4 million.

D. Sustainability
42. Project sustainability will be promoted first by the decision to empower actors in the

agropastoral value chains to be accountable for project activities. The second
measure to guarantee sustainability is the phasing approach that will
simultaneously make ProMIFA a tool to operationalize, consolidate and maintain
MIFA beyond project completion.

43. Among the effective mechanisms developed by ProMIFA are: making beneficiaries
accountable for the activities in which they are involved through their systematic
participation in decisions on the technical support needed to implement their action
plans. This will be realized through a tripartite partnership agreement established
between ProMIFA, the support provider and the beneficiary.

44. The cost-sharing system between the project and the beneficiaries will enable the
producers to contribute to the direct financing of their economically viable activities.
Similarly, with respect to the agricultural development financing facility, a
mechanism will make it possible to provide liquidity to MIFA’s partner financial
institutions for the financing of beneficiaries’ projects. This process will involve the
participation of the three sets of stakeholders: the farmers, ProMIFA and the
partner financial institutions.

45. The differentiated and calibrated support to the producers’ cooperatives and
organizations – by means of action plans that they themselves have designed – will
strengthen their institutional and economic capacity. The establishment of a
commercial relationship between the cooperatives and the market operators, along
with financial intermediation on the part of ProMIFA, will provide the producers with
autonomy. The specific and multifaceted support envisaged for building the
economic capacity of women and youth will contribute to the emergence of strong,
credible and economically promising entreprises led by women and young people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s main risks are inherent to activities in the agricultural sector and rural

finance, and to markets, climate change and the country’s social and political
situation, in particular: (i) weak technical and management capacity of the
beneficiaries for ensuring the productivity and economic return of their activities;
(ii) low participation of women, due to cultural barriers and to men’s
monopolization of the most profitable links in the value chain; (iii) fluctuation in
prices of staples and the distortion caused by the parallel markets; (iv) disruption
of the markets by government policies to subsidize inputs and foodstuffs; (v) poor
quality of records, entailing drawn-out loan provision processes; (vi) delays in
establishing financing mechanisms, mitigating risks and conducting surveys;
(vii) fiduciary risks; and (viii) climate events that may place a strain on production
and repayment capacities. The project is classified as having moderate climate risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

12

However, it will have many positive effects and is thus classified in environmental
category B.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
47. ProMIFA is in line with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which aims to

promote inclusive and sustainable rural transformation, and with IFAD’s rural
finance policy. ProMIFA will implement activities aimed at achieving IFAD’s three
strategic objectives: (i) improving the productive capacity of poor rural people in a
sustainable and resilient manner; (ii) adding to the benefits that these communities
draw from their inclusion/participation in the market; and (iii) strengthening
environmental sustainability and increasing the climate resilience of their economic
activities. It is also strongly aligned with IFAD’s planned country engagement as set
forth in the country strategy note for 2018-2019. ProMIFA is also in line with IFAD’s
rural finance policy, which calls for providing financial institutions with capital and
developing financial products tailored to the rural poor, including risk management
mechanisms, without creating distortion within the financial market.

B. Alignment and harmonization
48. ProMIFA will support the implementation of MIFA, a key instrument of the new five-

year PND (2018-2022), which will make it possible to facilitate the funding needed
for rural activities, so as to address the weak performance of agropastoral value
chains and poverty.

C. Innovations and scaling up
49. ProMIFA represents an innovative approach for mitigating risks linked to agricultural

financing, which is based on the scaling up of successful experiences from other
regions within the framework of a South-South partnership with Nigeria. MIFA is a
priority initiative of the President and plays a major role in the country’s
development strategy. It will be the gateway for the private sector, donors and
other partners. Since the beginning of the pilot phase of MIFA, IFAD, by supporting
ProMIFA, has been the only partner that has committed itself alongside the
Government and will benefit from a high level of visibility. IFAD’s direct
participation by providing a grant to strengthen the CPES – a service mechanism of
the Office of the President of the Republic of which MIFA is a priority project – is
also a major innovation whose results are eagerly awaited.

50. ProMIFA will build on and harness the experiences of projects with similar activities,
such as PEA Youth in Cameroon, NIRSAL in Nigeria, the Agribusiness Initiative Trust
in Uganda and the Private Agricultural Support Services Trust in the United Republic
of Tanzania.

D. Policy engagement
51. Since MIFA is a key implementation instrument for the Government’s development

strategy, ProMIFA – in support of MIFA – will contribute to strategic planning on the
key topics of: agropastoral value chains, professionalization of stakeholders and
rural finance. This contribution will be undertaken through mobilization of
specialized technical assistance, the financing of thematic studies, learning from
monitoring and evaluation, and building on and sharing good practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. The financing agreement between the Togolese Republic and IFAD constitutes the

legal instrument whereby the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The Togolese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive funding from IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

13

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Togolese Republic on
highly concessional terms in the amount of three million three hundred
thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Togolese
Republic under the Debt Sustainability Framework in the amount of
three million three hundred thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability
Framework Grant to the Republic of
Sierra Leone for the Agricultural Value
Chain Development Project



Republic of Sierra Leone

Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVDP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Sierra Leone

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security

Total project cost: US$60.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$5.9 million

Amount of IFAD DSF grant: US$5.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional, 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Financing gap: US$28.5 million

Cofinancier(s):

Amount of cofinancing:

Terms of cofinancing:

Adaptation Fund, subject to approval

Adaptation Fund: US$9.2 million

Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$8.1million (of which US$1.9 million will be provided
to match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million presented
in the financing agreement)

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.4 million

Contribution of private sector US$1.4 million

Appraising institution: International Fund for Agricultural Development



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value Chain
Development Project (AVDP), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant
to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value
Chain Development Project (AVDP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Sierra Leone economy has grown substantially since the end of the

civil war in 2002, but it suffered two major shocks in 2014/2015 – the Ebola
epidemic and the collapse of iron ore prices, with GDP shrinking 21 per cent in
2015. However, economic growth resumed following new investments in mining,
agriculture and fisheries, registering GDP growth of 6.3 per cent in 2016 and
5.7 per cent in 2017. Agriculture, the largest sector in the economy, accounted for
59 per cent of GDP in 2016, 62 per cent of the labour force, and 22 per cent of
export earnings. Cash crops produced for export include cocoa and coffee, while
palm oil is produced for domestic consumption and some export.

2. Sierra Leone’s population is around 7.4 million (40 per cent youth) and growing at
2.2 per cent annually. Poverty is widespread but is particularly acute and
concentrated in rural areas, where 59 per cent of the population lives. The rural
poverty headcount of over 66 per cent is double that of urban areas. Women and
youth are particularly vulnerable due to challenges associated with access to land,
skills and capital, as well as customs. About 59.7 per cent of rural households in
Sierra Leone are food insecure, compared with 25.1 per cent in urban areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. Agricultural development remains key to Sierra Leone’s economic development and
rural poverty reduction, and there is considerable untapped potential for increasing
the production and productivity of both staple and cash crops. The project will
focus on three crops: rice, cocoa and palm oil, though the largest share of the
budget will be devoted to rice production in inland valley swamps, consistent with
the Government of Sierra Leone priorities. The AVDP will promote crop
diversification to provide flexibility and choice to beneficiaries and support
improved nutrition.

4. The AVDP is aligned with the National Agricultural Transformation 2023
Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP addresses two of the
three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-sufficiency and crop
diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The project aligns with five of the
seven new strategic priorities: (priority 2) Increasing investment in rice production,
processing and marketing, (priority 3) Make youth and women catalysts for
agribusiness development and growth, (priority 4) Invest in catalytic technologies
such as agricultural mechanization, irrigation and water management,
(priority 6) Strengthen sustainable biodiversity management and conservation,
including forest and tree crops, (priority 7) Increase the production of other crops,
such as vegetables, to ensure diversification.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

2

5. The selection of value chains is consistent with government priorities and pro-poor
approaches to value chain development. The crop mixture addresses increased
availability of the dietary staple (rice), improved nutritional balance (vegetables)
and increased income from all crops.

6. The project development objective and approach are aligned with the two strategic
objectives of the Country Strategy Note 2017-2018, namely (i) improved
smallholder farmers’ access to technical skills and markets; and (ii) improved
access to finance for rural communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Due to widespread poverty, the AVDP will in principle be nationwide, though the

concentration and intensity of project interventions will depend on climatic and
agroecological conditions in each of the 16 districts of Sierra Leone.1 While rice and
palm oil are produced throughout the country, cocoa production is localized in
specific districts.

8. The socio-economic profile of the target group will be similar to that of the groups
targeted under the Smallholder Commercialization Program - Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program (SCP-GAFSP), although primarily in other areas of the
country. The majority of the beneficiaries (62.3 per cent) have no education. Only
37.7 per cent of beneficiaries have some formal education, mostly primary or
secondary but very little post-secondary/tertiary. More female beneficiaries
(69.1 per cent) than their male counterparts (40.5 per cent) have no education.
The average monthly income of beneficiaries is at 468,795 leones. Radio and
mobile phones are popular assets that beneficiaries own, as indicated by
49.8 per cent and 41.8 per cent of respondents, respectively. Ownership of other
assets is insignificant. Fully 91 per cent of households experienced hunger in the
12 months prior to the survey, during which they had difficulty providing sufficient
food to feed all members.

9. The project is estimated to target 204,000 direct beneficiaries, equivalent to
34,000 households, over a period of six years, providing assistance to the target
groups and support for greater participation in targeted value chains. The project
aims at reaching at least 40 per cent of both women and youth.

B. Project development objective
10. The project's development objective is to increase the income of smallholder

farmers through the promotion of agriculture as a business.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project has three components: (i) Climate-resilient and smart agricultural

production; (ii) Agricultural market development; (iii) Project coordination and
management.

12. Component 1: Climate-resilient and smart-agricultural production. The expected
outcome of component 1 is that the volume and value of production is increased
and production systems are made more climate resilient. Component 1 will have
two subcomponents, as follows:

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Support for smallholder rice production and productivity.
This will support a total of 10,000 rice farmers by providing technical
assistance through farmer field schools and financial support for the
development of inland valley swamps for double or triple cropping of rice and
improved access to quality inputs and mechanized farming services.

1 The project will pursue a strategy of territorial concentration of interventions to facilitate implementation, which in
practice may mean that not all districts are targeted.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

3

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Support for tree crop production and productivity. This
will involve work with 13,000 farmers (5,000 cocoa and 8,000 palm oil
producers) receiving technical assistance and support for the establishment of
one-hectare plots on fallow or abandoned agricultural land. No deforestation
is permitted to clear land for the smallholder plantations. No large plantations
will be supported.

13. Component 2: Agricultural market development. The expected outcome of this
component is improved performance and organization of the selected value chains
for increased smallholder production and productivity. The component is composed
of two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Market access. This subcomponent will focus on:
strengthening the business skills of Agri-Business Centres, farmers’
organizations; farmer field schools; facilitating value chain organizations; and
deal making through the establishment of provincial multi-stakeholder
platforms.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. Partly financed
through the Adaptation Fund, this will involve the rehabilitation of
warehouses to improve product drying and storage capacity, provide potable
water and latrines and rehabilitate feeder roads and farm tracks.

14. Component 3: Project coordination and management. This component is divided
into two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Project coordination and management.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Financing mechanisms for target groups.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The overall AVDP approach will be market-centred and demand-driven. The main
thrust will be on establishing win-win partnerships between producers and their
organizations, private-sector agribusinesses and rural finance institutions. This will
be achieved through a series of activities, including the provision of technical
assistance by the farmer field schools, as well as the strengthening of farmers’
organizations to better plan production and the purchase of inputs. The availability
of certified seeds will be enhanced through the set-up of seed multiplication plots
that will be linked to private-sector processors. The project will provide matching
grants to facilitate beneficiary investment in production infrastructure to boost
productivity. The matching grants scheme will also increase financial inclusion, as
most producers’ groups will need credit for their investments. Multi-stakeholder
platforms will better integrate the value chains by bringing the different
stakeholders – including representatives of the smallholder farmers – to the table
to find solutions to current obstacles, build trust and facilitate business deals.
Rehabilitated feeder roads will further facilitate market linkages. Additionally, the
project will seek to climate proof the productive investments and ensure relevant
capacity-building.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be responsible for project

planning, financial management, contracting implementing partners for specific
activities and tasks, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication and
knowledge management, supervision of project activities at the district level and
facilitating linkage with the Government, private-sector and development
institutions and integrating project experience into policy dialogue.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

4

17. The NPCU will have approximately 25 technical and support staff at its
headquarters, supplemented with a robust presence at the provincial level with the
out-posting of 4 tree crop officers, 4 inland valley swamp officers, 2 agribusiness
specialists and 4 Community Mobilizers/Targeting Specialists. A matching grant
evaluation committee will be set up to approve grant applications. Staff
implementing AVDP will have an opportunity for training to improve their
performance. At the district level, the district agricultural officer of Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security (MAFFS) will be responsible for
coordinating the implementation of project activities.

18. AVDP will be placed under the technical supervision of the MAFFS. The MAFFS and
the National Steering Committee will provide oversight, direction and advice for
project implementation, and in particular, approve the project’s Annual Work Plan
and Budget (AWPB), as well as its periodic progress reports.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will prepare an AWPB for approval by the National Steering Committee
and subsequent presentation to IFAD for no objection. The AWPB will serve as the
basis for any work that the project undertakes. The AWPB will be prepared in
consultation with beneficiaries and other stakeholders and build on the project’s
progress.

20. The project’s logical framework will be the main document for supporting results-
based and objective-oriented implementation. The AVDP monitoring and evaluation
system will build on the system developed in the SCP-GAFSP, including its M&E
manual. The M&E system will be in line with the Government of Sierra Leone
requirements, as well as IFAD’s Operational Results Management System and will
generate gender- and age-disaggregated data on project outputs, outcomes and
impacts.

21. AVDP monitoring will be integrated into the existing SCP-GAFSP monitoring and
evaluation framework. The project M&E Unit will include and regularly assess a
number of gender, youth and other group-specific indicators in the programme’s
M&E system at the output, outcome and impact level-in particular, capturing the
improvement of access to outputs, their use by the target groups and these
groups’ satisfaction with them.

22. Knowledge management and learning are key to meeting project objectives, as
reliable information is the basis of results-based management. Priority will be given
to areas where AVDP interventions are recognized as exemplary and expected to
have the greatest impact, though failures are also an important basis for learning.
Best practices and proven concepts will be fed into the MAFFS and regional
knowledge management systems. Lessons learned will also be fed into the
continuous improvement of manuals, concepts and strategies and disseminated to
the various target groups, including the public, using appropriate communication
media.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

financial management arrangements already established under the ongoing IFAD
projects, which will lower the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include the following: (i) a qualified financial controller and an
accountant will be appointed; (ii) all programme transactions will be recorded in
customized accounting software, in accordance with the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-basis of accounting, (iii) a designated account
in United States dollars for IFAD financing will be maintained at a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds, (iv) IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures and (v) the NPCU will



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

5

prepare quarterly financial reports in formats agreed upon with IFAD. Furthermore,
the consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the Audit Service
of Sierra Leone – Office of the Auditor General, in accordance with International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions/International Standards of Supreme
Audit Institutions (INTOSAI/ISSAI) standards and IFAD audit requirements. The
audit report, together with the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within
six months of the end of the fiscal year. The day-to-day financial operations will be
specified further in the relevant section of the project implementation manual.

24. IFAD’s has a zero-tolerance policy toward fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD's anticorruption
policy and whistleblowing procedures will be mainstreamed in the project
implementation manual.

25. A procurement assessment was undertaken as part of the design mission.
According to the assessment, the legal and regulatory framework for public
procurement in Sierra Leone will be used for all AVDP procurement activities, with
the exception of international competitive bidding, for which the World Bank
guidelines and framework will apply. In addition, the procurement plan to be used
by AVDP will be based on the version presented as part of the IFAD Project
Procurement Handbook.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will be conducted as an

opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly and reflect on ways to
improve implementation and impact. Furthermore, a financial management
specialist will participate in missions at least annually to supervise and provide
implementation support to the project and monitor the fiduciary risk at various
levels.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
27. The financing gap of US$28.5 million may be sourced by subsequent performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycles (under financing terms to be determined
and subject to internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval) or by
cofinancing identified during implementation.

A. Project costs
28. The total combined AVDP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$60.3 million, disaggregated
by component as follows: component 1, climate-resilient and smart-agricultural
production, is the main investment component, representing US$37.9 million of the
total project costs (63 per cent of total costs); while component 2, agricultural
market development, accounts for US$13.4 million (22 per cent of total costs); and
US$9 million for the project coordination and management component 3,
(15 per cent of total project costs).



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan

IFAD DSF
grant Financing gap

Adaptation
fund Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
and smart agricultural
production
1.1 Support for
smallholder rice
production and
productivity 2 370 10.5 2 370 10.5 11 676 51.7 2 246 10.0 522 2.3 3 385 15 - - 22 569
1.2 Support for tree
crop production and
productivity 447 2.9 447 2.9 7 107 46.2 4 235 27.6 828 5.4 2 305 15 - - 15 369
Subtotal 2 818 7.4 2 818 7.4 18 782 49.5 6 480 17.1 1 350 3.6 5 691 15 - - 37 938
2. Agricultural market
development
2.1 Market access 809 17.0 809 17.0 1 562 32.8 - - - - 694 14.6 881 18.5 4 755
2.2 Climate-resilient
rural infrastructure
and information
systems - - - - 4 456 51.8 2 367 27.5 - - 1 232 14.3 543 6.3 8 598
Subtotal 809 6.1 809 6.1 6 018 45.1 2 367 17.7 - - 1 926 14.4 1 424 10.7 13 353
3. Project
coordination and
management 2 268 25.2 2 268 25.2 3 700 41.1 308 3.4 - - 467 5.2 - - 9 012

Total 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 1 424 2.4 60 302

B. Project financing
29. The financing plan covers: (i) IFAD financing of US$11.8 million under the

Tenth Replenishment of IFAD's Resources (IFAD10); (ii) a financing gap of
US$28.5 million, which may be sourced by subsequent PBAS cycles, as outlined in
paragraph 27; (iii) an Adaptation Fund grant of US$9.2 million, subject to
approval; (iv) a contribution from the Government of US$8.1 million, which will be
used to finance project duties and VAT, of which US$1.9 million will be provided to
match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million approved under IFAD10; (v) estimated
beneficiary contributions (in-kind and cash) of US$1.4 million; and (vi) a private-
sector contribution of US$1.4 million.

30. Additionally, the AVDP is expected to benefit from an estimated US$10 million in
parallel value chain investments under the World Bank-financed Smallholder
Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project and an estimated
US$12 million for the rice-seed value chain under the World Bank’s West Africa
Agricultural Transformation Project.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
IFAD DSF

grant Financing gap
Adaptation

fund
Private
sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
I. Investment
costs
A. Civil works 509 5.4 509 5.4 4 178 44.3 2 338 24.8 488 5.2 - - 1 416 15.0 9 438 15.7
B. Goods,
equipment and
vehicles 324 42.5 324 42.5 - - - - - - - - 114 15.0 762 1.3
C. Technical
assistance 1 042 10.1 1 042 10.1 3 237 31.4 2 582 25.0 936 9.1 - - 1 470 14.3 10 310 17.1
D. Grants and
subsidies 2 308 7.1 2 308 7.1 17 662 53.9 4 235 12.9 - - 1 350 4.1 4 917 15.0 32 781 54.4
Total
investment
costs 4 183 7.9 4 183 7.9 25 077 47.1 9 156 17.2 1 424 2.7 1 350 2.5 7 917 14.9 53 290 88.4
II. Recurrent
costs
A. Salaries and
allowances 1 437 25.0 1 437 25.0 2 874 50.0 - - - - - - - - 5 748 9.5
B. Operating
costs 274 21.7 274 21.7 548 43.4 - - - - - - 167 13.2 1 264 2.1
Total recurrent
costs 1 711 24.4 1 711 24.4 3 422 48.8 - - - - - - 167 2.4 7 012 11.6
Total Project
Costs 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 424 2.4 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 60 302 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. The economic analysis shows that the project has the capacity to generate an

economic rate of return (ERR) of 32 per cent over a 20-year period, with a net
present value of Sierra Leonean leone 203 billion (approximately US$23.5 million).
Given the many unquantifiable benefits, the actual ERR will likely be higher.

32. In order to test the robustness of the above results, sensitivity analysis was carried
out, and the results are presented below. The sensitivity analysis investigates the
effect of fluctuations in project costs, benefits and implementation delays on the
net present value and ERR. The results show that the ERR drops to 22 per cent
with a 20 per cent increase in costs, and to 20 per cent with a 50 per cent increase
in costs, still making the project economically viable.

D. Sustainability
33. The project aims at strengthening farmers’ organizations to the extent that they

are able to collectively plan sustainable production, purchase inputs and sell their
produce through stable private-sector engagement. In coordination with the Rural
Finance and Community Improvement Programme, the project also seeks to
ensure that farmer-based organizations are sustainably accessing rural finance for
inputs. Furthermore, productive investments will be climate proofed through the
financing from the Adaptation Fund. Finally, through policy engagement planned as
part of component 3, the project will help keep the Government's focus on the
rural poor and facilitate Government support to the target group after project
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Since governance issues could compromise the expected impact on communities

and increase project costs, the risk is classified as high. Elite capture of outputs,
especially physical assets, which are intended for well-defined target groups, is
another problem associated with poor governance. These governance risks will be
mitigated by complementing the Government’s initiatives with: (i) increased
transparency and publicity about the distribution of outputs; (ii) training for



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

8

implementers at all levels in financial management, procurement, M&E and
reporting procedures; (iii) the implementation of a clear targeting strategy; and
(iv) continued improvement of the grievance mechanism for beneficiaries. The
Good Governance Framework developed for the SCP-GAFSP will be applied during
the implementation of AVDP.

35. Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are considered
moderate. Failure in project coordination is a risk, especially among and within
non-state actors and private agribusiness. Private stakeholders consistently
indicate that institutions that provide critical support services to private-sector
investors remain weak and coordination among them is fragmented. The project
will mitigate this risk by ensuring that the project implementation unit has clear
mechanisms for effective coordination during project implementation.

36. The AVDP is not expected to have overall negative environmental impacts.
However, since small commercial agricultural activities may produce unexpected
cumulative impacts, careful design of an appropriate monitoring system is critical.
The major concerns are associated with the increased use of fertilizers and
pesticides that might result from wider distribution of these products and their
impact on biodiversity and human health. Training on proper use and disposal,
adoption of the principles of the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution
and Use of Pesticides of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations, as well as the design of an environmental monitoring system in
partnership with the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency are considered
sufficient mitigation measures. Based on the above information, the project has
been classified as category B according to IFAD classification standards.

37. The promotion of palm oil is considered to entail limited risks, as only smallholder
oil palm plantations of a maximum of one hectare will be established under the
project. Large-scale plantations will not be supported. Furthermore, new
smallholder plantations will be established only on fallow or abandoned agricultural
land, and no deforestation will be accepted. Moreover, oil palm (Elaeis guineensis)
is endemic to West Africa and is therefore a natural part of the vegetation in
Sierra Leone. The palm oil produced will largely be used for cooking and sold on
the domestic market. Appendix II presents answers to key questions on how the
project will support palm oil production.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The project is aligned with the IFAD11 priorities on a range of parameters. First, it
addresses gender, youth, nutrition and climate change and therefore supports the
IFAD11 mainstreaming agenda. Second, the project has managed to attract
cofinancing from the Adaptation Fund and will therefore contribute to the corporate
cofinancing targets. Third, the project is designed to have a relatively frontloaded
disbursement profile underpinned by substantial investments in equipment and
irrigation systems, as well as road rehabilitation and maintenance in the initial
years, all of which will contribute to an increasing corporate disbursement ratio.
Fourth, the project covers two PBAS cycles and is therefore aligned with the notion
of delivering bigger, better and smarter.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The AVDP is wholly consistent with the Government’s National Agricultural

Transformation 2023 Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP
addresses two of the three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-
sufficiency and crop diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The selection of
value chains will allow the AVDP to build on and strengthen the results that have
been achieved in Sierra Leone through past and ongoing IFAD-financed projects
operating in the same value chains.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

9

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. The project scales up and refines the intervention model developed under the

ongoing SCP-GAFSP, but with a range of innovations, including: (i) the
establishment of multi-stakeholder platforms to strengthen integration of the
selected sustainable value chains; and (ii) an increased focus on nutrition and food
security through the promotion of intercropping with food/tree crops and the
creation of vegetable gardens.

Policy engagementD.
41. Policy engagement in the interest of smallholder farmers and the rural poor will be

undertaken through: (i) the organization of periodic stakeholder discussions around
specific policy issues, with the participation of public and private value chain
stakeholders; (ii) the use of provincial commodity platforms as a nexus for
discussing and sharing policy-related concerns with the Government, in line with
national priorities; (iii) support for relevant analytical work related to agricultural
policies and strategies; and (iv) support for capacity-building in selected
government agencies involved in policy-making for agricultural development
(e.g., MAFFS, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development
and Ministry of Trade and Industry).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A financing agreement between the Republic of Sierra Leone and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

43. The Republic of Sierra Leone is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the
Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred thousand
United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II



Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total Project cost: US$47.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$11.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$11.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period of
10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Financing gap: US$16.2 million

Contribution of borrower: US$2.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.8 million

Contribution of private sector US$3.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)
as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite positive socioeconomic developments since the end of the civil war in 2003,

Liberia remains a low-income, food-deficit country with an undiversified economy. The
country saw initial post-war economic growth in real GDP of 8.9 per cent in 2012; this
fell slightly to 8.1 per cent in 2013. In 2014 and 2015, the Ebola virus disease crisis
crippled economic growth and the GDP growth rate fell drastically, only starting to
recover in 2017 with 2.5 per cent growth. The growth forecast for 2018 is 3 per cent.1

2. As of 2016, Liberia's population was estimated at 4.6 million with an annual growth rate
of 2.6 per cent. In 2015, the United Nations Development Programme ranked Liberia
177th out of 188 countries on the Human Development Index with a score of 0.427. In
2016, approximately 54 per cent of the population lived below the poverty line
(46 per cent live in rural areas). Liberia has an extremely young population:
approximately 90 per cent of its people are under 35 years.

3. A 2015 emergency food security assessment by the World Food Programme (WFP)2
found that food insecurity affects 16 per cent of households, including 2 per cent that
are severely food insecure. Food insecurity is not distributed evenly across the country.
In Lofa County, where the project will be implemented, 11.3 per cent of households
reported moderate to severe food insecurity.

4. Agriculture is the primary livelihood source for more than 60 per cent of Liberia’s
population. Traditionally, tree crops have constituted one of the country’s largest
sources of employment and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. However
during the country’s civil wars, the tree crop sector was devastated and many farmers
were displaced. Abandoned farms and plantations degenerated into forests and their
associated support structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished
while exports dropped to near zero. In recent years, there has been increased
investment in rehabilitating smallholder cocoa farms and strengthening
cooperatives. Cocoa production is still small scale, undertaken by approximately 38,000
farmers in the country, of which 30 per cent are in Lofa County with cocoa farm sizes
averaging 1 to 3 ha.3 The sector is expected to grow as farmers continue to reclaim and
rehabilitate farms, and youth are attracted to the cocoa sub-sector with the emergence
of cocoa as a profitable cash crop.

1 http://country.eiu.com/liberia (2018).
2 WFP, Emergency Food Security Assessment: Liberia (2015).
3 Platform for Agricultural Risk Management, Agricultural Risk Assessment Report: Liberia (2017).



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The project is aligned with the Government’s Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development (PAPD), which has prioritized the agricultural sector for diversifying the
economy, and has identified seven priority value chains, including cocoa. The PAPD
outlines the need to strengthen policy coordination, agricultural research and the
extension system in order to support smallholders and out-grower farmers; these are
the areas to be addressed by TCEP II.

6. The current country strategy note for Liberia (2017-2019) has two strategic objectives:
(i) smallholder farmers’ access to finance, inputs, skills and markets is improved; and
(ii) smallholders’ organizational capacities and access to Ministry of Agriculture
extension services are improved. The project is aligned with the country strategy note
since it aims to support smallholder farmers’ access to inputs, capacity building,
markets and extension services.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. While TCEP II will target Lofa County, it will be closely connected with activities in

Nimba County given the: (i) importance of cocoa farming there; (ii) project’s
complementarity with others implemented in Nimba County, including its sister TCEP I
project; and (iii) potential gains from road and track improvement. Other areas may be
targeted during implementation if productive potential is demonstrated and targeting
criteria are met.

8. The project will benefit both producers and other players within the cocoa value chain
such as input suppliers and farm-to-market operators (FMOs).4 It aims to benefit
10,000 cocoa smallholder producers using a self-targeting approach complemented by
tools to ensure that beneficiaries meet project targeting criteria. These beneficiaries will
include members of kuu groups (traditional community-based labour groups), youth
and women. TCEP II will also target cooperatives strengthened through the recently
completed IFAD-financed STCRSP, other cocoa producer groups and potential FMOs.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of TCEP II will be to increase incomes and improve the livelihoods of poor rural

smallholder cocoa farming households in Lofa County. The project’s development
objective is to improve the incomes and climate resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in Lofa County.

C. Components
10. The project will have the following components:

11. Component 1: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. The expected outcome of
component 1 will be increased quantity and quality of cocoa sold by smallholders. This
component comprises five subcomponents: 1.1 – Basic rehabilitation and new cocoa
plantations; 1.2 – Improving post-harvest handling and quality;
1.3 – Germplasm garden support; 1.4 – Alternative livelihood activities (crop
diversification through intercropping on existing plantations for food and nutrition
security, shade management and income generation, and on new plantations before
newly planted cocoa trees mature); and 1.5 – Transformation of cocoa waste as an
alternative income source.

12. Component 2: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. The expected outcome of
component 2 will be improved and climate-proof access to markets. It contains two
subcomponents: 2.1 – Road construction, rehabilitation and climate proofing; and
2.2 – Maintenance of roads.

4 FMOs are value chain actors who buy products from producers and take them to market or for value addition through processing,
sorting, grading and bagging. They include buying agents, cooperatives and companies.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

3

13. Component 3: Service provision for value chain development. The outcome of
component 3 will be improved value chain organization and performance. This will be
achieved through a set of concurrent activities in subcomponents: 3.1 – Support to
farmer organizations (including the establishment of business platforms for value chain
players); 3.2 – Improved market linkages through the construction of humidity-
controlled warehouses to store cocoa beans during the wet season when roads are not
passable; 3.3 – Support to extension service development and outreach; 3.4 – Dry
storage; and 3.5 – Implementation support to the Government’s strategy on reducing
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and foster conservation,
sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.

14. Component 4: Project coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
and policy. Using the country programme approach, TCEP II will adopt a similar
strategy to that of TCEP I. This will ensure efficient and effective planning,
implementation, M&E and knowledge management while considering environmental and
climate change resilience. In addition, component 4 will involve policy engagement and
will drive gender and social inclusion activities along with dialogue for establishing a
functional road maintenance fund.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. Similar to TCEP I, the Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for implementing TCEP
II. The same national steering committee will orient the project strategy, oversee
planning, review progress and ensure linkages among stakeholders. Under the
supervision of the project management unit within the ministry, which was established
to coordinate donor-funded projects, the implementation, management and M&E of
TCEP II will be the delegated responsibility of the project implementation unit (PIU).
Staffing requirements for TCEP II will be harmonized with those of TCEP I using the
country programme approach. A county-level PIU will be established in Lofa County
with similar functions to that of STCRSP, but with increased human and physical
resources to coordinate the mobilization of kuu groups, farmer field schools and other
farmer groups, and facilitate the participation of community members and FMOs.
Through the efforts of a value chain specialist and a multi-stakeholder platform,
memoranda of agreement will be signed with private-sector entities and cooperatives in
order to ensure access to markets and services. The Central Agricultural Research
Institute (CARI) will be responsible for increasing the supply of improved planting
material.

Organizational framework.B.
16. A project steering committee will be established to drive the project’s strategy, oversee

planning, measure progress and assess impact. It will also facilitate linkages with
related projects, government services and value chain stakeholders. The Monrovia-
based project management unit will be the secretariat of the project steering
committee, with administration and overall management responsibilities. The
appropriately staffed and equipped country-level PIU at the Ministry of Agriculture office
in Voinjama will facilitate local linkages, provide technical and monitoring support, and
liaise with TCEP I counterparts in Nimba County.

17. The Monrovia-based PIU will coordinate activities in Lofa County with those in
Nimba County so that both can access similar services and jointly acquire seeds,
equipment and other inputs, creating economies of scale through bulk buying or
staggering buying arrangements in order to avoid over-burdening suppliers.

18. TCEP II is aligned with the Government’s PAPD, in which the Government recognizes
the agricultural sector’s potential for job creation and sustainable livelihoods,
particularly though value chain development.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

4

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

19. M&E will be undertaken by a team of qualified officers and implemented in line with
guidance developed for TCEP I. The targets included in the logical framework will guide
the project’s pace of implementation.

20. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be a participatory
exercise involving the county-level PIU along with colleagues from the central PIU in
Monrovia, the decentralized local government, other stakeholders and implementing
partners. The central PIU will play a key role in consolidating the AWP/B and will ensure
that project indicators are properly integrated with clear targets.

21. TCEP II will establish a knowledge management plan, including a communication
strategy and plan, which will determine the types of knowledge management products
to be developed based on the intended audience. The knowledge management focus of
TCEP II will be on learning lessons and accumulating best practices through the
collection, sharing and dissemination of information on targeted cocoa value chains,
organizational development and cocoa commercialization.

22. These knowledge services will be tailored to the needs of beneficiaries. The content will
be aimed at women and youth, and all services will target these users. To this end, the
project’s learning and knowledge management strategy will capture and disseminate
knowledge at various levels focused on: (i) generating trust and fostering linkages
between partners; (ii) managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences;
(iii) improving the private sector’s effectiveness and efficiency in adding value and
innovating; (iv) conducting analyses that can provide an evidence base for policy
dialogue; and (v) creating conditions for replication, scaling up and sustainability.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

same stand-alone financial management arrangements established for ongoing IFAD
projects, which will reduce the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include: (i) the appointment of a qualified financial controller and
accountant; (ii) the tracking of all programme transactions using customized accounting
software in line with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards cash basis of
accounting; (iii) a designated account in United States dollars for IFAD financing in the
central bank of Liberia (IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds); (iv) the
disbursement of IFAD financing against duly certified withdrawal applications in
accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures; and (v) periodic financial reports
prepared by the PIU in formats agreed upon with IFAD. In addition, consolidated
financial statements will be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance
with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD audit requirements. The audit
report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six months
of the end of each fiscal year. Daily financial operations will be detailed in the relevant
section of the programme implementation manual.

24. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy
and whistleblowing procedures will be included in the project implementation manual.

SupervisionE.
25. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will not be conducted as a

general inspection or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and
lessons jointly with the implementation team, and reflect on ways to improve
implementation and impact. A financial management specialist will participate in
supervision missions at least once per year, to providing implementation support and
monitoring fiduciary risks.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

5

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
26. The project is composed of four components, including project coordination and

management, totalling US$42.6 million in base costs and US$47.6 million including
contingencies and taxes over a six-year period. Component 2 (rehabilitation and
maintenance of roads) has the highest budget (at US$22.3 million), representing
47 per cent of total costs, followed by component 1 (revitalization of cocoa plantations)
at a cost of US$14.4 million (30 per cent of total costs). Service provision for value
chain development (component 3) has the lowest budget at US$2.6 million. Project
coordination, management, M&E and policy are estimated at US$8.4 million,
representing 18 per cent of total costs.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart

Financing gap,
including
climate Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Revitalization
of cocoa
plantations 3 558 24.7 3 558 24.7 3 252 22.6 1 660 11.5 741 5.1 1 628 11.3 14 396 30.2
2. Rehabilitation
and maintenance
of roads 4 206 18.9 4 206 18.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.0 12 395 55.7 22 263 46.7
3. Service
provision for
value chain
development 140 5.4 140 5.4 129 5.0 - - 21 0.8 2 144 83.2 2 575 5.4
4. Project
coordination,
management,
M&E and policy 4 009 47.7 4 009 47.7 - - - - 392 4.7 - - 8 410 17.7

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 16 167 33.9 47 644 100

B. Project financing
27. TCEP II will be financed by IFAD, the Government of Liberia, private-sector partners,

participating farmers and cofinanciers. As the main financier, IFAD will contribute
US$23.8 million, covering 50 per cent of the total costs of all components. Private-
sector partners will contribute approximately US$3.4 million. The Government will
finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and value-added tax for a total of
US$2.5 million (5.2 per cent of the total cost). Beneficiary contributions are estimated
at 1.8 million (3.8 per cent of the total cost). The financing gap of US$16.2 million
includes US$7 million for climate adaptation and mitigation. It should be noted that
TCEP II will absorb the entire US$ 23.8 million allocation for Liberia in IFAD10 through
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) as a 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent
highly concessional loan. Cofinancing opportunities will be explored in order to fill the
US$16.2 million financing gap. In the event that cofinancing to cover this gap is not
secured, funding will be provided through the country’s next PBAS allocation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan IFAD grant

Financing gap,
including
climate Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
I. Investment cost
A. Works 4 206 19.2 4 206 19.2 12 020 54.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.1 21 888
B. Equipment and

material 416 46.5 416 46.5 - - - - - - 63 7.0 895
C. Consultancies 582 46.5 582 46.5 - - - - - - 88 7.0 1 252
D. Training 1 680 18.0 1 680 18.0 2 750 29.3 1 146 12.2 1 660 17.7 454 4.8 9 370
E. Workshops 1 422 31.9 1 422 31.9 1 397 31.4 - - - - 214 4.8 4 455
F. Services 1 235 25.2 1 235 25.2 - - 2 235 45.5 - - 202 4.1 4 907
TOTAL INVESTMENT
COSTS 9 541 22.3 9 541 22.3 16 167 21.4 3 381 7.9 1 783 4.2 2 354 5.5 42 767
II. Recurrent costs
Salaries and allowances 1 490 50.0 1 490 50.0 - - - - - - - - 2 980
Operational costs 882 46.5 882 46.5 - - - - - - 133 7.0 1 897
TOTAL RECURRENT
COSTS 2 372 48.7 2 372 48.7 - - - - - - 133 2.7 4 877

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 16 167 33.9 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 47 644

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. TCEP II will benefit 10,000 smallholder cocoa farmers and 5,000 other beneficiaries

through improved roads and value chain services. Considering the average household
size of 4.289 in the project area, this totals 64,200 household members. An additional
5,000 people will benefit from better roads, stronger cooperatives and market linkages,
the availability of improved planting material and better input-supply systems.

29. Component 1 is expected to lead to an increase in cocoa production, marketing and
exports as a result of: (i) the revitalization of abandoned plantations; (ii) replanting of
new trees; (iii) higher yields for smallholder farmers; (iv) higher farm-gate prices; and
(e) higher-quality cocoa as a result of improved post-harvest handling and marketing.

30. Benefits from component 2 (rehabilitation and maintenance of roads) will include
greater access to markets, reduced time and cost of reaching local markets, and limited
post-harvest losses due to poor transportation conditions. Component 3 (service
provision for value chain development) will enhance the delivery of quality services to
cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability through improved extension services and
greater access to inputs and markets.

31. The economic results of the project are positive and significant, with an economic
internal rate of return of 17 per cent and a net present value of additional benefits
totalling US$15.2 million over 20 years against a social discount rate of 10 per cent.
The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results are robust to a reduction in the rate of
adoption, but sensitive to an overall reduction in benefits, increased costs and delays in
implementation.

D. Sustainability
32. In view of the project’s targeting of existing and new plantations, rehabilitation of

existing roads, safeguards against indirect deforestation, measures to mitigate
environmental risks posed by the application of agrochemicals and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts, it has been proposed to classify this project as category B –
posing moderate socio-environmental risks. A Social, Environmental and Climate
Assessment Procedures note has been prepared classifying the climate risk as
moderate.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

7

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The project’s main risks include start-up delays, weak governance and institutional

capacities, and vulnerability cocoa price variations. With a 14-month delay between
signature and ratification of the financing agreement for TCEP I under the previous
administration, continuous and results-driven dialogue with the Government on all
critical dimensions of the project will be undertaken to accelerate the start up. In
addition, start-up funds of US$200,000 have been included in the financing agreement.
To mitigate the risk of weak governance and capacities, TCEP II will competitively
recruit staff, harmonize staffing with the country programme staffing arrangements,
use IFAD procurement guidelines and strengthen training and control systems related to
financial management. To mitigate the risk of price variations, the project will support
investments in other food crops for food security, climate resilience and smooth cash
flow.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of TCEP II complies with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025), with a
clear focus on enabling poor rural women and men to overcome poverty. Specifically,
TCEP II is aligned with Strategic Objective 1: Increase poor rural people’s productive
capacities; Strategic Objective 2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market
participation; and Strategic Objective 3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability
and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.

35. In addition, the project is aligned with the IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment by promoting economic empowerment that provides rural women with
equal opportunities to participate in – and benefit from – profitable economic activities
in the cocoa value chain.

36. TCEP II is compliant with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy
through promoting public-sector facilitation of mutually beneficial 4P involving
smallholder farmers and private market operators in response to clear market
opportunities.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The proposed project is in line with the new administration’s five-year PAPD, which

recognizes the importance of: (i) inclusive and sustainable economic diversification to
achieve structural transformation and growth; (ii) enabling the private sector to play a
leadership role; and (iii) agriculture as an engine of growth. In order to diversify the
economy, the Government has prioritized the agricultural sector and has identified
seven priority value chains for support through the PAPD (2018-2022). These include,
rice, oil palm, horticulture, cocoa, rubber, cassava, and poultry and pig husbandry.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. TCEP II scales up the recently completed STCRSP and is complementary to TCEP I.

There are additional opportunities for scaling up within the cocoa belt and the proposed
project is closely aligned with government priorities and the interventions of other
donors such as the World Bank. Prospects for scaling up this project include the use of
kuu groups and farmer field schools, youth engagement, tree crop revitalization and
capacity building of partner cooperatives. The benefits of a strengthened cocoa value
chain could be transferred to other commodity value chains.

39. Key innovations in TCEP II as compared to past projects include: (i) the integration of
climate change resilience and institutional capacity building into the approach; (ii) a
focus on the supply chain for new cocoa genetic resources along with post-harvest
activities and cocoa quality; (iii) an emphasis on service delivery by cooperatives to
their members; (iv) the combination of plantation revitalization with the replanting of
cocoa; (v) specific measures to include women and promote their access to benefits;



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

8

and (vi) the use of a long-term capacity-building strategy for cooperatives along with
systematic institutional capacity building and institutional auditing.

Policy engagementD.
40. The proposed project is aligned with government policies including the: (i) PAPD (2018-

2023); (ii) Revised Draft National Aid Policy of Liberia; (iii) National Cocoa Export
Strategy (2014-2018); (iv) Land Rights Act; (v) Agriculture Commodity Regulatory
Authority Act; and (vi) National Adaptation Programme of Action for Climate Change
Resilience. Through its M&E system, the project will provide important feedback to the
Government on project implementation and lessons learned, informing policies for the
sector.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A Project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the session.

42. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement Establishing
IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of the

following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to the
Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and thirteen
thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and
thirteen thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
























































President’s Report 
 

 

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability 
Framework Grant to the Republic of the Niger 
for the Family Farming Development 
Programme in the Diffa Region  


 
Republic of the Niger 

Family Farming Development Programme in the Diffa 
Region  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower/recipient: Republic of the Niger 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture 

Total programme cost: EUR 16.06 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.37 million  

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability 
Grant: 

EUR 5.37 million  

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years, 
including a grace period of 10 years, interest-free with a 
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.  

Cofinancier: Norwegian Development Cooperation Agency 
(NORAD) 

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 3.09 million  

Contribution of borrower/ 
recipient: 

EUR 2.12 million  

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.12 million  

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming Development 

Programme in the Diffa Region (ProDAF-Diffa), as contained in paragraph 59. 

Proposed loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant 
to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming 
Development Programme in the Diffa Region  

I. Strategic context and rationale 

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 

1. Poverty and security situation. With a poverty rate of 48.9 per cent, a gross 

national product of US$430 per capita and a very low human development index 

(HDI) of 0.348 in 2015 and 2016, Niger is one of the poorest countries in the 

world, ranking 187
th
 out of 188 countries on the HDI. Attacks by Boko Haram 

terrorists around Lake Chad have exacerbated the poverty of the area’s population, 

whose security is seriously affected. According to government statistics, there were 

252,305 refugees or displaced persons in the Diffa region in October 2017. 

2. Agricultural potential. The Diffa region has real potential for the production of 

irrigated and flood recession crops, having an arable area of 265,000 hectares, 

69 per cent of it in the Lake Chad lakebed, 28 per cent along the Komadougou 

Yobé River et 3 per cent in the oasis basins of Mainé-Soroa and Goudoumaria. 

Rainfed crop development in the agriculture subsector is limited due to low rainfall, 

coupled with low dune-soil fertility and parasite pressure. The main constraints to 

irrigated crop production are the limited financial capacity of farmers to embrace 

irrigated farming, the absence of credit tailored to their needs and the lack of 

effective systems to provide them with inputs and market their produce. 

3. In terms of livestock production, in 2016 the livestock population in the Diffa 

region (all species) was estimated at over 3,750,000 head, corresponding to 

1,637,000 tropical livestock units, or 9.9 per cent of the nation’s stock. Some 

95 per cent of the population engages in livestock production, which accounts for 

55 per cent of the region’s annual gross product, making it the leading activity in 

terms of total export earnings from agro-sylvo-pastoral products. Notwithstanding, 

the livestock subsector in the Diffa region suffers from chronic forage shortages 

(in 10 out of 12 years), poor networking of water points, hindering rational use of 

grazing lands, and poor farmer organization in terms of marketing the animals and 

their subproducts. 

4. Market access. Market transactions in the Diffa region are dominated by the sale 

of livestock and peppers and controlled by Nigerians, who are positioned 

downstream in the value chains as the main buyers but upstream as well, in the 

case of peppers, as the main providers of inputs through crop loans. This model, 

however, has been seriously disrupted by the Boko Haram attacks, which have 

caused most rural markets to shut down and led to the development of informal 

channels of trade. A large portion of the profit margin, therefore, accrues to 

merchants and their intermediaries, while farmers sell around 70 per cent of their 

production at harvest, when prices are at their lowest.  

5. Situation of women and young adults. Limited access to production factors, 

among them land, financing and technical and economic advisory services, exclude 

women from agricultural production activities, leaving them to work in the artisanal 

processing of farm products (small-scale food services, oil, dairy products and flour 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

2 

and by-products). In rainfed crop production, women’s participation is observed in 

cowpea harvesting, and in irrigated crop production, in pepper harvesting. In 

recent years, women have shown a keen interest in irrigated market garden crops 

in oasis basins. The banning of motorcycle use due to security issues has seriously 

affected the employment of young men who once provided motorized transport for 

people and merchandize. Agriculture, especially market gardening, could offer 

them an opportunity to re-enter the workforce. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and 
RB-COSOP  

6. The Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) emphasizes: (i) the 

preservation, growth and diversification of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; 

and (ii) the strengthening of community resilience to climate change, crises and 

natural disasters.  

7. The national policy orientations for 2020
1
 include the goal of tripling the 

contribution of irrigated crops to the national grain balance sheet. This strategic 

orientation also applies to the Diffa region, thanks to a greater supply of production 

factors (water-capture works, drainage systems), technical and economic 

agricultural advisory services and the creation of warehousing and processing 

facilities and mechanisms for securing market access for the products supplied by 

the agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains. 

8. The Nigerien authorities’ determination and efforts to fight rural poverty by 

targeting support to young adults and women through agricultural development as 

the primary source of rural employment, strengthening the population’s resilience 

through upstream and downstream production assistance and helping households 

hurt by the security crisis to rapidly recover are the motives behind the preparation 

of this programme.  

9. Concerning refugee populations, the Government is committed to establishing 

mechanisms to support local communities, accommodating displaced persons 

through the development of sustainable agropastoral activities and ensuring the 

social and economic integration of displaced persons in the receiving areas and 

preparing them to return to their country and village of origin once the security 

threats are under control. This vision is supported by the findings of partners 

operating in the area, who state that after years of humanitarian assistance, the 

target groups’ current needs are related more to the demand for economic projects 

that empower them and guarantee their dignity. This demand is consistent with 

IFAD’s intervention framework, grounded in the promotion of family farming to 

eradicate poverty and hunger in rural areas.  

10. Thus, based on the conclusions and measures agreed upon by Niger and IFAD in 

the COSOP 2013-2018 midterm review, the Government has requested IFAD’s 

agreement to finance and extend the Family Farming Development Programme 

(ProDAF) to the Diffa region to capitalize on the achievements of previous and 

current projects in this region. 

II. Programme description 

A. Programme area and target group 

11. The programme will operate in oasis basins, the western and central areas of the 

Komadougou Yobé river valley, the central agropastoral area and the north-

western pastoral area of the region. This area covers the entire communes of 

Goudoumaria, Mainé-Soroa, Chétimari, Diffa, Gueskérou, Foulatariet and N’Guel 

Beyli and the southern part of the N’gourti commune, connecting the Gueskérou 

                                           
1
 (i) The Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035); (ii) the Economic and 

Social Development Plan 2017-2021; (iii) the Action Plan 2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens"; 
and (iv) the Small-scale Irrigation Strategy in Niger. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

3 

and N’Guel Beyli communes. Operations will be concentrated around five economic 

development poles (EDP): Goudoumaria (including Boudti), Mainé-Soroa, N'Guel 

Beyli/Foulatari, Chétimari and Diffa (including Gueskérou). The N'Guel Beyli EDP 

will focus on agropastoral activities and products, and the other EDPs on activities 

and the products of irrigated and rainfed agriculture and sedentary livestock 

production. 

12. Four criteria were used in selecting the intervention areas: (i) security conditions 

(subject to variation); (ii) the geographical concentration of activities in an EDP 

approach; (iii) potential partnerships and synergies with other actors; and (iv) the 

presence of different types of target groups, addressed through a holistic approach. 

13. The targeting of beneficiaries will take place at two levels: (i) socio-economic 

targeting of vulnerable local or refugee households; and (ii) demographic targeting 

of women and young adults. More particularly, ProDAF-Diffa will target 20,000 

households, or roughly 140,000 people, representing some 16 per cent of the 

population in the Diffa region, 30 per cent of them refugees. Furthermore, at least 

30 per cent of the beneficiaries will be women and 30 per cent young adults, as 

stipulated in the ProDAF strategy for equitable development and empowerment of 

women and youth.  

B. Programme development objective 

14. The programme’s general objective is adapted from the objective of the ProDAF 

programme in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions, of which this programme is 

an extension. Its purpose is to sustainably ensure food and nutrition security and 

the resilience capacities of rural households in the Diffa region. 

15. The development objective is to sustainably increase the income, adaptation to 

climate change and market access of family farms and promote the social and 

economic integration of refugee or displaced populations into the receiving 

communities. 

16. ProDAF-Diffa operations will be part of the following key actions in the five selected 

EDPs: (i) the development of a wholesale market; (ii) small-scale irrigated farming 

in intermediate areas located near national Route 1; (iii) higher productivity in 

rainfed and irrigated crop production; (iv) protection of intervention basins through 

sand-dune stabilization; (v) the upgrading of pastoral trails and water points; and 

(vi) the social and economic integration of refugee groups. 

17. The expected result is expressed in two outcomes: 

(i) The emergence of sustainable family farms enables 20,000 rural households, 

30 per cent made up of refugees, 30 per cent women and 30 per cent young 

adults, to diversify their production (crops and livestock) and boost their 

yields (30 per cent) and resilience to external shocks, notably those that are 

climate-related. 

(ii) Thirty per cent of the 20,000 rural farmers, 30 per cent of them refugees, 

30 per cent women and 30 per cent young adults, obtain higher income from 

their surplus agro-sylvo-pastoral production thanks to higher sales in the 

markets that supply national consumer centres and cross-border markets. 

C. Components/outcomes 

Component 1: Strengthening of sustainable family farming 

18. The objective of this component is to sustainably boost the productivity of family 

farms. It has three sub-components: (i) structured and productive climate-resilient 

farms; (ii) strengthening of the technical and economic capacity of family farms; 

and (iii) resilience of vulnerable populations.  

19. Component 1 consists of: (i)(a) the development of sub-watersheds 

(3,000 hectares) and promotion of the pastoral water subsector through water and 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

4 

soil conservation works and soil protection and restoration, the rehabilitation of 

pastoral corridors and water points and (i)(b) the development of areas for 

irrigated crop production (360 hectares); (ii) the strengthening of agricultural 

technical capacity to enable family farms to diversify their production and increase 

crop yields by 30 per cent, and the improvement of sedentary livestock production 

to boost herd productivity and reduce conflicts over the use of natural resources; 

and (iii) activities preparatory to action on behalf of refugees and the promotion of 

women’s leadership and nutrition security. 

Component 2: Market access 

20. This component has three sub-components: (i) the structural development of 

sustainable market access; (ii) the promotion of rural microenterprises and youth 

employment; and (iii) market access and regional trade integration. 

21. Component 2 consists of: (i) the rehabilitation or building of economic 

infrastructure to improve trade flows in existing markets in the five EDPs; (ii) the 

sustainable management of economic infrastructure through specific social 

engineering; (iii) the promotion of rural microenterprises to benefit local and 

refugee populations; (iv) financing for the vocational training and equipping of 

young adults (30 per cent of them young women) for work in farming-related 

agricultural activities or non-agricultural activities; and (v) actions aimed at 

strengthening the policy dialogue on increasing EDP connectivity through wholesale 

markets and sales platforms in subregional transport corridors. 

Component 3: Programme management and coordination, monitoring and 

evaluation and knowledge management  

22. This component includes the administrative and financial operations, management 

and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the programme. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

23. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will follow the ProDAF principles applied in the 

Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions while considering the specific context of Diffa, 

marked by the presence of refugee populations among the beneficiaries.  

24. The programme approach is based on the following intervention principles: 

 The improvement of food and nutrition security, considering the dimensions 

of food availability, accessibility and use through stable mechanisms; 

 Geographical continuity of the interventions through the EDPs, which includes 

the wholesale market connected by rural feeder roads to satellite collection 

points in the production areas, themselves surrounded by watersheds; and  

 The scaling up of ProDAF to benefit the Diffa region. 

B. Organizational framework 

25. The Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for project oversight and 

implementation. The national steering committee will be responsible for the 

strategic orientation of the programme, ensure compliance with the financing 

agreements and the programme’s alignment with national strategies and approve 

the annual work plans and budgets (AWP/B). It will be presided over by the 

General Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and consist of representatives of 

government agencies and the beneficiaries. 

26. Programme coordination and management, overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

will be handled by a regional programme management unit (RPMU) based in Diffa 

with technical, administrative and financial autonomy. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

5 

27. ProDAF’s national technical assistance unit, based in Niamey and Maradi, will 

provide ad hoc technical assistance for programme implementation, as needed, 

particularly in the areas of fiduciary, administrative and technical management.  

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and 
knowledge management  

28. Planning. The RPMU will be responsible for consolidating the AWP/Bs prepared by 

the technical partners in keeping with the regulations and timetables and based on 

targeted discussions at the local level. It will be co-responsible for organizing and 

serving as the secretariat for the national steering committee’s sessions with the 

other RPMUs. The AWP/B will be validated by the national steering committee and 

submitted for IFAD's prior approval. 

29. Monitoring and evaluation. The purpose of the M&E system will be to furnish 
reliable current data on the programme’s implementation and facilitate 
decision-making. It will be linked to ProDAF’s comprehensive M&E system. The 
RPMU in Diffa will take the data collected from forms completed in the field by 

implementation operatives/partners and enter it in ProDAF’s consolidated 

harmonized database. IFAD and the Government will conduct a joint midterm 

review in year three of the programme.  

30. Learning and knowledge management. The purpose of knowledge management 
in ProDAF-Diffa will be: (i) to encourage personnel involved in the implementation 
of programme activities to regularly describe and document the knowledge gained 

during implementation (capitalization); and (ii) to systematically store (either 

manually or electronically) the documentary output (reports, studies, terms of 

reference, notes, etc.) of the various programme actors and facilitate its use 

(as part of knowledge sharing). 

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

31. The programme’s administrative and financial management, as well as its fiduciary 

aspects, will be based on ProDAF’s existing configuration and mechanisms. 

ProDAF’s financial management risk is considered “moderate.” 

32. Programme funds will be managed according to the terms of the financial 

agreements. The administrative and financial management procedures will be 

detailed in the letter to the borrower and the manual of internal administrative, 

financial, accounting and monitoring procedures. The manual will take the 

distinctive features of the programme into account, specifically the multiple sources 

of financing and the number of intervention regions, as well as the particular risks 

of the Diffa region.  

33. Flow of funds. A dedicated account in CFA francs for the deposit of the respective 

loan and grant funds and an operational account in CFA francs will be opened in the 

name of the programme at a reputable commercial bank. Disbursements from 

these accounts will require two signatures.  

34. The programme coordination unit will prepare quarterly financial and accounting 

statements, which it will transmit to the Government and IFAD, along with the 

financial statements for programme operations, which will be subject to an annual 

external audit.  

35. Pursuant to IFAD guidelines, an external audit of the financial statements will be 

performed annually. It will adhere to the International Standards on Auditing and 

comply with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. The audited financial statements 

will be published on IFAD’s official website.  

  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

6 

36. Procurement. Procurement is governed by: (i) Law No. 2011/037 of 28 October 

2011, containing the general principles, controls and regulations governing public 

contracts and the outsourcing of public services; (ii) Decree No. 2014-070/PRN/MF 

of 12 February 2014 on a priori supervision of procurement procedures, which is 

exercised by the Directorate for Public Procurement and Financial Covenants; and 

(iii) Decree No. 2016-641/PRN/PM of 1 December 2016 on the code for 

procurement and the outsourcing of public services. 

E. Supervision 

37. Programme supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD and the Government, 

represented by the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with the other 

departments involved, the programme coordination unit and relevant partners, 

notably NORAD. In addition, IFAD will organize implementation support missions, 

as needed.  

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits 

A. Programme costs 

38. The total programme cost over a six-year period, including provisions for physical 

contingencies and price increases, is estimated at EUR 16.06 million. This cost 

includes an estimated base cost of EUR 14.82 million and provisions for physical 

and financial contingencies in the amount of EUR 1.24 million, or 8 per cent of the 

total programme cost. 

39. The estimated total programme cost by component is as follows: (i) component 1: 

strengthening of sustainable family farming, in the amount of EUR 8.86 million, or 

55.2 per cent; (ii) component 2: market access, in the amount of EUR 3.93 million, 

or 24.5 per cent; and (iii) component 3: programme management and 

coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management, in the 

amount of EUR 3.27 million, or 20.3 per cent. In terms of total financing, current 

expenditures are established at EUR 1.92 million, or 11.9 per cent. The table below 

shows the breakdown of programme costs by component and sub-component.  



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

7
 

 
Table 1 
Programme costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of euros) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD  Beneficiaries Government Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Strengthening of sustainable 
family farming 

            

1.1. Structured and productive climate-
resilient farms  

1 542.8 27.3 1 542.8 27.3 1 676.5 29.7 89.6 1.6 792.7 14.0 5 644.3 35.1 

1.2. Strengthening of the technical and 
economic capacity of family farms 

751.3 29.1 751.3 29.1 761.2 29.5 - - 313.8 12.2 2 577.7 16.1 

1.3. Resilience of vulnerable populations  149.1 23.5 149.1 23.5 257.2 40.5 - - 80.0 12.6 635.4 4.0 

Subtotal 2 443.2 27.6 2 443.2 27.6 2 694.9 30.4 89.6 1.0 1 186.4 13.4 8 857.4 55.2 

2. Market access             

2.1. Structural development of 
sustainable market access  

1 008.1 43.7 1 008.1 43.7 - - - - 291.0 12.6 2 307.3 14.4 

2.2. Promotion of rural microenterprises 
and youth employment  

508.5 44.9 508.5 44.9 - - 33.1 2.9 82.9 7.3 1 133.0 7.1 

2.3. Regional trade integration  225.1 45.7 225.1 45.7 - - - - 42.7 8.7 493.0 3.1 

Subtotal 1 741.8 44.3 1 741.8 44.3 - - 33.1 0.8 416.6 10.6 3 933.2 24.5 

3. Programme management and 
coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation and knowledge 
management 

            

3.1. Monitoring and evaluation and 
knowledge management  

445.8 42.6 445.8 42.6 - - - - 154.2 14.7 1 045.8 6.5 

3.2. Coordination and management 730.3 32.9 730.3 32.9 396.6 17.8 - - 364.9 16.4 2 222.1 13.8 

Subtotal 1 176.1 36.0 1 176.1 36.0 396.6 12.1 - - 519.1 15.9 3 267.9 20.3 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

8 

B. Programme financing 

40. The programme will receive financing in the amount of EUR 16.06 million, as 

follows: (i) an IFAD Debt Sustainability Framework grant in the amount of 

EUR 5.37 million, or 33.4 per cent; (ii) an IFAD loan of EUR 5.37 million, or 

33.4 per cent; (iii) a grant from Norway for an estimated EUR 3.09 million, or 

19.3 per cent; (iv) a contribution from the Government in the amount of 

EUR 2.12 million, or 13.2 per cent; and (v) a contribution from the beneficiaries 

in the amount of EUR 0.12 million, or 0.8 per cent. The table below shows the 

breakdown of programme costs by expenditure category and financier. 



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

9
 

Table 2 
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of euros)  

Expenditure category 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD Beneficiaries Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenditures             

1. Works 1 208.5 31.5 1 208.5 31.5 823.4 21.5 - - 590.8 15.4 3 831.2 23.9 

2. Vehicles 74.8 29.1 74.8 29.1 40.7 15.8 - - 66.8 26.0 257.1 1.6 

3. Equipment and materials 92.7 35.4 92.7 35.4 8.7 3.3 - - 68.2 26.0 262.4 1.6 

4. Training 715.4 45.7 715.4 45.7 - - - - 135.7 8.7 1 566.5 9.8 

5. Consultancies 452.5 22.6 452.5 22.6 776.1 38.7 - - 325.2 16.2 2 006.3 12.5 

6. Goods, services and 
supplies 

1 669.5 33.0 1 669.5 33.0 1 095.4 21.6 89.6 1.8 538.1 10.6 5 062.1 31.5 

7. Grants and subsidies 409.2 43.6 409.2 43.6 - - 33.1 3.5 86.7 9.2 938.2 5.8 

8. Unallocated - - - - 214.4 100.0 - - - - 214.4 1.3 

Total investment 
expenditures 

4 622.6 32.7 4 622.6 32.7 2 958.7 20.9 122.6 0.9 1 811.6 12.8 14 138.1 88.0 

Current expenditures             

1. Salaries and allowances 593.3 38.6 593.3 38.6 101.9 6.6 -  248.4 16.2 1 537.0 9.6 

2. Operating costs 145.2 37.9 145.2 37.9 30.9 8.1 -  62.1 16.2 383.4 2.4 

Total current expenditures 738.5 38.5 738.5 38.5 132.8 6.9 - - 310.5 16.2 1 920.4 12.0 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

10 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis  

41. The analysis of the financial return of the activities shows that for rainfed crops, 

the respective internal rates of return (IRR), net present values (NPV) and cost-

benefit ratios are on the order of: (i) for millet, IRR of 21.20 per cent, NPV of 

FCFA 15,135 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:7; (ii) for sorghum, IRR of 16.3 per cent, 

NPV of FCFA 7,206 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:3; and (iii) for groundnut, IRR of 

23.40 per cent, NPV FCFA 37,772 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:2. 

42. The additional margins for irrigated crops are FCFA 661,697 and FCFA 739,000 for 

peppers and rice, respectively. The IRR for onions is 62.8 per cent, with an NPV of 

FCFA 11 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 2:2. These results show that a farmer 

can handle the additional costs of adopting improved production techniques to clear 

additional income.  

43. Goat raising in these groups is also a profitable venture, with an IRR of 

43.7 per cent, an NPV de FCFA 642,219 and a cost-benefit ratio of 1:3. 

44. The financial analysis of the operating accounts of the various market stakeholders 

(farmers, collectors, warehousers, merchants/wholesalers, communities/ 

municipalities, market management groups) shows a satisfactory return for the 

different types of market investments, with IRRs ranging from 14.2 to 48 per cent.  

45. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 21.6 per cent, 

and the NPV of the net economic cash flow will be US$13 million. This preliminary 

result is satisfactory. With a 10 per cent increase in sales prices, the EIRR is 

around 23.6 per cent. A 15, 20 and 30 per cent drop in the yield of rainfed crops 

reduces the EIRRs to 18.9 per cent, 17.3 per cent and 14.0 per cent, respectively, 

while a 10 per cent increase in costs yields an EIRR of 19.6 per cent.  

D. Sustainability 

46. ProDAF-Diffa employs an approach based on increasing resilience that applies the 

lessons learned in neighbouring regions while tackling the challenges stemming 

from population movements triggered by the security situation. The programme’s 

primary goal is therefore to increase the sustainability of the proposed practices 

and the installations introduced by the programme. The sustainability of the 

interventions will be guaranteed by choosing practices and activities that have 

proven effective over decades, with a high rate of adoption by rural populations. 

47. From a technical standpoint, the activities under components 1 and 2 are based on 

social engineering that links each intervention, from the lowland parcel to the 

subwatershed, to its users through commune management and association 

committees with recognized competencies.  

48. From a social standpoint, the programme approach will be inclusive, and support 

will be provided to all target groups without discrimination. To this end, instead of 

setting up specific organizations for refugee groups, the programme will encourage 

populations to participate in existing or newly created village associations. This 

approach will better integrate the communities to implement the activities and 

capitalize on the opportunities offered. 

49. From an economic standpoint, the increased volume and value of farm production, 

together with greater market opportunities, will be the incentives for beneficiary 

engagement. 

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

50. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will face risks associated with the climate and 

security situation in the region, the security risk remaining unpredictable and high. 

The environmental and social risks make it a “Category B” project. Since the region 

is Sahelian, the project is classified as having a “high climate risk” due to the risks 

associated with climate change. The risk assessment was taken into account in the 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

11 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. The anticipated mechanisms and 

interventions will mitigate the adverse effects of the risks on the activities. Since 

ProDAF-Diffa is an extension of ProDAF, numerous risks are substantially mitigated 

by the very fact of its institutional integration and the recognized experience of 

ProDAF. Nevertheless, in order to lower ProDAF-Diffa’s risk in the implementation 

phase from “high” to “moderate,” as in the case of ProDAF, the new structure 

includes an internal risk auditor to better control the risks. The main risks and 

mitigation measures put the overall programme risk at the “moderate” level.  

V. Corporate considerations 

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

51. ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, centred on 

inclusive and sustainable transformation of the rural world. ProDAF-Diffa will 

contribute to meeting IFAD’s three strategic objectives, namely: (i) increase poor 

rural people’s productive capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from 

market participation; and (iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and 

climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.  

52. The activities implemented under ProDAF-Diffa (development of water points, 

pastoral areas, stabilization of dunes surrounding water points, support for 

agricultural inputs) will have a limited, reversible, and easily mitigated 

environmental and social impact. Moreover, they will take place in small areas and 

be on the scale of the activities implemented under ProDAF in the neighbouring 

regions, where the adverse social and environmental impacts were considered 

minimal and very localized. It is therefore proposed that ProDAF-Diffa be classified 

as an environmental and social category “B” programme. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

53. The programme’s targeting strategy is aligned with IFAD’s targeting policy. 

ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with the Government’s recommendations in favour of the 

interventions in the Diffa context, considering the refugee, displaced and returning 

populations in the country who wish to engage in family farming. The programme 

will also ensure that this aspect will be taken into account in the monitoring of 

programme results and the impact assessment (with data disaggregated by sex, 

age and origin). ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with Niger’s Small-scale Irrigation 

Strategy.  

C. Innovations and scaling up 

54. ProDAF-Diffa is the product of a scaling up of ProDAF’s achievements and approach 

in the neighbouring regions. In particular, it has the following features:  

 The economic development pole (EDP) approach. The EDP approach, 

which consists of concentrating a coherent and complementary group of 

support activities in a production area to amplify their impact, was 

successfully implemented in 2012-2013 in the Project to Support Food 

Security in the Maradi Region (PASADEM) and the Ruwanmu Small-scale 

Irrigation Project (PPI Ruwanmu). It has been employed in current ProDAF 

activities in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions and is now used as a 

model in the intervention strategies of the government and certain partners. 

This approach will be replicated in this programme.  

 Farmer field schools and water user associations. These tools will be 

promoted by the programme based on the current ProDAF experience. 

 Assisted natural tree regeneration. This simple and inexpensive technical 

innovation for managing the natural regeneration of trees has had a very 

positive impact in projects promoted by IFAD since the 1980s.  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

12 

D. Policy engagement  

55. ProDAF-Diffa interventions are aligned with the lines of action in the Plan of Action 

2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens," especially: 

(i) water management for agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; (ii) the 

promotion of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains; and (iii) integrated and 

sustainable natural resource management and environmental protection. These 

lines of action are also part of the Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) 

and IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2021. 

By focusing its efforts on the problem of assisting refugees, the programme is also 

aligned with the Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural 

Stability (FARMS), developed by IFAD and its partners to help displaced persons 

become more independent and strengthen the resilience of receiving communities. 

Therefore, the programme will generally support Niger’s Sustainable Development 

and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035). 

VI. Legal instruments and authority 
56. The financing agreement between the Republic of the Niger and IFAD will 

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 

borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in 

appendix I. 

57. The Republic of the Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 

VII. Recommendation 
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolution: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million three hundred seventy 

thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall 

be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented 

herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability 

Framework grant to the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million 

three hundred seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms 

and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo  

President 

 












































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and
Market Access Support Project

Republic of Benin
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support Project
Detailed design report

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of IFAD concerning the delimitation of the frontiers or boundaries, or the authorities thereof.
Source: IFAD, 2018

IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

iv

Republic of Benin

Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Total project cost: EUR 89.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system [PBAS]–2016-2018 cycle)

EUR 13.3 million

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 13.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID),
private sector, financial institutions

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: EUR 8.6 million
Private sector: EUR 4.8 million
Financial institutions: EUR 1.1 million

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: Loan
Private sector: Loan
Financial institutions: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: EUR 8.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 2.8 million

Financing gap: EUR 37.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Agricultural Development and Market
Access Support Project, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. As a result of the economic and institutional reforms introduced under the

Government Action Programme (PAG) “Revealing Benin”, the Beninese economy
has entered a new era of growth. In 2017, the country reported 5.5 per cent
growth in its GDP, compared with 4 per cent in 2016. Nevertheless, it still faces
significant challenges, with a poverty rate of more than 40 per cent; persistent
social and occupational inequalities to the detriment of women; food insecurity,
which affects 15 per cent of rural populations and 21 per cent of farm households;
and persistent unemployment (2.7 per cent) on top of a high level of
underemployment (72 per cent), largely among young adults. Added to these
constraints are the effects of climate change, which sap the resilience of
populations, especially in rural areas.

2. Agriculture is a strategic sector of the Beninese economy, contributing an average
of 23 per cent of GDP and 75 per cent of export revenues and generating around 70
per cent of the jobs. The National Investment Plan for Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Security 2017-2021 five-year breakdown, prepared within the framework
of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Development (PSDSA 2017-2025), is aimed at
maintaining annual GDP growth of at least 6 per cent during the period and
increasing the average annual income of rural households by 7.5 per cent.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

3. PADAAM was chosen to implement the country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for Benin 2018-2022 and is entirely under the agricultural component of
the PAG 2016-2021. It has two strategic objectives: (i) the productive capacity,
resilience to climate change and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural
populations are sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets
is improved.

4. The national value-chain promotion strategy focuses on three conventional value
chains – rice, maize and cassava – with a view to improving food security and
increasing the income of rural populations. PADAAM will thus support the three
value chains stipulated in the PAG in order to: (i) bridge the food gap in terms of
the domestic demand for rice, only 56 per cent of which was met in 2017, thus
reducing the country’s dependence on mass imports of rice from the Asian market;
and (ii) maintain and increase the value added of maize and cassava in association
with the private sector, while developing trade with the subregional market.

5. In the conventional value-chain niche, PADAAM will support government efforts to
promote the value chains, ensuring household food security and creating value
added. It will be devoted entirely to supporting the implementation of national
development programmes in the value chains in question.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

2

II. Project description
A. Intervention area and target group
6. In the current strategic context, characterized by the promotion of value chains and

“agro-clusters,” PADAAM will intervene in four agricultural development poles
(ADPs) with the potential for production and economic partnership development,
namely: (i) the south of pole 4, covering the department of Collines; (ii) pole 5,
covering the departments of Zou and Couffo; (iii) pole 6, confined to the
department of Plateau; and (iv) pole 7, which stretches to the departments of
Ouémé, Atlantique and Mono.1 The priority production areas in the ADPs will be
selected on the basis of a detailed study conducted prior to project start-up.

7. PADAAM’s target group will consist of the following categories: (i) smallholder
farmers and small rural entrepreneurs engaged in production or processing
activities in the three value chains (rice, maize and cassava); (ii) young adults from
family farms and/or young adults who have graduated and/or have some education
who wish to work in the value chains as first-time entrepreneurs, as well as young
entrepreneurs who are already active in the value chains or wish to take advantage
of the business opportunities they offer; (iii) agroentrepreneurs and downstream
actors in the value chains – for example, processors, merchants and individuals
involved in service activities and organized into small or medium-sized enterprises
or cooperatives; (iv) agricultural professional organizations (APOs) with different
degrees of organization and geographic positioning: grassroots farmers’
organizations, unions, federations, regional collaboration platforms and national
mixed groups of professionals.

8. PADAAM will reach 51,000 households and approximately 255,000 rural people,2
including smallholder farmers, farm youth, agroentrepreneurs and actors
downstream in the value chains, as well as professional organizations. This
approach is designed to target and favour women and young adults (aged 15-35),
who represent 40 per cent and 30 per cent of the beneficiaries, respectively.

B. Project development objective
9. PADAAM’s general objective is to reduce rural poverty in the project intervention

area by including stakeholders, both women and men, in diversified and profitable
value chains.

10. The project’s development objective is to sustainably increase the food and
nutrition security, as well as the income, of smallholder farmers, particularly
women and young adults.

11. Attainment of this objective will be measured by the following indicators:
(i) 204,000 low-income rural people benefitting from upward economic mobility, 40
per cent of them women and 30 per cent of them young adults; (ii) an increase in
the yield per hectare of maize, rice and cassava; (iii) at least a 30 per cent increase
in the income of 80 per cent of the beneficiaries; (iv) more than 400 production
partnerships, bringing together some 1,600 organizations, and close to
50,000 smallholder farmers developed; (v) 80 per cent of supported rural
businesses reporting higher profits; and (vi) 1,100 young adults engaged in
business initiatives in the three targeted value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. PADAAM will be implemented over a six-year period (2019-2024) and will have

three investment components: (i) strengthening partnerships and creating value
added (EUR 39.4 million, or 44 per cent of the total cost); (ii) improving agricultural

1 The department of Littoral, included in ADP 7, is not part of the PADAAM intervention area.
2 Average size of households (five individuals) based on the average size of rural households in the
seven departments targeted by the intervention. Source: Cahier des villages et quartiers de ville, INSAE,
August 2016.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

3

productivity and production (EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total cost);
and (iii) coordination and management under the IFAD Rural Intervention
Framework Programme in Benin (ProCar) (EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the
total cost).

13. Component 1: Strengthening partnerships and creating value added. This
component should result in: (i) the formalization of sustainable economic
relationships between smallholder farmers and the private sector; (ii) an increase in
the volume of raw materials processed in the three value chains and sold on the
domestic and international market; (iii) a significant increase in the income of
smallholder farmers; and (iv) strengthening of the institutional and governance
base of professional organizations.

14. Component 2: Improving agricultural productivity and production. This
component is aimed at increasing the average yield per hectare by around 44 per
cent, with production in the three targeted value chains reaching the volumes
specified in the PSDSA for 2021. Under this component, PADAAM will also
participate in increasing the availability and quality of infrastructure for production
and implementation support, with the following as the main indicators:
2,500 hectares of wetlands improved, 91 storage facilities rehabilitated or built and
250 km of feeder roads built.

15. Component 3: Coordination and management under ProCar (Coordination,
monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management). Implementation of
this component will be based on the programme approach used in the creation of
ProCar and the reforms to the territorialization of agricultural development adopted
by the Government. This framework programme governs the administrative and
fiduciary management of all projects in IFAD’s portfolio in Benin, and supports the
shared functions of monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management,
communication, targeting and youth support.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
16. Geographic approach. Benin has chosen the geographic approach for agricultural

development, and PADAAM will endorse it. This new approach will be implemented
through the ADPs under the new institutional architecture that gives the territorial
agricultural development agencies (ATDA) technical coordination functions that
cover the ADPs and the promotion of value chains, making the departmental
bureaus of agriculture, livestock and fisheries responsible for the regulation of the
interventions and geographic monitoring and evaluation at the territorial level.

17. Value-chain approach. PADAAM supports a change in paradigm centred on the
sustainable creation of value added through the promotion of inclusive economic
partnerships that link smallholder farmers and their organizations with the private
sector and the market in the three priority value chains.

18. Outsourcing approach. The project will employ an inclusive outsourcing approach
to implementing the activities related to partnerships, employing a mechanism
involving different consulting and facilitation firms whose services will be
coordinated by international technical assistance in direct support of project
coordination. This approach will also help to bring young adults into the workforce
through on-the-job training provided by experienced training centres selected for a
customized partnership.

B. Organizational framework
19. PADAAM will be overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries and

be part of ProCar’s organic framework. ProCar’s National Steering Committee (CNP)
will be expanded to PADAAM with the participation of new stakeholders and/or focal



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

4

points. Four participatory territorial planning committees will be created in the four
ADPs in question – the south of pole 4, pole 5 and poles 6 and 7).

20. PADAAM’s execution will involve an array of complementary functions divided into
two categories: (i) the country programme functions already established in ProCar
(financial administration and management, procurement, monitoring and
evaluation, communication and knowledge management, gender, young adults and
targeting, etc.); and (ii) specific technical functions, which will be buttressed by
technical assistance.

21. In the ADPs, PADAAM will be implemented by the ATDAs, which will be supported
with technical assistance under a mandate governed by a clear and assured exit
strategy with a three-year horizon, capacity building and the acquisition of
competencies by the ATDAs. ProCar programme functions in the four ADPs will be
guaranteed by two regional support units.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

22. The planning and budgeting of PADAAM activities will be built on the work
programmes and annual budgets, prepared using a bottom-up approach. The
participatory territorial planning committees will meet in the ADPs each year to
validate the work programmes and annual budget, which will ultimately be
submitted to ProCar for approval during the annual sessions of the CNP.

23. The PADAAM monitoring and evaluation system will be anchored in the ProCar
system and implement a results-based management system, using the programme
approach adopted in 2016 and the monitoring and coordination mechanism of the
National Value-chain Development Programmes fostered by the ATDAs responsible
for their coordination. The system will be buttressed by: (i) monitoring and
evaluation assistants assigned to the regional support units, (ii) the creation of a
data-gathering mechanism and tools to ensure optimal and regular information
about the PADAAM’s chain of results, and (iii) the ProCar database, along with
those of the ATDAs in the ADPs.

24. Learning, knowledge management and communication. PADAAM will base its
learning and knowledge management system on ProCar’s monitoring and
evaluation mechanism. A management plan will be prepared at project start-up to
specify the different communication products and tools that should be developed,
the most suitable formats and support for the different types of users and the
frequency with which these products and tools should be developed.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. This will be based on the ProCar mechanisms and

procedures for the execution of portfolio operations. Resource management will
follow country and IFAD procedures. ProCar will prepare the financial statements,
which it will regularly transmit to the Government and IFAD.

26. Procurement. The works and supplies, as well as the consulting and advisory
services necessary for the project, will be delivered in accordance with the current
Benin procurement code, insofar as they are aligned with IFAD’s procurement
mechanisms. Within the framework of productive partnerships and rural
microenterprise promotion, the beneficiaries – farmers’ organizations and young
promoters of rural enterprises – will participate in procurement through the specific
modalities defined in the manuals.

27. Governance. PADAAM will apply the principles of good governance: (i) to the
national orientation and monitoring committee’s mobilization and participation
mechanism through Benin’s civil society stakeholders’ platform; (ii) thanks to the
territorial decentralization groups’ involvement in creating facilitating infrastructure
for the implementation of productive partnerships; (iii) through beneficiary



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

5

participation in the planning and evaluation of investments; and (iv) by overseeing
the implementation of partnership business plans by farmers’ organizations.

E. Supervision
28. PADAAM supervision will consist of two supervision missions per year, organized

and conducted jointly by IFAD, the Government and the principal stakeholders,
notably the members of the CNP and the ADP participatory territorial planning
committees. Supervision will be conducted using the new online Operational Results
Management System, which will facilitate the updating of data and information on
the project’s status. The first supervision mission will essentially support project
start-up by establishing the implementation mechanism at all levels, finalizing the
mandates, and issuing the tender documents for the baseline studies and other
priority activities. The supervision missions will particularly emphasize
implementation monitoring, achievement of the results, outcomes and impacts and
the effectiveness of institutional and technical outcomes intended for consolidation
and replication on a large scale. Specific implementation support missions can also
be organized as needed.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total cost of PADAAM, including provisions for physical contingencies and price

increases, is EUR 89.5 million. The base cost is EUR 84.1 million. The amount for
physical and financial contingencies is EUR 5.4 million. Taxes, which are included,
come to EUR 8.4 million.

30. Project costs can be broken down into the following components: (i) strengthening
of partnerships and creation of value added: evaluated at EUR 39.4 million, or
44 per cent of the total project cost; (ii) improvement of agricultural productivity
and production: EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total project cost; and
(iii) coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management:
EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the total project cost.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs, by component and financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap OFID Private sector Banks/SFD
Beninese
Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of partnerships and creation of value added
Partnership
development

4 390 14.6 4 390 14.6 11 971 39.7 4 807 15.9 628 2.1 1 850 6.1 2 131 7.1 30 167 33.7

Capacity-
building

1 778 19.4 1 778 19.4 5 229 56.9 301 3.3 106 1.2 9 193 10.3

Subtotal 6 168 15.7 6 168 15.7 17 200 43.7 4 807 12.2 628 1.6 2 151 5.5 2 237 5.7 39 360 44
B. Improvement of agricultural productivity and production

Access to inputs,
services, cross-
cutting support

1 936 18.8 1 936 18.8 4 946 48 466 4.5 410 4 600 5.8 10 295 11.5

Infrastructure
development

3 122 10.5 3 122 10.5 9 784 32.8 8 561 28.7 5 243 17.6 29 832 33.3

Subtotal 5 059 12.6 5 059 12.6 14 730 36.7 8 561 21.3 466 1.2 5 653 14.1 600 1.5 40 126 44.8
C. Coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management

Coordination
and
management

1 514 21.4 1 514 21.4 3 607 50.9 444 6.3 7 080 7.9

Monitoring and
evaluation and
knowledge
management

573 19.4 573 19.4 1 687 57 128 4.3 2 961 3.3

Subtotal 2 087 20.8 2 087 20.8 5 295 52.7 573 5.7 10 041 11.2
Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100

B. Project financing
31. The project financing plan is as follows:

(i) IFAD, for a total of EUR 26.6 million, or 29.8 per cent of the total project cost
(50 per cent in the form of a loan granted under highly concessional terms
and 50 per cent in the form of a grant through the Debt Sustainability
Framework), under the PBAS 2016-2018 cycle;

(ii) OFID, for EUR 8.6 million, or 9.6 per cent of the total project cost;

(iii) The private sector, for EUR 4.8 million, or 5.4 per cent of the total project
cost;

(iv) Financial institutions, for EUR 1.1 million, or 1.2 per cent of the total project
cost;

(v) Beninese Government, for EUR 8.4 million, or 9.4 per cent of the total project
cost; and

(vi) Beneficiaries, for EUR 2.8 million, or 3.2 per cent of the total project cost.

32. This yields a financing gap of EUR 37.2 million, or 41.6 per cent of the total project
cost, which can be filled by future allocations from IFAD (through financing
modalities to be determined, based on internal procedures and approval by the
Executive Board), or any other source of financing to be determined in the course
of project implementation. The financing from the Beninese Government consists
solely of the exemption of duties and taxes on project acquisitions.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category/financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan
IFAD

grant
Finaning

gap OFID
Private

sector
Banks/SF

D

Beninese
gover
nment

Beneficiar
ies Total

Categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Works 2 549 10.3 2 549 10.3 8 148 32.8 7 094 28.6 4 465 18 24 803 27.7
Equipment and
matérial a

1 380 18.9 1 380 18.9 2 862 39.0 22 0.3 1 685 23 7 328 8.2

Goods, services
and inputs

1 436 19.7 1 436 19.7 4 030 55.2 12 0.2 365 5 21 0.3 7 301 8.2

Consultancies b 2 056 15.9 2 056 15.9 5 732 44.3 1 330 10.3 1 755 13.6 12 929 14.4
Training c 2 327 20 2 327 20 6 537 56.2 104 0.9 346 3 11 640 13.0
Grants and
subsidies

2 875 12.9 2 875 12.9 8 232 36.8 4 807 21.5 1 094 4.9 2 470 11.1 22 353 25

Operating costs 109 18.5 109 18.5 266 45.1 106 18 591 0.7
Salaries and
allowances

581 22.5 581 22.5 1 420 55 2 582 2.9

Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100
a Including vehicles.
b Studies, including domestic and international technical assistance.
c Including workshops.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. PADAAM’s financial analysis examined: (i) smallholder maize

and cassava farmers; (ii) small wetlands operations; and (iii) different types of
partnership initiatives between farmers and the private sector in the form of simple
partnerships, public-private-producer partnerships (4P) and co-enterprises. The
analysis was aimed at determining the feasibility of the activities in terms of the
return on investment throughout the project and ensuring that the funds invested
came from the farmer, the project or a credit institution. It consisted, on the one
hand, of evaluating farmers’ capacity to generate net positive results, and on the
other, of analysing their financial situation to ensure that financial equilibrium was
maintained for the continuity of the activity, bearing in mind the conditions of
access to credit in the project area and the cofinancing rules established for the
project. The results, summarized in the table below, indicate that all the models
included have a satisfactory financial return.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

8

Table 3
PADAAM economic model summary

Models Cost-benefit Ratio
Financial Internal

Rate of
Return

NPV (8.5%)

FCFA USD
EUR

1. Agricultural production models
Maize/cassava model 2.9 104% 3 881 463 7 255 6 223
Wetlands management type 1 1.2 13% 9 355 186 17 486 14 999
Wetlands management type 2 1.1 13% 11 990 007 22 411 19 224
Wetlands management type 3 1.4 19% 38 169 833 71 345 61 198

2. Models for increasing value added
Creation of ESOPa-Rice 1.2 32% 388 379 283 725 943 622 699
Strengthening of ESOP-Rice 1.3 46% 433 770 696 810 786 695 476
Creation of ESOP-Cassava 1.1 29% 242 930 261 454 075 389 496
4P PIVERTB/ESSORc -Maize 1.1 17% 44 129 563 82 485 70 754
4P PIVERT/ESSOR-Cassava 1.2 26% 103 466 044 193 394 165 890
4P Agribusiness-Maize 1.5 33% 45 872 520 85 743 73 549
Simple contracting–Cassava 1.1 24% 14 007 311 26 182 22 458
Simple contracting-Maize 1.2 22% 19 152 330 35 799 30 708
Simple contracting-Rice 1.3 54% 114 071 931 213 219 182 895

a Producer services and organization enterprise.
b Green innovation, rural energy and transformation pole.
c Solidarity Enterprise for Services to Rural People.

34. Economic results and sensitivity analysis. Given the wide range of activities
foreseen, PADAAM will have many economic benefits, the totality of which cannot
be addressed in calculating the economic return indicators, such as the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) and the net present value (NPV). Nevertheless, the
analysis covers the project’s main benefits and the resulting support for production
(rice, maize and cassava), support for the creation and strengthening of
stakeholder partnerships (simple contracting, 4Ps, co-enterprises) and the
rehabilitation of rural feeder roads.

35. The project’s EIRR is established at 18.9 per cent, and the NPV, with an economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6 per cent, at EUR 54.2 million. This is a very
satisfactory result, all the more so because certain benefits could not be included in
the calculations due to insufficient data for their evaluation – for example, the
effects of capacity building and the construction of storage facilities, which have
improved food security. Overall, the project will have a positive impact on the
entire economy and especially on women and young adults, who are its priority
target groups.

36. The sensitivity analysis yields very robust results. Even in the case of a 30 per cent
drop in income, a 50 per cent increase in costs or a two-year lag in profits, the
economic rate of return remains largely above the opportunity cost of capital (6 per
cent), and the NPV, at more than EUR 20.6 million. Calculation of the switching
values shows that, all things being equal, the project’s economic return will be nil
only if its profits fall by 56 per cent or its costs increase by 125 per cent.

D. Sustainability
37. PADAAM will develop and/or improve the sustainability of the investments made at

different levels of the ADPs, thanks to its approach aimed at guaranteeing their
ownership by the beneficiaries and furthering beneficiary empowerment, thereby
limiting backsliding after project completion. The dynamics of the programme
approach in place since the advent of ProCar will consolidate the synergy of the
interventions and strengthen the sustainability of the achievements.

38. PADAAM’s actions will contribute to: (i) the institutional sustainability of farmers’
organizations and mixed groups of professionals in the targeted value chains, and
the strengthening of ATDAs through institutional support; (ii) the economic and
financial viability of the actors involved in the partnerships and business initiatives
developed by farmers’ organizations or young rural entrepreneurs; (iii) on the one



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

9

hand, the sustainability of the infrastructure that will be built in collaboration with
the decentralized territorial groups during implementation of their communal
development plans, and on the other, the involvement of the beneficiaries, who will
be organized to ensure the sustainable maintenance and management of the
infrastructure and facilities; and (iv) environmental sustainability and the promotion
of measures to increase target groups’ resilience to climate change. In addition, the
results of the sensitivity test performed as part of the economic and financial
analysis show the robustness of the project in the face of risks.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks for PADAAM are associated with: (i) the innovative nature of the

value-chain approach in the ADPs: (ii) the recent advent of the ATDAs as overseers
of the execution of the national value-chain promotion strategy; (iii) the weak
structure of the value chains’ APOs, and (iv) external factors, such as climate
change. These risks have been clearly identified and mitigation measures put in
place, among them: (i) the strengthening of ATDA technical functions and the
gradual transfer of project supervision; (ii) support for the establishment of APOs
and the improvement of their governance; (iii) the dissemination of drought-
resistant varieties, cultivation systems and conservation practices in agriculture;
and (iv) agricultural insurance. The project’s environmental and social risks put it in
Category “B.” The risks associated with climate change are considered moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies

40. IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025. PADAAM is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic
Framework 2016-2025, which fosters inclusive and sustainable transformation of
the rural world. PADAAM will engage in activities aimed at the attainment of IFAD’s
three strategic objectives, which are to: (i) increase poor rural people’s productive
capacity; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and
(iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural
people’s economic activities.

41. COSOP 2018-2022. PADAAM is included in IFAD’s strategy note for Benin, which
pursues the following strategic objectives: (i) Productive capacity, resilience to
climate change, and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural populations are
sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets is improved.

42. IFAD strategy on climate change. The project is aligned with the IFAD strategy
on climate change, especially the following objectives: (i) support innovative
approaches to make smallholder farmers, both women and men, more resilient to
climate change; (ii) help smallholder farmers take advantage of the available
measures and financing to mitigate its effects; and (iii) establish a more coherent
dialogue on climate change, rural development, agriculture and food security.

43. Natural resource and environmental management. PADAAM is aligned with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011) and is based
on the following guiding principles: (i) engagement in value chains to drive green
growth (principle 5); and (ii) promote climate-smart approaches to rural
development (principle 3).

44. IFAD targeting strategy. The project’s targeting strategy espouses IFAD’s policy,
which is based on targeting that is geographic, direct and self-targeting. PADAAM
engages with poor rural people, women and young adults, the priority beneficiaries
at the heart of IFAD interventions. The different profiles of the target groups have
been considered in the project support, notably through an analysis by sex and
age, as well as wherewithal (degree of wealth). PADAAM also integrates the issues
of gender and youth in its targeting and throughout the project’s life cycle. The
development of gender and youth targeting strategies and mechanisms was



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

10

introduced during the project design phase. These strategies also sought to devise
measures to promote empowerment, facilitation, and execution during its
implementation. The project will also ensure that these elements are well-
integrated during results monitoring and impact assessment.

45. Integration of smallholder farmers and the private sector in agricultural
value chains. PADAAM’s development approach is focused on value chains and
based on an overall analysis of the entire value chain (for each of the three value
chains – rice, maize and cassava). The value-chain approach adopted considers all
stakeholders in each of them (in addition to poor rural people, young adults, and
women, who are IFAD’s main target group) and their interactions. The market is
considered a driving force, and the activities are based on an assessment of the
demand and the capacity of markets to absorb additional production. PADAAM
encourages private-sector engagement to promote the forging of 4P partnerships
that facilitate access to markets.

46. Social, environmental and climate evaluation procedures. Aligned.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. PADAAM is aligned with the PAG and the PSDSA 2025, whose implementation it

supports by concentrating on the strategy to promote the three conventional value
chains. Project execution will respect the principles of coordination by value chain
established at the sector level and will support implementation of the national
development plans for these value chains overseen by the ATDAs.

48. In addition to the usual services, ProCar aims at fostering greater complementarity
between PADAAM and IFAD-funded operations, in alignment with the Adapted Rural
Financing Services Promotion Project and the Market Gardening Development
Support Project.

49. PADAAM’s targeting will consider the presence of the other bilateral and multilateral
partners operating in the project areas and the need for complementarity. In order
to ensure good coordination in the value chains, prior to start-up a study will be
conducted to update the intervention plan with the support of other technical and
financial partners such as the French Development Agency, German cooperation,
Belgian cooperation, Swiss cooperation, Netherlands cooperation, Canadian
cooperation, the European Union, the African Development Bank, the World Food
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank, etc.

C. Innovation and scaling up
50. PADAAM is one of the first development projects formulated under the PAG. It will

support the national strategy to promote ADPs, innovatively combining the
geographic and value-chain approaches.

51. PADAAM will replicate IFAD’s strategy to further the social and economic inclusion
of poor rural people and scale up successful integrated and innovative approaches
to agricultural value-chain development in order to promote intensified use of
innovative production and processing technologies, efficient agricultural and
agro-industrial contracting practices and appropriate financing and risk
management mechanisms in the agricultural production system. While employing a
diachronic approach, the PADAAM design values the achievements of the recently
sunsetted IFAD interventions – that is, the Rural Development Support Programme
and the Rural Economic Growth Support Project.

D. Policy engagement
52. The project is aimed at grassroots capacity building, especially through

consolidation of the technical, economic, organizational, and operational
competencies of APOs (unions and federations) and mixed groups of professionals.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

11

The goal is to endow their structures for representation with greater legitimacy and
enable them to actively participate in policy-making.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD is the legal

instrument under whose terms the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Benin is authorized under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

55. I hereby certify that the proposed financing is consistent with the stipulations of the
Agreement Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing by adopting

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Republic of Benin under
highly concessional terms in an amount of thirteen million three hundred
twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of
thirteen million three hundred twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
















































President’s report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the
Western States Agribusiness Project


Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Western States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$20.26 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$8.98 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a 10-year
grace period and a service charge of three quarters
of one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: US$3.98 million

Financing gap

Cofinancier(s):

US$4.47 million

Implementing partners

Amount of cofinancing: US$1.05 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$0.99 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.78 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness
Project, as contained in paragraph 54.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context

1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive
path of political and economic reforms since 2011. These aim to introduce elements
of popular representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and
inclusive social development, improve the business environment, attract foreign
investment and reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar’s population was estimated at 53.9 million in 2015, of which some
66 per cent is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic groups
and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being resource-rich, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia. An estimated one third of the population were living below the poverty line in
2005, but this proportion had dropped to one fourth by 2014. The 2015 Human
Development Report ranked the country 148th among the 188 nations rated, with a
human development index of 0.536. Myanmar’s per capita gross national income
was estimated at US$1,160 in 2015. The annual growth rate of gross domestic
product accelerated from 4.8 per cent in 2011 to 7.2 per cent in 2015, while
inflation was reported at 8.4 per cent at the end of that year.

4. The agriculture sector is the core of the economy, generating 37 per cent of GDP
and employing about 70 per cent of the working population in 2015. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty; and there is significantly
greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also higher among ethnic
groups compared to the majority population.

5. Disparities exist among and within states and within communities. Rural poverty is
largely a function of poor resource endowments. The rural poor are typically
landless people and small and marginal farmers, usually owning between less than
one and five acres of land. They lack access to adequate food and to essential non-
food items and services. Many of the poorest live in isolated hill tracts and upland
areas of ethnic states, which were previously ravaged by decades of civil conflict
that left them isolated and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. IFAD’s strategy in Myanmar is to support the Government in creating a model for
agricultural modernization and rural transformation in each agroecological zone of
the country. The first investment – the Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in
Myanmar (FARM project) – created the model for agricultural development, service
delivery and enterprise growth in the central dry zone. This model is now being
scaled up by development partners and the Government across the entire dry zone.
The second investment – the Eastern States Agribusiness Project – establishes the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

2

model for agribusiness development and community agroforestry, and will create
farming and employment opportunities across the eastern hilly zone for ethnic
groups, indigenous people, ex-combatants, and returning migrants. The third
investment – the Western States Agribusiness Project – to be financed under the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle – creates the model
for climate-resilient agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods, to be implemented across the western upland areas and forests. With
these projects, IFAD is fulfilling its strategic objective of helping the Government
create optimal models for modernizing agriculture across agroecological zones, with
a strong focus on the ethnic states.

7. The project’s rationale is anchored in the Government’s policies to reduce economic
and social disparities in rural areas. It is consistent with the National
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for Economic and Social
Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development Action Plan. The
project’s rationale has four dimensions: (i) to provide a systemic structural
response to the challenges of, and opportunities for, rural transformation in
southern Chin and northern Magway; (ii) to create a model for the environmentally
sustainable modernization of agriculture in degraded sloping areas, which generates
economic benefits for poor households; (iii) to rehabilitate productive infrastructure
in ways that optimize sustainable use of the natural resource base; and (iv) to
forge pathways for communities to transition from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods through better access to inputs, knowledge and services. Activities for
livelihood-support and nutrition-sensitive agriculture have also been included, to
address important needs among local communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project is located in southern Chin State and the northern Magway Region,

which share a common river basin. These areas have among the highest
concentrations of poverty in Myanmar. Chin State is located in the hilly western
border area. Its people belong to the Chin ethnic group and its 53 officially
recognized subgroups. Southern Chin is home to some of the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. Magway Region is situated in the central dry
zone, and its population is mostly of the Bamar ethnic group. The region is poor
and food-insecure, and has suffered a series of natural calamities and major
harvest losses in recent years.

9. The project’s target groups consist of: (i) small and medium-scale farming
households in upland and lowland areas; (ii) livestock producers; and
(iii) non-farming and landless households. Women and women-led households will
be prioritized; and youth, as the primary agents of change at the community level,
will be the focus of activities involving technological innovation and
commercialization.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s goal is to improve the social and economic status of rural households

in a climate-resilient manner in the northern Magway Region and southern
Chin State. Its objective is to increase household incomes and enhance food
security and nutrition quality. Its investments focus on commodities and services
that have comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project’s two expected outcomes are: (i) access to productive and social

infrastructure is improved; and (ii) technological, financial and policy environment
for small farmers and agribusinesses is enhanced.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

3

12. Component 1: Infrastructure. The project will finance strategic investments in
productive and social infrastructure.

13. Subcomponent 1.1: Productive infrastructure. The project will finance:
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to ensure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to farms; (ii) rural access roads linking farms to markets; (iii) irrigation
technology for home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity; and,
(iv) land consolidation on a pilot basis. These investments will generate
opportunities for increased incomes, reduce on-farm and off-farm production costs,
and improve food security for communities and households. They will also improve
water management, reduce water conveyance and application losses by
30-40 per cent, improve drainage and reduce siltation, and conserve groundwater.

14. Subcomponent 1.2: Social infrastructure. The project will invest in social
infrastructure facilities mainly at the household level, particularly targeting the
needs of women and the poorest households. Domestic water supply, rainwater
harvesting, and renewable energy solutions will be eligible for support. Scheme
selection will be participatory, sensitive to cultural considerations, and subject to
social, technical, financial and environmental feasibility. The ownership,
management, operation and maintenance of all facilities constructed will be
optimized to ensure sustainability.

15. Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity-building. The project will build capacities in the
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department and the Department of
Rural Development of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MoALI) –
responsible for productive and social infrastructure respectively. This will be done
through the provision of technical assistance; strengthening of staffing and office
facilities; awareness of water, sanitation and hygiene issues; awareness of
nutritional diversity; and capacity development for social mobilization.

16. Component 2: Services. The project will invest in agricultural modernization and
enabling services to optimize resource management, productivity and benefits in
areas of infrastructure investment.

17. Subcomponent 2.1: Agricultural modernization. The project will invest in a
range of agriculture, livestock and technical services to modernize production and
trigger improvements in food security and nutrition, livelihoods, and economic
returns. Services delivered to farming households will include land titling,
technology transfer, skill development, access to inputs and supplies, access to
markets and information, contractual linkages, and access to financial resources.
Climate-resilient sloping agricultural land technology will be promoted. Services
delivered to the landless will focus on technical and business management skills,
microenterprise development and private-sector linkages.

18. Subcomponent 2.2: Financial services. Building on FARM experiences, the
project will support financial inclusion for small farmers, livestock owners and the
landless, ensuring equal access for ethnic groups and women. It will invest in:
(i) savings and credit groups, promoting financial literacy; (ii) a rural business fund
to support microenterprises; (iii) an agribusiness fund to help agribusinesses set up
processing facilities in the project area; and (iv) a line of credit to refinance project-
related agriculture, livestock and enterprise-lending operations by licensed financial
institutions.

19. Subcomponent 2.3: Policy engagement. The project will contribute to an
inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for rural development in Myanmar,
specifically related to the project’s implementation experiences. It will focus on:
(i) transition from shifting to sedentary agriculture and associated customary land
laws; (ii) re-categorization of high-value commercial crops from non-timber forest
products to agricultural or industrial crops; and (iii) agricultural service delivery and
market linkages.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. Based on an institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar
contexts and the country strategy, the project’s implementation approach is to:
(i) strengthen MoALI and other relevant agencies at the state level, and increase
their responsibilities for implementing activities in a sequenced manner; (ii) engage
with reputable implementing partners to serve as lead technical agencies and to
gradually devolve responsibilities to public agencies as their capacities mature;
(iii) establish small state-level project implementation offices (PIOs) for
coordinating implementation at state level and for monitoring and reporting on
progress ; and (iv) establish a project management unit (PMU) in the Department
of Rural Development (DRD) that will be integrated within DRD structures. The PMU
will be responsible for project implementation, fiduciary management, work
planning and budgeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and policy interface
functions. It will manage contracts with implementing partners and public and
private entities.

B. Organizational framework
21. MoALI, in its capacity as lead project agency, will be responsible and accountable

for the project. The DRD of MoALI will be the project's focal department. The
Ministry of Planning and Finance will enter into subsidiary financing agreements
(SFA) with selected licensed financial institutions for administration of the credit
line.

22. The project will be governed by a National Project Steering Committee and two
project coordination committees (one in each location). It will be managed by the
central PMU established within DRD and the two decentralized PIOs (one in each
location).

23. The project will be executed by implementing partners, MoALI at the state level,
and the private sector. They will lead social mobilization, community interfacing and
policy engagement. Infrastructure will be implemented by the Irrigation and Water
Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) and DRD, in collaboration with
private-sector engineering firms and contractors, as required. Agricultural
modernization will be implemented by MoALI knowledge centres (KCs), brokering
services and markets for the target groups, in collaboration with producer
associations and community organizations. Financial services will be provided by
licensed financial institutions.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. The annual work plan and budget will be the key management tool for
planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. It will be
based on project design, cost tables and the implementation manual; and it will be
informed by operational experiences and challenges. The logical framework will
constitute the main reference for framing annual work plan and budgets, to create
clear linkages among proposed activities, budget requirements and expected
outputs, outcomes and impacts. A participatory planning approach will be applied,
to ensure that project investments reflect the target groups’ needs and aspirations.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. The project’s M&E system will be designed to provide
reliable information to facilitate results-based management. It will be aligned with
the M&E system developed under the FARM, and will help strengthen MoALI’s
system for monitoring the effectiveness of official development assistance. The M&E
system will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring, focusing on physical
and financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring, focusing on the
use of outputs and measurement of benefits at the household and community



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

5

levels; and (iii) impact assessment, evaluating impacts against objectives. All M&E
data, analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by poverty status, gender, and
ethnicity.

26. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s learning system will be
structured at the state, region and central levels. It will capture information on
progress, lessons and solutions to implementation constraints. A consolidated
annual project review will be performed towards the end of each fiscal year, to
assess physical and financial progress against the targets and towards the
objectives.

27. Knowledge management will be a systematic feature throughout the project. To
enable effective knowledge management and sharing, results and lessons from the
project will be systematically documented through specific studies and knowledge
products commissioned by the PMU and/or the PIOs. The M&E system will be a key
knowledge source. Innovations observed during implementation will be documented
for possible scaling up. The MoALI and PMU will be responsible for sharing
knowledge documents through dedicated websites, workshops and seminars.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating

measures: (i) financial reporting based on automated systems; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) use of a financial management manual
integrating controls with operations; (iv) technical assistance and external
oversight; (v) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits and
independent external audits; and (vi) a good governance framework to ensure
accountability and transparency.

29. Financial management. The PMU will be responsible for all aspects of project
financial management, including budgeting, financial statements and reporting,
withdrawal applications for IFAD disbursements, and the coordination of audit
processes.

30. Flow of funds. Designated accounts in United States dollars will be opened for the
IFAD loan and the IFAD grant, and will be operated using the imprest method. Bank
accounts denominated in local currency will be opened at the PMU level, with
signatories at appropriate level for operational efficiency.

31. Financial reporting. The PMU will maintain separate accounts for the project, in
accordance with the cash basis of accounting. The financial statements prepared for
the project will be supplemented with additional data as necessary, so as to provide
minimum disclosures under international accounting standards.

32. Project expenditure will be recorded using the accounting software currently used
by the PMU of another ongoing project in MoALI. Further customization is foreseen
to enhance the software’s reporting capability.

33. Taxes. IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, adopted
in 2009 and amended in 2014, allow IFAD financing to be used to pay taxes. The
payment of taxes with IFAD funding is foreseen for the project. The Ministry of
Planning and Finance has formally requested IFAD to cover taxes on the basis that
tax exemption is impractical and the tax burden is low.

34. Audit. The project will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General of the Union
(OAG), which has adopted INTOSAI audit standards. OAG conducts mostly financial
audits, with some procurement and performance audits.

35. Procurement. IFAD procurement guidelines will apply to the project. The
programme implementation manual will specify detailed procurement requirements
and procedures. The procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and
time estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

6

Borrower and reflected in the procurement plan. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop PMU and PIO procurement capacities.

E. Supervision
36. The project will be supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation support

mission will be undertaken annually; and MoALI offices at the central, state and
regional levels will participate in these missions. A midterm review mission will be
undertaken jointly by IFAD and the Government at the end of the third year of
implementation, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging
impact and likely sustainability of project activities, and to make recommendations
and any adjustments for the remaining project period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total project cost, including duties, taxes and contingencies, is estimated at

US$20.26 million over a six-year implementation period. Indicative costs for each
component are detailed in table 1. Indicative costs by expenditure categories are
provided in table 2.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Infrastructure 4 065 58.6 1 124 16.2 963 13.9 780 11.2 6 932
1.1 Productive
infrastructure 3 573 83.2 278 6.5 117 2.7 327 7.6 4 294
1.2 Social
infrastructure 146 9.1 627 39.0 383 23.8 453 28.1 1 610
1.3 Capacity-building 346 33.7 219 21.3 463 45.0 1 028

2. Services 3 938 32.4 2 854 23.5 1 050 8.6 3 509 28.9 796 6.6 12 146
2.1 Agricultural
modernization 1 148 12.4 2 854 30.8 1 050 11.3 3 427 37.0 796 8.6 9 275
2.2 Financial services 2 708 100.0 2 708
2.3 Policy engagement 81 50.0 81 50.0 163

3. Project management 981 83.2 198 16.8 1 179
Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$8.98 million, an IFAD grant of

US$3.98 million, a government contribution of US$0.99 million, a
beneficiary/private-sector contribution of US$0.78 million, and implementing
partners’ cost-sharing of US$1.05 million. The financing gap of US 4.47 million may
be sourced through cofinancing identified during implementation or through a
subsequent PBAS cycle.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil works 3 256 91.9 44 1.2 117 3.3 127 3.6 3 554
2. Vehicles 255 100 255
3. Equipment 24 100 24
4. Consulting

services 633 21.2 1 489 52.5 861 30.3 2 984
5. Training 661 38.0 303 17.4 777 44.6 1 741
6. Goods,

services
and inputs 1 615 23.0 2 141 30.5 1 050 15.0 1 528 21.8 652 9.3 29 0.4 7 015

7. Credit 2 276 100 2 276
8. Salaries

and
allowances 152 8.6 1 189 67.7 416 23.7 1 757

9. Operating
costs 104 15.9 549 84.1 652

Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257
*

Disbursement categories will be specified in schedule 2 of the negotiated financing agreement. A maximum of six disbursement categories is
envisaged to allow sufficient flexibility during implementation.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. The project is expected to directly benefit 76,810 households, of which 10,190 in

Chin and 66,620 in Magway, encompassing a total of 390,410 rural women and
men. Many additional households will indirectly benefit from project activities. The
estimated project cost per beneficiary household is US$327.

40. Project benefits will be generated from improved infrastructure, land tenure,
agricultural technology, market access, enterprise growth and financial services.
The main beneficiaries will be small farming households, landless/tenant
households, and off-farm households. The key results will be higher incomes,
additional jobs, better food security and nutrition, and secured climate resilience.

41. The project’s economic internal rate of return over 20 years is estimated at
32 per cent.

D. Sustainability
42. The sustainability of project investments is based on the underlying business

relationships that the project will generate between small farmers and markets, and
between enterprises and markets. Global development experiences have shown
that profitable business relationships are an optimal instrument for making
investments sustainable and for breaking the cycle of dependency and poverty.

43. Project sustainability is also based on: (i) access to knowledge: KCs will be low-cost
facilities that will eventually operate on a cost recovery basis; (ii) access to
markets: upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes
will ensure smallholder access to markets; (iii) access to land: the project will
invest in securing land tenure and ownership, particularly in Chin State; (iv) access
to water: irrigation and drainage improvement, combined with participatory water
management, will improve water distribution and operation and maintenance;
(v) access to basic needs: social infrastructure will cover underlying needs related
to food security, nutrition, and domestic water supply; (vi) access to finance:
financial inclusion activities will link smallholders and landless microentrepreneurs
to the formal financial sector; and (vii) access to extension: use of MoALI extension
officers as KC managers trained by the project will ensure continuity in service
delivery.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

8

44. Exit strategy. The project’s exit strategy is to strengthen public institutions at the
central and state levels, to rely on a range of institutional service providers for
implementation, to foster profitable business relationships among producers and
markets, and to improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
45. The project’s main risks are in the governance, expropriation, fiduciary and capacity

areas. They will be mitigated by a robust project governance framework, a set of
legal assurances to be negotiated with the Government, substantial technical
assistance and capacity-building, and the underlying business relationships to be
fostered.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. The project’s goal and objectives are aligned with the Strategic Framework
2016-2025 in terms of market-driven smallholder development and rural business
growth. It is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines,
and in particular with the Fund’s policies on targeting, rural finance, land tenure,
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, as well as with the partnership and climate change strategies, and
the Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
47. The project’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s poverty reduction mandate and the

Government’s policy for reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar’s National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of multilateral and bilateral development partners, and with the
Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Working Group.

Innovations and scaling upC.
48. Innovation. The project is the first substantial investment in Myanmar’s western

states to address the climate change challenges posed by erratic rainfall, intra- and
inter-annual drought, and record high temperatures that are undermining farm
productivity and the livelihood options of the rural poor. It introduces several
innovations in its model for climate-smart agricultural development in the
upland/lowland areas of the western states. Key innovations in the Myanmar
context include: (i) introduction of sloping agricultural land technology;
(ii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iii) livelihood diversification, with potential for greater value-added; (iv) promotion
of smallholder-driven small businesses and microenterprises; and (v) support for
adapted rural finance products and services.

49. Scaling up potential. Given the transient nature of the current agriculture sector
regulatory framework in Myanmar, particularly in view of the major political
changes that occurred in 2015, there is an important window of opportunity for
scaling up the methodologies and results pioneered by IFAD-financed operations in
Myanmar. The country programme is engaging in this in two ways: (i) successful
service delivery models are already being replicated and brought to scale in other
parts of the country by the Government, partners, and the private sector; and
(ii) policy engagement opens avenues for scaling up investments based on
implementation experiences, the fostering of stakeholder alliances to capture policy
proposals, capacity-building for policy development, and the promotion of policy
advocacy within national processes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

9

Policy engagementD.
50. The project will contribute to an inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for

rural development in Myanmar, specifically related to the project’s implementation
experiences. It will support formulation of the policies and regulations needed to
enhance and sustain project investments, and to contribute to the ongoing policy
discussions on broader agricultural modernization and rural transformation. Policy
engagement will also aim at scaling up successful approaches in other states and
regions of the country, and will contribute to the project’s exit strategy.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
51. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

52. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

53. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
54. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to eight million
nine hundred and eighty four thousand United States dollars (US$8,984,000)
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to three million nine hundred
and seventy eight  thousand United States dollars (US$3,978,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President


















































President’s report

Proposal for a grant to the
Central African Republic for the
Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah


Central African Republic

Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the
Savannah

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Central African Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Health

Total project cost: US$29.04 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$12.4 million

Terms of IFAD grant: Grant under the Debt Sustainability Framework

Financing gap: US$12.6 million

Contribution of recipient: US$0.966 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.077 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Central African Republic for the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposal for a grant to the Central African Republic for
the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in
the Savannah

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Central African Republic (CAR) is classified as a country with a fragile situation.

The recent humanitarian and security crisis in 2013-2015 devastated the economy
and caused a quarter of the population to flee their homes. GDP fell 37 per cent in
2013, stabilizing at a growth rate on the order of 5 per cent between 2014 and
2016. Some 74 per cent of the population depend on the agropastoral sector, which
accounts for 52 per cent of GDP. With a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.352
in 2016, CAR ranks 188th of 188 countries,1 reflecting the poverty that affects an
estimated 67 per cent of the population as a whole and 72 per cent of rural people.
Life expectancy is 51.5 years. CAR’s population density is among the lowest in the
world with five million people and an area of 623,000 km2. About 60 per cent of
the country’s people live in rural areas and the population is very young, with 60
per cent under 25.

2. The causes of poverty include poor availability and management of agropastoral
production factors, destruction of the economic fabric and limited road access; a
lack of infrastructure and of efficient public services in rural areas; and scarce
economic opportunities, especially for young people. The conflicts continue to have
an adverse impact on food security. Ten armed groups are still operative in the
areas bordering Cameroon and Chad, and in the country’s central and eastern
regions. Many farmers have fled their land, while others have had no access to
agricultural inputs or agropastoral markets. Livestock keepers have lost their herds
or migrated to Cameroon. Nevertheless, the potential for agricultural development
is extraordinary with close to 15 million hectares of arable land and 20 million
hectares of permanent pasture, as well as a favourable climate. The vulnerability
profile, however, presents extreme hazards such as torrential rains, flooding and
drought.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The Central African Government and IFAD, based on lessons learned from the
Project for Reviving Food Crops and Small Livestock Production in the Savannah
(PREVES), which was completed on 31 December 2017, have designed the Project
to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the Savannah (PREPAS) to
consolidate and scale up gains under PREVES. PREPAS is in line with the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan (PNRCP) 2017-2021, which sets forth the
Government’s priorities and was the subject of the donors conference held in
Brussels in December 2016. The PNRCP has three pillars: (i) support for peace,
security and reconciliation; (ii) renewal of the social contract between the
Government and the people; and (iii) economic recovery and reactivation of

1 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Report 2017.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

2

productive sectors. PREPAS will contribute to the food security and productive
sector recovery objectives set under pillar 3.

4. In terms of IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-
2025 and the country strategy note 2018-2019 under which PREPAS is the only
investment planned.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro, Bossemptélé and

Yaloké, with a possible expansion to Bozoum following the midterm review.

6. PREPAS will target some 30,000 beneficiaries and their households, or some
240,000 people potentially reached by the project. The beneficiaries are essentially
poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers and agricultural producers, at least 50
per cent of them women, 30 per cent young people and 10 per cent heads of highly
vulnerable families. Given the marked vulnerability of women in the Central African
Republic, a gender equity strategy will be developed to promote their economic
empowerment. The project will support the integration of young people into
existing groups, establishment of youth groups and promotion of youth
entrepreneurship in specific activities such as market gardening, small livestock
raising or upstream and downstream production activities, particularly related to
marketing and processing, the seed subsector, farm mechanization and borehole
maintenance.

7. The 355 groups under PREVES will be supported in achieving a higher stage of
professionalization, while 445 new grass-roots groups will be structured with
training and start-up support, taking the total number of groups to 800, or 20,000
beneficiary households. In addition, 10,000 more households will benefit from
activities around nutrition, access to drinking water, animal hygiene and
vaccination, and structuring activities.

B. Project development objectives
8. The overall objective of PREPAS is to contribute to reducing poverty and sustainably

improving food and nutritional security in the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro,
Bossemptélé and Yaloké. The development objective is to strengthen the socio-
economic development framework and reactivate crop and livestock production
using approaches adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
9. Component 1: Promotion of community development. Expected outcome 1 is

improved community organization, nutrition and access to drinking water.

10. Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening of organizational capacities. The aim is to
create an enabling environment for sustainable project implementation, by focusing
on sensitizing and mobilizing populations, encouraging dialogue between crop and
livestock farmers, organizing producers into groups and providing functional literacy
training. The main outcomes expected under subcomponent 1 are: (i) 800 groups
organized through community facilitation; (ii) 1,600 technical delegates of these
groups having received organizational training; (iii) 3,200 people having received
literacy training; (iv) 5,000 group members participating in savings and credit
activities.

11. Subcomponent 1.2: Promotion of nutrition and access to drinking water.
Nutritional education designed to improve the beneficiaries’ dietary behaviours will
be accompanied with other nutrition-related activities to put in place a healthy and
balanced diet. This objective will be achieved with the increased availability of foods
with high nutritional value and their processing. In addition, the project will
strengthen institutional capacities in nutrition. The project is also intended to
rehabilitate or build 135 boreholes in the project area and to continue to guarantee



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

3

the operation of the 65 boreholes installed by PREVES. The boreholes will be
combined with the construction of latrines following the models and approaches
disseminated by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The main expected
outcomes under this subcomponent are: (i) 10,000 people having received
capacity-building in nutritional practices; (ii) 2,500 home gardens set up; (iii) 135
drinking water points constructed and 65 water points set up under PREVES
maintained; (iv) two spare parts warehouses installed; (v) 20 repairers trained.

12. Component 2: Productive investments. Expected outcome 2 will be producers
strengthened and recapitalized with more efficient production, processing and
marketing methods that are adapted to climate change. The products targeted will
be: (a) for crops: maize, cassava, groundnut, and red bean; and (b) for livestock:
poultry and smallstock – goats, sheep and pigs.

13. Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening of the supply of services to producers.
The aim is to improve the supply of extension services for farmers as follows: (i) an
effective system of outreach and advisory assistance, and better technical and
logistical capacities among public services; (ii) professionalization of the seed
subsector to recover the productivity of the targeted value chains; and (iii) a
livestock vaccination campaign. The expected outcomes are: (i) thematic materials
and toolkits developed for outreach; (ii) 28 master trainers trained; (iii) 1,600
technical delegates having received technical training; (iv) 800 groups having
received extension services; (v) the Central African Agricultural Research Institute
station in Bolée better equipped; and (vi) the National Livestock School in Bouar
rehabilitated.

14. Subcomponent 2.2: Support for production, processing and marketing. To
ensure efficient implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area,
various support modules will be used – network of seed producers, crop production,
livestock farming and market gardening – for the 800 groups. In addition, PREPAS
will support 150 modules benefiting 450 young people in areas such as:
(i) agricultural processing; (ii) transportation and marketing; (iii) input stores; and
(iv) mechanization. As part of the inclusion module for highly vulnerable
households, PREPAS will provide the most capable with start-up equipment
consisting of small-scale supplies and inputs to undertake farming, while
beneficiaries lacking labourers will receive small ruminants or poultry. They may
subsequently set up an agricultural or agropastoral group. The expected outcomes
under this subcomponent are as follows: (i) 800 agricultural, agropastoral and
market gardening groups, representing 20,000 households, having benefited from
crop, livestock and market gardening production modules; (ii) 8 ha of land
developed for market gardening and equipped with innovative irrigation devices,
mainly solar; (iii) 12 storage warehouses and eight input storehouses constructed;
and (iv) 450 young people supported and engaged in processing, marketing or
services upstream and downstream of the value chain.

15. Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and policy dialogue. The expected outcome of subcomponent 3.1 is better
coordination and M&E of rural sector interventions and knowledge management
that stimulates fruitful consultations and enhances the sector environment in favour
of sustainable agropastoral development.

16. Subcomponent 3.1: Knowledge management and policy dialogue. The aim is
to set up a rural sector coordination group (RSCG) linked to the PNRCP institutional
guidance and steering arrangements. In addition to this strengthening and the
creation of a consultative framework, the RSCG will specifically support the
development of a rural sector M&E system with the participation and alignment of
technical and financial partners. Data from the M&E system will be used in annual
rural sector reviews and consultation themes, which may lead to the formulation of
policies such as the National Agricultural Outreach Policy (PNVA).



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

4

17. Subcomponent 3.2: Coordination, management and M&E. The objective of
this subcomponent is to coordinate project interventions, provide effective and
transparent financial management of resources, promote ongoing improvements in
tools, approaches and methods of the actors, and coordinate the results-based M&E
process.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
18. The government services participating in project implementation are, at the

regional, prefectural and subprefectural level, the Central African Agency for
Agricultural Development (ACDA), National Agency for Livestock Development
(ANDE), Central African Institute of Agricultural Research (ICRA), the Regional
Directorates for Rural Development 1 and 2, the West Regional Directorates and
the Livestock Centre and the prefectural services of the Interministerial Unit for
Rural Roads Planning and Coordination (CIPC-PR). At the national level, the actors
concerned will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR)
Directorate General for Monitoring and Evaluation and the Directorates General of
ICRA, ACDA and ANDE.

19. At the national level, the project management and coordination unit (PMCU) will
sign agreements and performance contracts with government and non-government
partners in the different areas of project implementation. The technical agencies
AGDR, ANDE and ICRA will be accountable for the implementation of project
activities in crop and livestock agriculture under agreements and protocols for
collaboration concluded with the PCMU. Certain specific activities will be
implemented by operators and service providers and through national and
international technical assistance to be selected by competitive bidding and linked
to the project under performance contracts.

B. Organizational framework
20. PREPAS will be placed under the joint oversight of MADR and the Ministry of

Livestock and Animal Health (MESA). The two ministries will jointly provide
supervision and direct interaction with other sector ministries and technical and
financial partners, and will coordinate M&E activities in relation to recovery and
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic. The Ministry of Finance and Economy,
as recipient, will manage all funds and will be responsible for making counterpart
funding available in an effective and timely fashion.

21. National consultations will take place through a national steering committee to be
created by a joint decree of the Ministers of Agriculture and Livestock. The national
steering committee will bring together representatives of the sector ministries
involved in PREPAS implementation and representatives of producers’
organizations. Decentralized consultations will take place at the subprefectural
level, within consultative committees created by joint decree of the Ministers of
Agriculture and Livestock. Secretariat services will be provided by the PREPAS
bureau chief.

22. Project management will be provided by the PMCU based in Bangui, which will have
administrative and financial autonomy. The two subprefectural branches will be
located in Yaloké and Bouar. In alignment with IFAD guidelines for implementation
of projects in fragile situations, PREPAS will promote partnership-building and
technical assistance mobilization (UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Office for Project Services, the International
Institute of Tropical Agriculture, and the International Centre for Agricultural
Research for Development). This will allow for the scaling up of activities in year 3,
particularly in relation to drinking water access, training and production.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

5

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
23. Planning and budgeting for PREPAS activities will take place by means of annual

workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs). Beginning in year two, the draft AWP/B will
include a summary of results obtained and constraints encountered during the
preceding year. A flexible approach will be adopted to enable the AWP/B to be
revised in the course of the fiscal year as needed. The planning process will begin in
early September of each year so that the Government may transmit the AWP/B to
IFAD on 30 November at the latest. Since the M&E system was virtually nonexistent
during PREVES start-up, the project will develop an M&E system to steer
implementation of sector M&E, which will produce data for policy dialogue purposes.
The PREPAS M&E system will measure progress made on project implementation
and the results and impact on target groups, including core indicators from the
Operational Results Management System (ORMS). An M&E manual will be
developed. An automated database will be developed specifically for the project,
which will also be equipped with geographical information system (GIS) software
for intervention mapping. A knowledge management strategy will be developed at
project start-up and supported by the M&E system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Budgets will be prepared and approved in accordance with the management

manual. The budgets are to be specified and entered using accounting software.
The imprest accounts procedure will be used for disbursements. Prior conditions will
be met before the first disbursement. The management manual will outline all
control activities in detail. The PREPAS accounts will be kept on an accruals basis in
accordance with international accounting standards and the Organization for the
Harmonization of Business Law in Africa accounting system (SYSCOHADA). An
internal auditor will be hired and will report to the national steering committee or to
an audit committee. The external audit of the project will be done by a private audit
firm in accordance with IFAD guidelines.

25. Procurement will take place in accordance with IFAD guidelines and the public
procurement code of the Central African Republic. To the extent possible, contracts
will be grouped in such a way as to appeal to bidders, encourage competition and
obtain the bet offers. At project start-up, the PCMU will update the procurement
plan for the first 18 months and submit it to IFAD for approval. The procurement
plan will specify, inter alia, the procurement method for each contract and the
thresholds and preferences applicable within the project. Procurement plans for
subsequent years will be included in AWP/Bs and submitted for approval by the
steering committee and non objection of IFAD. Each procurement plan will stipulate
the procedures to be followed by bidders to ensure compliance with IFAD
procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
26. PREPAS supervision and financial administration will be done directly by IFAD, with

participation by representatives of MADR and MESA, with two supervision missions
per year. The first of these will be dedicated to supporting project start-up with
preparation of the first AWP/B, the procurement plan for the first 18 months, and
terms of reference for baseline studies and tender documents. In light of the fragile
context, significant resources will be allocated to the country office to ensure
continuous supervision and strong implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. PREPAS will be implemented over a period of six years. The project duration will be

reassessed at the midterm review given the fragile situations in the country. The
total project cost, including contingencies, is US$29.04 million (CFAF 15.9 billion).
Base cost is US$25.5 million (CFAF 14.0 billion). The project’s investment costs and
current expenses are, respectively, US$23.5 million (CFAF 12.9 billion) or 92 per



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

6

cent of base cost, and US$1.9 million (CFAF 1.1 billion) or 8 per cent of base cost.
Contingencies are US$3.5 million (CFAF 1.9 billion) of which US$0.8 million (CFAF
0.4 billion) for technical contingencies and US$2.7 million (CFAF 1.5 billion) for
financial contingencies.

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD PBAS
2016-2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promotion of community
development
1.1 Organizational capacity-
building 632 34 1 242.90 66 - - 0 - 1 874.90 6.5

1.2. Promoting nutrition and
access to drinking water 2 440.80 67 763.7 21 - - 431.4 11.9 3 636.00 12.5

Subtotal 3 072.80 56 2 006.60 36 - - 431.4 7.8 5 510.90 19

2. Productive investments

2.1 Strengthening the supply
of services to producers

3 460.40 63 1 678.00 30 - - 376.8 6.8 5 515.20 19

2.2 Support for production,
processing and marketing 3 645.50 27 6 902.80 51 3 077.10 22.5 56.5 0.4 13 681.80 47.1

Subtotal 7 105.80 37 8 580.80 45 3 077.10 16 433.3 2.3 19 197.00 66.1
3. Coordination, management,
M&E and consultation

3.1 Knowledge management and
consultation 103.6 41 150.1 59 - - 0 - 253.7 0.9

3.2 Coordination, management
and M&E

2 117.80 52 1 862.50 46 - - 101.5 2.5 4 081.80 14.1

Subtotal 2 221.40 51 2 012.60 46 - - 101.5 2.3 4 335.50 14.9

Total project cost 12 400.00 43 12 600.00 43 3 077.10 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.40 100

B. Project financing
28. The financing sources for the project are as follows: (i) IFAD will provide

US$25.0 million, or 86 per cent of total project cost, assigned over two allocation
cycles of the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) – US$12.4 million under
the 2016-2018 cycle and US$12.6 million to cover the financing gap under a further
cycle; (ii) module beneficiaries will contribute US$3.1 million, or 11 per cent of total
cost, in the form of contributions in kind; and (iii) the Central African Government
will contribute US$0.97 million in the form of exemptions from taxes and tariffs on
goods and services to be acquired under the project, or 3 per cent of total cost. The
financing gap of US$12.6 million could be financed under subsequent PBAS cycles,
on terms to be determined and subject to internal procedures and Executive Board
approval, or by cofinancing to be identified during implementation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

7

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD PBAS

2016 - 2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Rural engineering/works 2 411.1 81.0 - - - - 565.6 19.0 2 976.6 10.2

B. Vehicles 525.4 69.1 14.6 1.9 - - 220.6 29.0 760.6 2.6

C. Equipment and supplies 388.1 62.5 53.0 8.5 - - 180.2 29.0 621.3 2.1

D. Training, workshops and
seminars

1 368.7 41.2 1 950.4 58.8 - - 0.0 - 3 319.1 11.4

E. Consulting services 2 450.0 58.9 1 706.6 41.1 - - 0.0 - 4 156.6 14.3

F. Goods, inputs and services 266.5 40.8 387.4 59.2 - - 0.0 - 653.9 2.3

G. Subsidies and grants 3 800.2 26.5 7 453.9 52.0 3 077.1 21.5 -0.0 - 14 331.2 49.3

Total investment expenses 11 209.9 41.8 11 565.9 43.1 3 077.1 11.5 966.3 3.6 26 819.2 92.3

II. Current expenses

A. Salaries and benefits 1 072.4 55.9 846.5 44.1 - - - - 1 918.9 6.6

B. Operating expenses 117.7 38.6 187.6 61.4 - - 0.0 - 305.3 1.1

Total current expenses 1 190.1 53.5 1 034.1 46.5 - - 0.0 - 2 224.2 7.7

Total project expenses 12 400.0 42.7 12 600.0 43.4 3 077.1 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.4 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the project are
profitable. The economic internal rate of return is 19.6 per cent. Net present value
is an estimated US$19.3 million, or CFAF 10,590 million, for a discount rate of 6 per
cent.

D. Sustainability
30. PREPAS is not expected to involve any adverse environmental and social impact

and has therefore been classified as a category B operation, among projects with
moderate climate risk. The probability of maintaining gains over the long term and
creating the desired conditions to develop crop and livestock farming in the project
area is good. Boreholes and water points will be managed by management
committees to make drinking water widely available, thus reducing the workload
and waterborne illnesses, and will meet the needs of multiple uses. In addition,
repairers will be trained to do maintenance. The approach for inclusion of the most
vulnerable people – through literacy and project support modules designed to
facilitate access to production factors – is structured so as to endow households
with the needed capital and to create production and management capacity over
the medium term to guarantee food and nutritional security.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified, in addition to fiduciary risks, are as follows: (i) worsening

of the country’s political and security crisis, and its possible spread to the PREPAS
area; (ii) poor technical and administrative capacities among project team
members; (iii) limited capacities of implementation partners; (iv) a lack of
coordination among interventions by technical and financial partners; and
(v) extreme climate events. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

8

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. PREPAS is aligned with IFAD policies, including: (i) IFAD’s Strategic Framework

2016-2025; (ii) Disaster Early Recovery Guidelines; (iii) Country Strategy
Note 2017-2018; (iv) climate change strategy; (v) environment and natural
resource management policy; (vi) targeting policy to mainstream smallholder
farmers and vulnerable groups into agricultural value chains; and (viii) policy on
gender equality and women’s empowerment.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. PREPAS is aligned with the PNRCP 2017-2021, and will contribute to achieving the

objectives of food security and productive sector recovery included in pillar 3.
Within IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025
and Country Strategy Note 2018-2019, in which PREPAS is the only investment
planned. PREPAS will respond to IFAD’s strategic objectives 1, increasing the
productive capacity of poor rural people; and 3, strengthening the environmental
sustainability and climate resilience of their economic activities. PREPAS will also
contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular
SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG2 (zero hunger), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation) and
SDG 15 (life on land).

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. IFAD considers innovation to be a process that adds value and solves a problem in

new ways. Based on this definition and to ensure the possibility of efficient
implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area, the project will make
available standardized modules for production, processing, marketing and
production support services, taking into account the innovations that are best
adapted to withstand the effects of climate change, in particular involving manure –
e.g. training in integrated soil fertility management and EcoSan. PREPAS will also
consolidate and expand PREVES by gradually adding new villages and groups, and
with the inclusion of the Bossemptélé subprefecture.

D. Policy engagement
35. PREPAS calls for providing, based on pilot tests, factual data to guide policy

formulation favouring public and private investment and putting in place an
attractive regulatory and legislative framework. Through PREPAS, IFAD will support
the development and implementation of a seed policy, possibly in partnership with
FAO and/or the International Centre for Agronomic Research for Development. The
Central African Republic does not currently have a national policy on agricultural
extension. PREPAS will continue to pursue the extension approach used under
PREVES, adapting it to the local and national context. The data gathered will be
used to design such a policy over the longer term.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A financing agreement between the Central African Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Central African Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

9

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Central African Republic
under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of twelve million four
hundred thousand United States dollars (US$12,400,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President

























































President’s report

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon
for the Agricultural and Rural Development
Project – Phase II

Republic of Gabon

Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Gabon

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible
for the Graine national agriculture programme

Total project cost: EUR 20.93 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system 2016-2018)

EUR 5.43 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Repayment term of 15 to 18 years,
including a grace period of three years, with an
annual rate of interest equivalent to 100 per cent
of the variable reference rate determined semi-
annually by the Executive Board

Financing gap: EUR 4.91 million

Contribution of the borrower: EUR 10.26 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.32 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Gabon for the Agricultural and Rural Development Project –
Phase II, as contained in paragraph 48.

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon for the
Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Gabon is an upper middle-income country with a predominantly young population

estimated at 1.7 million. According to the Human Investment Strategy of 2014, the
poverty rate has dropped from 33 per cent in 2005 to 30 per cent in 2013. Poverty
is more prevalent in rural areas, where 45 per cent of households are economically
vulnerable compared to 20 per cent in urban areas.

2. The agriculture sector currently employs around 40 per cent of Gabon’s rural
population, yet contributes just 5 per cent of GDP. Agricultural production is
insufficient to make the country self-sufficient in food. To make up the resulting 60
per cent deficit in staple products, particularly cereals and meat, large volumes of
food are imported, estimated at more than US$650 million per year. The
prevalence of chronic malnutrition is higher in rural areas than in urban centres at
29 per cent and 14 per cent respectively.

3. This situation, the result of an organizational, political and institutional framework
that is weakly organized to stimulate agricultural development, is caused by
several factors: (i) uncontrolled and unsecured land tenure; (ii) small size of farms;
(iii) low yields for staple products; (iv) unattractive investment conditions and
insufficient tax incentives; (v) limited access to financing, seed, agricultural inputs
and outreach services; (vi) weak capacities among public, private and community
institutions operating in the sector; (vii) insufficient investment in production,
processing and marketing infrastructure; (viii) limited interconnectivity among
different value chain stakeholders; (ix) insufficient local workforce; and (x)
obsolete training infrastructure and platforms.

B. Justification and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. To reduce the country’s dependence on oil revenues and diversify the economy,
the Government launched the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan (PSGE) setting forth
the main development priorities through 2025. In application of the PSGE, the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible for the Graine programme
(MALGP) developed the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, built around three major priorities: (i) guarantee food
security and reduce food imports by 80 per cent; (ii) create at least 150,000 new
formal jobs in cooperatives; and (iii) boost agricultural exports to US$1 billion per
year.

5. The country still faces rural poverty, inequalities and other challenges such as
limited institutional capacities and weak support structures and mechanisms for
agricultural policy and strategy. Although policies have been launched in the past,
the lack of full implementation has limited their impact on rural poverty, food crop
productivity, nutrition and food security.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

2

6. Achieving the current national ambitions for agriculture will therefore mean
overcoming these challenges, starting with the creation of enabling conditions for
mobilizing and settling rural people generally, and the young workforce in
particular. This challenge, in addition to the need to strengthen productive capital,
is to reform institutional support systems, improve access to rural areas and
guarantee an adequate supply of inputs and technologies to support production
processing and market integration. Essentially, a fact-based decision-making
process on strategy and policy is crucial to spark excitement and engagement
among farmers, and interest among the private sector and market actors, in order
to sustainably reactivate agricultural development in Gabon.

7. Against this backdrop, a contextualized approach to IFAD’s engagement in Gabon,
based in part on support for agricultural policy and in part on structuring
productive investments, is suggested to accompany the Government’s efforts to
meet the challenges described. IFAD assistance in policy dialogue, innovation,
knowledge management and partnership, including South-South cooperation, will
make it possible to build local and national institutional capacities, stimulate sound
governance and promote an enabling environment for national and private
investment.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. PDAR II will be implemented in three of the country’s nine provinces: Woleu-Ntem,

where PDAR was implemented, Ngounié and l’Ogooué-Ivindo. Within these
provinces, the project will focus on 16 production areas covering 43 cantons and
171 villages or groups of villages.

9. PDAR II is intended to reach more than 16,000 beneficiaries. It will target actors in
the value chains, including those operating upstream and downstream of
production, in related services and occupations, in particular agricultural service
provision, input distribution, and equipment installation and maintenance. The
priority target group comprises poor rural people, particularly: (i) smallholder
producers; (ii) rural youth; (iii) women; and (iv) indigenous people.

10. The other beneficiaries will be the public bodies involved in agricultural policy
formulation, implementation and evaluation, decentralized crop and livestock
services, producers’ organizations and the private sector. They will receive
capacity-building to ensure that goods and services provided are adapted to the
needs of the priority target group.

B. Project development objectives
11. The project development objective is to sustainably improve incomes, food security

and nutrition for smallholder producers – women, youth and indigenous people – in
three provinces in Gabon. More specifically, this means:

- Improving the agricultural policy environment to promote increased public
and private investment thanks to an effective and sustainable system that
allows for implementation and monitoring of subsector policies and
strategies;

- Promoting economic activities and entrepreneurship in key agropastoral value
chains to improve incomes, food security and nutrition.

C. Components/results
Component 1: Policy support

12. The goal of this component is to improve the institutional, policy and regulatory
framework for the agriculture sector to increase public and private investment in
the rural sector and improve sector governance.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

3

13. The component will be implemented in three subcomponents.

Subcomponent 1.1: Agriculture policy dialogue
14. The aim of this subcomponent is to achieve participation by all stakeholders in the

process of sector policy development, implementation and monitoring – the private
sector, producers’ organizations, NGOs, youth and women’s representatives, and
so on – while ensuring that poor rural people and their organizations have a space
to express their concerns.

15. To this end, a national platform and three provincial platforms will be set up to
serve as a framework for dialogue on agriculture policy and bottlenecks impeding
agricultural development, subsector competitiveness and actors’ performance.
Working groups will be set up around the priority themes identified. Specialized
resource persons will be tapped to conduct studies documenting the discussions
and informing debates by presenting facts and sound evidence. To optimize
participation by producers’ organizations, their apex organization will be
restructured and will benefit from specific capacity-building.

Subcomponent 1.2: Support for evidence-based agriculture policy
formulation and implementation

16. Depending on the bottlenecks identified by platform participants, the project will
support the production and use of factual data to document the development or
revision of policies on priority themes and their implementation, to improve
governance and enable an effective rural transformation to take place.

17. Activities will relate to: (i) the conduct of prospective and thematic studies in
preparation for the development or revision and validation of priority policies;
(ii) preparation and validation of three provincial land use management and
allocation plans; (iii) mobilization of international technical assistance specializing
in agriculture policy during the first three years of implementation, through a
specialized institution.

Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

18. The aim of this subcomponent is to strengthen national capacities with training on
policy analysis, evaluation of different agricultural strategy options, production of
factual data to guide policy and decision-making. To support this strategic,
institutional and operational shift, PDAR II will support the following five actions:

- Conduct of an institutional and organizational diagnostic assessment by the
MALGP, to develop a restructuring proposal adapted to the mandates of the
central directorates, decentralized services and agencies;

- Entry into service of the Agriculture Development Agency, which was recently
created to implement agricultural policies and strategies;

- Operational capacity-building for three provincial directorates, the regional
directorate for the North and 18 agriculture divisions to improve their
effectiveness in monitoring and supervising interventions by PDAR II;

- Entry into service of the sector M&E system prepared by the Government with
technical support from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), and the establishment of a framework for consultation and
coordination of rural sector technical and financial partners; and

- Strengthening of the PDAR II steering, monitoring and knowledge
capitalization function.

Component 2: Value chain development and agropastoral
entrepreneurship promotion

19. This component is intended to intensify production systems and improve
productivity and competitiveness of produce by supporting the development of



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

4

local economic initiatives and entrepreneurship in the crop and livestock
subsectors. This objective will be achieved within the framework of four
subcomponents.

Subcomponent 2.1 – Support for consultation among local actors and
market access

20. The aim is to set up multi-actor innovation platforms in the 16 production areas to
improve consultation among actors and create local collective dynamics that will
enable market access. Each innovation platform will conduct a diagnostic
assessment for use in developing and implementing action plans.

Subcomponent 2.2 – Access to inputs and crop and livestock services
21. The intervention strategy will be based on setting up private local service

providers, particularly young people, by financing cross-cutting actions that are key
to promoting the targeted value chains. These actions will relate to multiplication
and distribution of plant material, supply of small-scale breeding livestock, setting
up agricultural machinery service providers and installing input stores in
partnership with producers’ organizations or private providers.

Subcomponent 2.3 – Support for agropastoral investment and
entrepreneurship

22. The aim is to cofinance actions plans, i.e. collective and individual investments
planned for production areas by innovation platform participants to improve
production, storage, processing and marketing, and raise the incomes of the target
groups. To this end, a PDAR II investment cofinancing mechanism will be set up at
project start-up following the model in the PDAR manual. This will define the
overall activity planning framework, cofinancing code, procedures and management
tools.

Subcomponent 2.4 – Capacity-building and dissemination of innovations
23. This subcomponent will cover testing and disseminating innovative techniques that

can lift the constraints on smallholder rural producers and improve the productivity
of production systems. In addition, it will allow for testing and disseminating
technologies to manage conflicts with wildlife generally, and with elephants in
particular, to enable the producers concerned to better manage their farms. Finally,
the subcomponent will promote South-South cooperation to seek solutions to
urgent challenges facing agricultural development in Gabon.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
24. The national platform for policy dialogue and the innovation platforms in production

areas will be coordinated respectively by a MALGP central or general directorate
and by provincial directorates. Participation by actors representing all economic
interests and target groups will be assured, to engage in dialogue, communication
and interaction to mobilize collective knowledge about the territories and prioritize
problems and possible solutions and take them to the Government. This approach
will improve the ownership and effectiveness of policies and strategies.

25. Policy and strategy development will be steered by the central directorate in charge
of planning and policy. International technical assistance will be used to carry out
agriculture policy support activities, including capacity-building for actors.

26. Setting up and coordinating innovation platforms will be a key activity under
component 2, to be launched at project start-up, as the success of productive
investments will depend upon them functioning properly. Supported activities will
be identified in the diagnostic assessments and consultations conducted in the
platforms, and will be included in their action plans. The action plans will define the
different individual and collective value chain subprojects to be submitted for
funding purposes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

5

27. Cofinancing for subprojects will be obtained via demand together with a feasibility
study or business plan. Business plans will be developed by the beneficiary with
support from the production area facilitator, and by ad hoc experts as needed. A
simplified procedure will be put in place to review the applications.

B. Organizational framework
28. The project will be placed under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture as the

executing agency. A national project steering and monitoring committee will be set
up to provide strategic direction. Consultation at the decentralized level will be
through a provincial technical coordination committee that will validate provincial
activity planning and supervise implementation to ensure harmonization and
consistency with sector strategies and interventions by other partners. Project
coordination and management will be done by a national project coordination and
management unit (PCU) based in Libreville with administrative and financial
autonomy. The PCU will comprise a national coordination unit and three provincial
branches located in Ngounié, Ogoué Ivindo and Woleu Ntem.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
29. Planning involves the preparation of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs).

Planning and budgeting activities under component 1 will be steered by the PCU in
close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture central and general directorates
concerned. Planning and budgeting activities under component 2 will be based on
diagnostic assessments and consultations at the production area level, estimates of
potential demand in subprojects for the following year and recommendations from
annual participatory M&E workshops held at the provincial level, and will give rise
to preparation by each branch of an annual workplan for discussion at meetings of
provincial technical coordination committees, then transmitted to the PCU for
decision.

30. The M&E system will serve as a tool for steering at both the project and oversight
level. The information provided by the system will be used to help achieve project
results and to improve the strategy and policy framework. A management
information system and a subproject management and monitoring system will be
put in place to provide input for a spatial database on all project interventions.

31. Knowledge management will be linked to the project M&E through a global system
for collection and dissemination of information of use to the different actors, and
for gathering information on the activities and methods implemented. Products
generated will include training manuals, good practice guidelines, technical
specifications, posters, videos and rural radio broadcasts, as well as exchanges of
experience and knowledge.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. PDAR II financial management will be provided by the PCU, acting with

administrative and financial autonomy. The PCU will be responsible and
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the use of the project’s financial
resources in accordance with the financing agreement. The PCU will prepare
quarterly financial and accounting statements for transmission to the Government
and IFAD, as well as financial statements on project operations for submission to
an annual external audit. The administrative and financial management of PDAR II
and all fiduciary matters will be in compliance with the provisions and procedures
set forth in the letter to the borrower and in the administrative, financial and
management procedures manual.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

6

33. Procurement will take place in accordance with the relevant IFAD guidelines1 and
the Gabonese Procurement Code. To the extent possible, contracts will be grouped
in such a way as to attract bidders, encourage competition and obtain better offers.
At start-up, the procurement plan for the first 18 months of implementation will be
updated by the PCU and submitted to IFAD for non-objection.

E. Supervision
34. PDAR II will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government, through

representatives of the project’s national steering and monitoring committee, with
two supervision missions each year.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
35. The total cost of the project, including contingencies, is EUR 20.93 million (CFAF

13.73 billion) over a period of six years. Base costs are EUR 19.6 million, and cost
escalation and physical contingencies are EUR 1.32 million (CFAF 868 million), or 6
per cent of base costs. Taxes account for 8 per cent of total cost, in the amount of
EUR 1.72 million (CFAF 1.1 billion).

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of euros)

Components

IFAD (PBAS)*
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries

Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Policy support and institutional
capacity-building

1.1 Agriculture policy dialogue 554 90.1 - - 61 9.9 - - 615 2.9

1.2 Support for evidence-based agriculture
policy formulation and implementation

196 14.9 - - 1 124 85.1 - - 1 320
6.3

1.3 Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

1 289 40.7 726 22.9 1 150 36.3 - - 3 164 15.1

Subtotal 2 039 40.0 726 14.2 2 334 45.8 - - 5 100 24.4

2. Value chain development and
agropastoral entrepreneurship promotion

2.1 Support for consultation among local
actors and market access

1 487 39.8 805 21.5 1 447 38.7 - - 3 739 17.9

2.2 Access to inputs and crop and
livestock services

308 19.8 466 29.9 782 50.3 - - 1 557 7.4

2.3 Support for investment and
agropastoral entrepreneurship

370 13.1 1 775 63.0 350 12.4 322 11.4 2 817 13.5

2.4 Capacity-building and dissemination
of innovations

354 11.0 734 22.8 2 137 66.3 - - 3 225 15.4

Subtotal 2 520 22.2 3 780 33.3 4 716 41.6 322 2.8 11 338 54.2

3. Project coordination and
management 872 19.4 407 9.1 3 210 71.5 - - 4 488 21.4

Total cost 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

* Performance-based allocation system.

B. Project financing
36. PDAR II will be financed by IFAD, the beneficiaries and the Government of Gabon.

The project financing will be provided by the different sources as follows: (i) an
IFAD loan under the 2016-2018 AWP/B in the amount of EUR 5.43 million,
equivalent to US$6.3 million2 (26 per cent of total cost); (ii) a financing gap of EUR

1 These guidelines set forth the principles of economy, efficiency and social equity, and call for various methods ranging
from international competitive bidding to direct contracting depending on the contract type and amount.
2 At the rate of US$1.16 to EUR 1.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

7

4.91 million, equivalent to US$5.7 million (23.5 per cent of total cost); (iii) a
government contribution of about CFAF 6.73 billion or EUR 10.26 million (49 per
cent of total cost), of which EUR 1.72 million corresponds to taxes and tariffs on
goods and services purchased by the project and a contribution in cash of EUR 8.54
million; and (iv) a contribution by beneficiaries to cofinancing for subprojects
estimated at EUR 0.32 million (1.5 per cent of total cost).3 The financing gap of
EUR 4.91 million could be covered under subsequent cycles of the PBAS – subject
to financing terms to be determined, compliance with internal procedures and
Executive Board approval – or by cofinancing mobilized during implementation.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of euros)

Category of expenditure

IFAD (PBAS)
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs

Works 1 410 56.1 422 16.8 681 27.1 - - 2 512 12.0

Equipment and supplies 136 23.6 - - 438 76.4 - - 574 2.7

Transportation equipment 25 4.9 - - 483 95.1 - - 508 2.4

II. Consulting services

National consultants 616 21.7 823 29.0 1 400 49.3 - - 2 839 13.6

International consultants 1 589 42.5 762 20.4 1 391 37.2 - - 3 741 17.9

Subtotal 2 205 33.5 1 585 24.1 2 790 42.4 - - 6 580 31.4

Training and workshops 900 42.9 350 16.7 845 40.3 - - 2 096 10.0

Subsidies and grants 514 13.3 2 149 55.7 874 22.7 322 8.3 3 859 18.4

Total investment costs 5 190 32.2 4 506 27.9 6 112 37.9 322 2.0 16 130 77.1

III. Recurring costs

Salaries and benefits 242 6.6 407 11.2 3 002 82.2 - - 3 651 17.4

Operating and maintenance - - - - 1 146 100.0 - - 1 146 5.5

Total recurring costs 242 5.0 407 8.5 4 148 86.5 - - 4 797 22.9

Total project costs 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
37. The quantifiable benefits of PDAR II are derived from the investments to be made.

The economic internal rate of return is an estimated 13.22 per cent, well above the
opportunity cost of capital (7 per cent); net present value is CFAF 6.92 billion
(US$12.23 million).

D. Sustainability
38. Three kinds of major adverse environmental and social impact potentially related to

project implementation have been identified: (i) conflicts between humans and
wildlife; (ii) accelerated deforestation as a result of supporting unsustainable
farming practices; and (iii) marginalization of indigenous peoples. For each of the
risks identified, alternative measures or safeguards have been proposed to
minimize the project’s adverse environmental and social impact and optimize
benefits for target populations.

3 Counterpart contributions from beneficiaries will represent at least 10 per cent of the total cost of the subprojects,
including contributions in cash and in kind. The counterpart ratios for public and common goods may, following
consultation with beneficiaries, exceed this percentage.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

8

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. Several risks have been identified: (i) insufficient or tardy mobilization of

counterpart funds; (ii) weak national capacities in coordination and
implementation; and (iii) weak national capacities in financial management and
procurement. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each of these risks,
including mobilizing international technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. PDAR II is aligned with IFAD policies and major guidelines, such as: (i) IFAD’s

Strategic Framework 2016-2025; (ii) country strategy note 2017-2018;4
(iii) climate change strategy; (iv) natural resources and environmental
management policy; (v) rural finance policy; (vi) targeting strategy, in connection
with targeting vulnerable people and mainstreaming smallholder producers and the
private sector into agricultural value chains; and (vii) respect for gender parity and
social inclusion of young people.

41. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures of IFAD (SECAP) note
has been prepared. PDAR II is not expected to involve any significant adverse
social, environmental or climate impact. It is therefore proposed that it be
classified as a category B operation.

B. Alignment and harmonization
42. The project’s lines of action are in line with the priorities set forth in the PSGE, and

more specifically with the strategic guidelines of the Green Gabon Plan. They are
also fully aligned with the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, and consistent with IFAD’s country strategy note
outlining the framework for cooperation during the 2016-2018 financing cycle.

C. Innovations and scaling up
43. Based on IFAD’s definition of innovation as a process that creates value added or

solves a problem in an original way using new solutions, PDAR II has selected the
following areas for innovation: (i) mitigating human-elephant conflict; (ii) inclusion
of indigenous peoples; (iii) South-South cooperation; and (iv) testing innovations
in a farming environment. Phase 1 of the project arose as a model for sustainable
socio-economic development in rural Gabon. Scaling up earlier achievements by
IFAD in the framework of public investment will inspire this model, and will be
realized using three main instruments: project financing, policy and strategy
consultations, and knowledge management.

D. Policy engagement
44. One component is entirely dedicated to policy development. The objective is to

improve the agriculture policy environment to encourage increased public and
private investment by setting up an effective and sustainable system to develop,
implement and monitor subsector policies and strategies.

4 Preliminary version presented in May 2017. In view of IFAD’s comparative advantage and lessons learned from
experience, the strategy consists of scaling up PDAR gains to intensify sector investment while enabling full
participation by rural smallholder producers in the agriculture sector recovery and diversification of the economy,
following an entrepreneurial approach. Overall, the aim of the strategy is to achieve a sustainable increase in incomes
and food and nutritional security for poor rural people, particularly women and young people. This overall objective
translates into three strategic objectives: (i) sustainably increase smallholder farmers’ productivity; (ii) improve
smallholders’ access to markets; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of all actors.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

9

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of Gabon and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

46. The Republic of Gabon is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Gabon in an amount equivalent to five million four hundred and
thirty-one thousand euros (EUR 5,431,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



























































 

 

 

 

 

 

President’s report 
 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic 
of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural 
Development and Rural Entrepreneurship 
Programme ‒ Phase II  
 

Republic of Senegal  

Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower: Ministry of Economy and Finance  

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure  

Total programme cost: US$72.4 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: 
(Performance-based allocation system 
[PBAS] 2016-2018): 

EUR 40.5 million (equivalent to US$46.3 million) 

Amount of IFAD grant:  
(PBAS 2016-2018): 

EUR 0.4 million (equivalent to US$0.5 million) 

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity of 40 years, including a 
grace period of 10 years, with a service charge of  
0.75 per cent per annum  

Cofinanciers: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), local 
communities  

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$10 million 
Local communities: US$0.2 million 

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: grant 

Contribution of the borrower: US$9.5 million 

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million 

Appraising institution: IFAD 

Cooperating institution: IFAD 

 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural Development 

and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II, as contained in paragraph 44. 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic of Senegal 
for the Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

I. Strategic context and rationale  

A. Country and rural development and poverty context  

1. Senegal had a population of 15.26 million in 2017, 50.2 per cent women and  

49.8 per cent men. Demographic growth is 2.6 per cent per year. The Senegalese 

population is relatively young, with 62 per cent under 35 years of age. 

Unemployment is primarily young as well: nearly six of 10 unemployed people 

(60.6 per cent) were between 15 and 34 years of age in 2017, according to the 

National Agency of Statistics and Demography (2016). 

2. Growth in 2016, driven by agriculture and the secondary sector, was 6.5 per cent. 

Nevertheless, the endemic poverty rate remains unchanged at an estimated  

46 per cent of households, placing Senegal among the world’s 25 poorest 

countries.  

3. The country’s economy is based essentially on the primary sector – agriculture, 

fishing, mining and tourism – in addition to the secondary and tertiary sectors with 

new information and communication technologies. Agriculture employs 50 per cent 

of the population and accounts for 15.83 per cent of GDP (World Bank, 2016). 

Farming is mainly rainfed and seasonal, focusing on both cash crops – groundnut, 

cotton, horticulture – and staple foods such as millet, sorghum, maize, cowpea and 

rice. The groundnut subsector, long the mainstay of the economy, is undergoing a 

serious crisis. Current agricultural performance does not allow for improving living 

standards or reducing poverty among people living in rural areas.  

4. The food and nutritional status of Senegal’s population is cause for concern. Since 

2012, Senegal has faced a persistent nutritional crisis, with high rates of acute 

malnutrition in five regions – Matam, Tambacounda, Louga, Saint-Louis and 

Diourbel. Nutritional surveys conducted at end-2017 show a significant drop in the 

prevalence of acute malnutrition in these five regions, but the situation remains 

precarious despite this positive development. Some 120,000 children will need 

nutritional care, including more than 23,000 suffering from severe acute 

malnutrition and close to 92,000 with moderate acute malnutrition. Around 25,000 

expectant and nursing mothers will also need nutritional support (United Nations, 

2018). 

5. The United Nations Development Programme’s sustainable human development 

index ranked Senegal in 165
th
 place worldwide in 2016, with 46.7 per cent of the 

population living below the poverty line (World Bank, 2016). Poverty is 

multidimensional in Senegal and very pronounced in rural areas where farming is 

the main economic activity: in 2015 more than two thirds of households  

(69 per cent) were considered poor, 53.2 per cent of them very poor (National 

Agency of Statistics and Demography, 2015). 

6. The agriculture sector is extremely fragile in the face of climate hazards. Poor 

management of natural resources such as soil and water raise the vulnerability of 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

2 

poor people, whose incomes and food security are dependent on agriculture. 

Recent climate changes in Senegal include a 30 per cent drop in rainfall, an 

increase in temperature on the order of 0.9°C, growing aridification in the country’s 

north, a strong trend towards aridity in the central regions and a more or less 

strong trend towards semi-aridity in the southern regions. Should these trends 

continue, the resulting impact on water resources, agriculture, fishing, coastal 

areas and health could be significant. 

7. The supply of financial services in rural areas is insufficient to meet the financing 

needs expressed by the populations concerned. High transaction costs, limited 

institutional capacities of endogenous rural service providers, specific risks inherent 

to farming activity, a lack of assets that can be put up as collateral by people and 

inadequate financial resources given the specificities of savings that are often in 

kind – livestock, poultry, agricultural produce, etc. – act as obstacles to financial 

inclusion of rural populations in Senegal. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and  
RB- COSOP  

8. The Support to Agriculture Development and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme – 

Phase II (PADAER-II) will be carried out within a country context characterized by 

high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor agricultural productivity, low access 

by agricultural value chain actors to external financing, very high youth 

unemployment and production systems that are highly exposed to climate 

phenomena. Accordingly, it will adopt an inclusive value chains approach that 

builds on and scales up the results achieved by IFAD in Senegal under the first 

phase of PADAER and elsewhere in the subregion. PADAER-II is fully aligned with 

national policies on rural development, in particular the Programme to Accelerate 

Agricultural Growth, the agricultural component of the Emerging Senegal Plan, the 

Livestock Development Programme, the National Food Security Plan and the 

National Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation. The programme is aligned with 

the IFAD country strategy note, and takes into account experiences by the World 

Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

Nations (FAO) and the Global Environment Fund (GEF). 

9. The lessons learned from the first phase of PADAER showed that access to quality 

production factors for women and young people, together with a system of 

agricultural advisory assistance based on mobilizing endogenous resource persons 

from producers’ organizations (POs) supported by rural advisory assistance 

structures, can make a strong contribution to raising farm productivity. It is crucial 

to take climate variability into account by making sustainable hydro-agricultural 

improvements available to value chain actors, facilitating access to climate 

information and developing a farm insurance programme to build the resilience of 

vulnerable households. Previous experiences in Senegal also showed that giving 

producers access to secure and more profitable markets is a determining factor in 

achieving food security and combating poverty. 

II. Programme description  

A. Programme area and target group  

10. PADAER-II will operate in the regions of Matam, Tambacounda, Kédougou and 

Kolda. The programme area covers about 50 per cent of the country’s area and  

15 per cent of its population. PADAER-II will target 43,700 households directly, 

comprising about 437,000 people. The programme beneficiaries are essentially 

poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers, of whom at least 40 per cent will be 

women and 50 per cent young people, both girls and boys. 

11. PADAER will operate in the following value chains: rice, maize, fonio, small 

ruminants and improved village poultry breeding. The programme will support the 

market gardening subsector. In addition to these major value chains, it will support 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

3 

complementary value chains such as millet and sorghum, non-timber forest 

products and banana. Value chains to be prioritized will be those in which poor 

households, women and young people are most represented or could easily join.  

B. Programme development objective 

12. The goal of PADAER-II is to contribute to reducing poverty for women, young 

people and men living in the programme area by integrating them with profitable, 

diversified value chains that are resilient to climate change. The development 

objective is to sustainably improve the food security and incomes of smallholder 

crop and livestock farmers and to create permanent, well-paying jobs for rural 

people, particularly women and young people.  

C. Components/outcomes 

13. The programme is structured in three components.  

14. Component 1: Improving the supply of agricultural products. The expected 

outcome of this component is for smallholder crop and livestock farmers to 

sustainably increase their production and productivity. To this end, the programme 

will build: (i) hydro-agricultural improvements; (ii) pastoral infrastructure; and 

(iii) marketing infrastructure. It will facilitate access to production factors and 

advisory assistance on crop and livestock farming. The nutritional education 

subcomponent will strengthen knowledge and attitudes among rural people. To 

build smallholder resilience, the programme will consolidate the index-based 

insurance programme developed during phase one.  

15. Component 2: Developing value chains and financing actors. The expected 

outcome is professionalized and empowered agricultural value chain actors, 

particularly crop and livestock producers’ organizations. To this end, the 

programme will facilitate the development of rural entrepreneurship; capacity-

building for POs to enable them to provide sustainable services to their members; 

and collaborative governance of crop and livestock value chains to consolidate 

existing value chain inter-professional frameworks. The programme will also 

facilitate access by producers to credit and strengthen their knowledge of financial 

matters. 

16. Component 3: Coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 

knowledge management. Under this component, the programme will finance: 

(i) the programme coordination unit (PCU); (ii) the operation of three branches 

located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda; (iii) steering and technical activities; and 

(iv) strengthening of M&E capacities within the agriculture sector. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

17. The PADAER–II intervention logic is to scale up the gains achieved under the first 

phase of the programme, as well as the positive results of innovations developed in 

Senegal, to promote rural youth employment, rural women’s empowerment and 

the climate change resilience of agricultural value chains. As in phase one, the 

programme will adopt an inclusive value chains approach driven by demand from 

agricultural value chain actors.  

18. The programme will outsource the implementation of activities with support from 

deconcentrated government services, national directorates and agencies, 

experienced national and international operators, civil society, and PO and private 

sector platforms.  

B. Organizational framework 

19. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure (MAER) will provide oversight 

of PADAER-II. MAER will set up a steering committee based on the same 

committee as in phase one, expanded to take responsibility for new activities under 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

4 

PADAER-II. The Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production will serve as  

vice-chairperson of the committee. The technical committee, composed of the 

various national and regional actors in rural development, will review relevant 

matters as needed prior to meetings of the steering committee.  

20. PADAER-II will have a PCU that will be responsible for procurement and M&E and 

will coordination consultations among the partners to ensure sustainable 

agricultural value chain development. The PCU will be based in Tambacounda and 

will have three light branches located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda. 

21. The PCU, directed by a coordinator, will comprise an administrative and financial 

officer, an infrastructure specialist, an M&E specialist, a specialist in gender issues 

and POs, a specialist in livestock value chains, a specialist in crop value chains, a 

specialist in rural entrepreneurship, an accountant, an M&E assistant and support 

staff. The branches will be very light units directed by a regional branch manager, 

with a secretary and a driver. They will provide representation and close 

monitoring of activities. The management staff of the PADAER-II PCU will be 

recruited on a competitive basis according to IFAD-approved procedures. 

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management  

22. Planning. The programme will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans 

and budgets (AWP/Bs). The AWP/Bs will be driven by the needs of agricultural 

value chain actors, with support from inter-professional value chain frameworks. 

Needs expressed at the regional level will be covered by a regional technical 

programme. The different regional technical programmes will be validated by the 

technical committee, then assembled by the PCU team into a national AWP/B, 

which will then be transmitted for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture and 

approved by the steering committee before being sent to IFAD for non-objection. 

To ensure consistency and complementarity of actions with partners operating in 

the programme area and investments in roads to connect production areas and 

hydro-agricultural improvements, the programme will ensure that such activities 

are in fact included in the community investment plans.  

23. M&E system. The M&E system will be used as a decision-making tool at various 

levels of programme implementation. M&E for PADAER-II will be established by 

drawing on lessons learned during phase one. A limited number of indicators will be 

gathered, disaggregated by sex and age as relevant. The system will be aligned 

with the national indicators used by MAER and the Ministry of Livestock and Animal 

Production. The programme will set up the system to monitor the agriculture 

subsector and will support the Ministry of Livestock’s research and planning unit in 

implementing the livestock sector monitoring system.  

24. Knowledge management. The knowledge management strategy for PADAER-II 

will link the M&E, results obtained and lessons learned. The programme will 

support the collection and dissemination of useful information for value chain 

actors at the local, regional and national levels, as well as the capitalization of 

activities and methods applied by IFAD projects.  

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

25. Financial management. An evaluation of the proposed financial management 

system was done during programme design. The programme risk is considered 

moderate. The programme funds will be managed in accordance with the financing 

agreement. The administrative and financial management procedures will be set 

forth in the letter to the borrower and in the programme manual of administrative, 

accounting, financial and internal control procedures. 

26. The administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual will take into 

account the specificities of the programme, in particular the use of multiple 

financing sources and the number of intervention regions. The accounting 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

5 

procedures used will be those applicable to programmes and projects in the IFAD 

portfolio. 

27. Flow of funds. For disbursements, a principal designated account will be opened 

in the programme name by the Directorate for Cooperation and External Financing 

at a credible commercial bank to deposit the loan proceeds. A separate account will 

be opened for grant resources. An operations account, receiving funds from the 

designated accounts, will also be opened in Tambacounda, and movements will be 

subject to the double signature principle.  

28. Audit. In accordance with the new IFAD procedures approved in December 2017, 

an overall programme audit will be performed each year by an audit firm selected 

by competitive bidding. The project support unit of the Ministry of Economy, 

Finance and Planning will direct the audit firm selection process and the monitoring 

of implementation of audit recommendations. The internal control arrangements 

for the country programme will ensure that internal control for the programme 

takes place on the basis of an annual plan approved by the Ministry of Finance and 

IFAD. In addition to the annual audit, the project will prepare quarterly financial 

and accounting reports for transmission to the Government and IFAD. The audited 

financial statements will be published on the IFAD official website. 

29. Procurement. Contracts for goods, works and services will be awarded in 

accordance with recipient government provisions, provided they are compatible 

with IFAD procurement guidelines. The community procurement method may also 

be used to ensure participation by POs and local authorities. For infrastructure, the 

procurement specialists of regional development agencies will provide oversight of 

the quality of tender documents prepared by local authorities and implementing 

agencies.  

E. Supervision 

30. Programme supervision and administration of financing will be provided directly by 

IFAD.  

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits  

A. Programme cost 

31. The total cost of the programme, for a duration of six years, is US$72.4 million, of 

which US$3.4 million for physical and financial contingencies, distributed as 

follows: US$56.0 million for component 1 (77.3 per cent), US$5.8 million for 

component 2 (8 per cent) and US$10.6 million for component 3 (14.7 per cent).  



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

6 

Table 1 
Programme cost by source of financing and component 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities 
Borrower/ 

counterpart Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Improving the 
supply of 
agricultural 
products  32 352 57.8 - - 10 000 17.9 5 318 9.5 242 0.4 8 092 14.1 56 003 77.3 

2. Developing 
value chains and 
financing actors  4 194 72.4 500 8.6 - - 621  10.7 - - 478 8.3 5 793 8.0 

3.Coordination, 
M&E, knowledge 
management  9 747 91.6 - - - - - - - - 892 8.4 10 639 14.7 

Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 

B. Programme financing 

32. Financing for PADAER II breaks down as follows: a grant in the amount of  

US$0.5 million (0.7 per cent) and a loan from IFAD under the current performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycle in the amount of US$46.3 million  

(63.9 per cent); a loan from OFID in the amount of US$10 million (17.7 per cent); 

a contribution from the Government of US$9.5 million (13.1 per cent) 

corresponding to taxes and tariffs estimated at US$7.9 million, and a direct 

contribution in kind of US$1.5 million; a contribution from beneficiaries in the 

amount of US$5.9 million (8.2 per cent); and a contribution from communities for 

US$0.2 million (0.3 per cent). 

Table 2 
Programme cost by category of expenditure and source of financing  
(Thousands of United States dollars)  

Category of 
expenditure 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenses    

1. Civil and rural 
engineering 20 852 54.7 - - 9 430 24.8 231 0.6 242 0.6 7 342 19.3 38 096 52.6 

2. Equipment and 
vehicles 541 84.7 - - - - - - - - 98 15.3 639 0.9 

3. Fund for 
subprojects  9 916 67.7 - - - - 4 724 32.3 - - - - 14 639 20.2 

4. Support for 
subprojects  895 63.1 - - - - 305 21.6 - - 217 15.3 1 417 2.0 

5. Research, 
training, information 
and technical 
assistance formation  7 123 73.3 500 5.1 570 5.9 59 0.6 - - 1 464 15.1 9 717 13.4 

6. Service provision 1 479 64.6 - - - - 620 27.0 - - 193 8.4 2 291 3.2 

Total investment 
expenses 40 806 61.1 500 0.7 10 000 15.0 5 939 8.9 242 0.4 9 313 13.9 66 800 92.2 

Recurrent expenses    

1. Salaries and 
benefits 4 666 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 4 666 6.4 

2. Operating 
expenses 821 84.7 - - - - - - - - 148 15.3 969 1.3 

Total recurrent 
expenses 5 487 97.4 - - - - - - - - 148 2.6 5 635 7.8 

 Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

7 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 

33. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and 

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the programme are 

profitable. The economic internal rate of return for the programme is  

16.92 per cent. Net present value is estimated at US$41.2 million, or  

CFAF 24.3 billion, at a discount rate of 6 per cent. The sensitivity analysis confirms 

that the positive economic results and impact of the programme are robust to the 

risks identified.  

D. Sustainability 

34. The sustainability of the investments under PADAER-II will be ensured by: 

(i) systematically giving accountability from the outset to existing permanent 

structures set up and reinforced by previous projects and programmes – 

deconcentrated technical services closest to beneficiaries, grass-roots and apex 

professional organizations, and agricultural and rural advisory assistance and 

private sector organizations – to provide accessible socio-economic services of 

quality; (ii) giving accountability and providing institutional and economic 

strengthening to POs at all levels; (iii) setting up management and maintenance 

committees based on previous experience for infrastructure built or rehabilitated in 

each case; (iv) strengthening inter-profession capacities to provide collaborative 

value chain governance; (v) guaranteeing the creditworthiness of market operators 

and compliance with contracts between POs and market operators; and 

(vi) promoting production models that are resilient to climate change.  

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

35. Overall, the level of risk of PADAER-II is considered moderate. The most probable 

risks relate to climate hazards, in particular rising temperatures and declining 

rainfall, and to access by vulnerable households to financial institutions. These risks 

will be mitigated by means of an effective partnership between the programme and 

the financial institutions and other funds set up by the Government, and by 

developing climate-smart production models. In addition to the risks mentioned 

above, the additional workload to be taken on by the current team could have an 

adverse impact on internal control. This risk could be mitigated by realistic 

planning of activities and a good distribution of the workload. 

V. Corporate considerations  

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

36. The programme is compliant with IFAD strategies, principles and instruments, and 

is aligned with IFAD’s climate change strategy.  

37. PADAER-II is classified in environmental category B. The programme activities will 

have moderate social and environmental impact owing to the intensification of 

agricultural and livestock production through the use of appropriate technologies as 

well as the processing and marketing of products. The programme calls for a set of 

approaches and technologies to avoid greenhouse gas emissions and to capture. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

38. The programme is fully aligned with the Emerging Senegal Plan, in particular the 

agriculture component, and with the Programme to Accelerate Agricultural Growth. 

In the case of livestock activities, it is aligned with the National Livestock 

Development Programme and the livestock component of the Emerging Senegal 

Plan. Concerning nutrition, the programme is consistent with the Strategic Plan on 

Nutrition.  

C. Innovations and scaling up  

39. A number of innovations and good practices developed during phase one and 

during the implementation of other projects under the country programme will be 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

8 

scaled up: (i) commercial contracting between POs and market operators to 

facilitate access by smallholders to more profitable markets; (ii) the consolidation 

and establishment of value chain inter-professional frameworks to facilitate 

collaborative governance of activities and effective smallholder participation in 

consultations; (iii) capacity-building for smallholder producers in good practices in 

crop and livestock farming; and (iv) quality and management of infrastructure in 

crop and livestock value chains.  

D. Policy engagement  

40. PADAER-II will support the establishment of a national monitoring system for the 

agriculture subsector. For the livestock subsector, the programme will support the 

implementation of the system in place. Support for national M&E systems will 

significantly improve the quality of sector reports and the preparation of crop and 

livestock policies. At the institutional level, the programme support will facilitate 

good coordination of interventions and complementarity among the technical and 

financial partners.  

VI. Legal instruments and authority  
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Senegal and IFAD will constitute 

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy 

of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I. 

42. The Republic of Senegal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria. 

VII. Recommendation 
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolutions: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of Senegal in the amount of forty million five hundred thousand 

euros (EUR 40,500,000), equivalent to forty-six million three hundred 

thousand United States dollars (US$46,300,000), and upon such terms and 

conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of 

Senegal in an amount of four hundred and forty thousand euros  

(EUR 440,000), equivalent to five hundred thousand United States dollars 

(US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially 

in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo 

President 

 


































































49026-002: Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3633-VlE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in .the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 42. AoriZ Z.OA2

VIE 49026



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated A2. Ap«^ 70^ between SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, 
Ha Giang, and Lang Son (“Project Provinces”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make 
available to the Project Provinces the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ARVC” means agriculture and rural value chain;

(b) “Candidate Subproject” means a candidate subproject for financing 
under the Project, a list of which has been agreed upon between the 
Project Provinces and ADB and provided in the PAM;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);



2

(d) ' “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan to help in carrying out activities as described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the 
Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(f) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and'requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable.) of 
the SPS;

( (h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any
x update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces and

cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(k) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces pursuant to 
the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

( (I) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Onlending Agreement” means, the agreement or agreements entered 
into between the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and each of the 
Project Provinces for the purposes of relending a portion of the 
proceeds of this Loan as specified in Section 3.01 of this Loan 
Agreement;



3

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) . “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project facilities” means facilities developed, constructed, updated 
and/or maintained under the Project;

(t) “Project Province” means each of the Borrower’s provinces of Bac 
Kan, Cao Bang, Ha Giang, and Lang Son where the Project is carried 
out;

(u) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Framework” or 
“REMDF” means the resettlement and ethnic minority development 
framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(v) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Plan” or “REMDP” 
means each resettlement and ethnic minority development plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Project Provinces pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
REMDF and cleared by ADB;

(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces to ADB that describes progress 
with implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the 
REMDPs (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;

(y) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement 
and the relevant provisions of the PAM; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule.set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall (i) make a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Project Provinces through budget allocation, and (ii) 
relend the balance of the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Provinces under the respective 
Onlending Agreements, all upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



5

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 
Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2023 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4. 02. The Borrower, through the Project Provinces, shall 
enable ADB's representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant 
records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project Provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Onlending Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under any Onlending Agreements shall be 
assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates the Project Provinces 
as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or 
permitted under Section 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02 and 
5.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 
Project Provinces pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan 
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as 
if taken by the Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on the Project Provinces under
Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 
of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

State Bank of Vietnam
47-49 LyThai To 
Hanoi, Viet Nam



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(84-4) 38250-612 
(84-4) 38258-385

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2331.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

LEMINH HUNG 
Governor 

State Bank of Viet Nam

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase production, and movement of goods
and passengers within the Project Provinces and to major domestic and international 
markets.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs.

Output 1: Road network connectivity among the Project Provinces 
improved. Carrying out Subprojects to upgrade provincial and district roads, 
including road safety measures and training.

Output 2: Rural water supply improved. Carrying out Subprojects to 
develop water supply schemes.

Output 3: ARVC infrastructure in Lang Son province improved. Carrying 
out Subprojects to support the development of shared horticultural trade and 
marketing services for horticultural commodities, through provision of viability 
gap grants to the selected enterprises and producers groups.

Output 4: Decentralized public asset management processes 
established. Supporting the implementation of the Borrower’s decentralized 
public asset management program.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2023.



10

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.



11

SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed put of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for:

(a) Category 1A, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Bac Kan Province, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and executed and 
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government 
entity) and the Bac Kan Province, and is legally binding upon the 
parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(b) Category 1B, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Cao Bang Province,. in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Cao Bang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(c) Categories 1C and 2, until the Onlending Agreement between the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and the Ha Giang Province, in form 
and substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Ha Giang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms; and

(d) Category 1D, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Lang Son Province, in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Lang Son Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated for 

ADB Financing 
(Dollar)

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account**

Category Subcategory
1 Project Costs 144,686,400

1A. forBac Kan Province* 32,884,373 100% of total expenditure claimed***

1B for Cao Bang Province* ' 33,039,415
100% of total expenditure 
claimed***

1C for Ha Giang Province* 31,418,624
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

1D for Lang Son Province* 47,343,988
100% of total expenditure 
claimed****

2 Consulting Services for Ha Giang Province* 1,587,004
66 percent of total expenditure 
claimed***

3 Interest Charge 3,726,596 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 150,000,000
Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.

** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
*** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services.
**** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services and detailed engineering design consulting services.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) National Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for the respective
Subprojects which involves environmental impacts until it has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s competent 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

7. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject
involving involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous peoples impacts until the relevant 
Project Province has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP for the Subproject 
based on the Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of the REMDP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Fixed Budget Selection for Project audit

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB,
unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement 
Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social, 
Financial and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. 
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Project Provinces and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM 
and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) 
the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the ADB’s Category A environmental criteria as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for each Subproject and all Project facilities are made 
available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related 
Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in 
compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective REMDP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Involuntary Resettlement Category A as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards,
the REMDF or the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to 
ensure , that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the 
Subprojects until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and



17
Schedule 5

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

7. ' The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) the REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the respective REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Indigenous Peoples Category A as defined under the Safeguard 
Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower shall make available and cause the Project Provinces to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and the REMDP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the relevant Project Provinces with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation 
of the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the 
REMDP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project Provinces to do
the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;



18
Schedule 5

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts' 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the REMDP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

f 12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources are allocated 
for implementation of the GAP; and (c) progress on implementation of the GAP, including 
progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced 
labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from using a legally permissible means of expressing 
their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of 
employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, 
information. on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular, reports.

Selection and Implementation of Subprojects

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
only Candidate Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project; (b) Candidate 
Subprojects in each Project Province are taken up in the order of priority as indicated in the 
PAM; (c) feasibility studies and detailed design for such Candidate Subprojects are carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions under the PAM; and (d) only Candidate 



19
Schedule 5

Subproject which meets feasibility criteria as provided in the PAM is financed as a Subproject 
under the Project.

Community Awareness and Beneficiary Participation

16. The Borrower shall ensure that Project Provinces promote active community
awareness and stakeholder participation in the design, implementation and performance 
monitoring of Subprojects, through (a) disseminating the nature of the proposed Works in 
open public forums, and (b) establishing a mechanism for public consultation during Project 
physical implementation activities.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the counterpart
funding required for successful Project implementation is timely allocated and provided. The 
Borrower shall further cause the Project Provinces to adequately staff and equip their 
respective Project management offices.

18. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project
Provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Consulting Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

19. The Borrower shall ensure that each of the Project Provinces shall (a) prepare
a maintenance management plan that includes estimates of the physical works and 
associated costs required for routine and periodic maintenance, as well as provisions for 
emergency repairs for the whole life of the Project facilities; (b) include the maintenance 
management plans in its annual budgets and provide adequate funds in a timely manner 
from provincial budgets to implement the maintenance management plan; and (c) establish 
mechanisms for the safe and proper use for each of the Project facilities in accordance with 
national regulations and practice, including, but not limited to, posting signs on roads and 
bridges of maximum weight limits, and as necessary alerting users of hazards or establishing 
physical barriers that prohibit vehicles above a certain size to pass.

Financial Management

20. The Borrower shall ensure that the financial management action plan as
agreed between the Project Provinces and ADB and included in the PAM is implemented in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe as indicated in the PAM, but in any case within one 
year of the Effective Date.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower (a) acknowledges ADB's right to investigate, directly or through
its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practices relating to the 
Project; and (b) agrees to cooperate, and shall cause the Project Provinces, and all other 
offices of the Borrower, organizations and entities involved in implementing the Project to 
cooperate, fully with any such investigation and to extend all necessary assistance, including 
providing access to all relevant books and records, as may be necessary for the satisfactory 



20
Schedule 5

completion of any such investigation. In particular, the Borrower shall ensure that (a) periodic 
audits of the Project contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are 
carried out; (b) relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) are included in all bidding documents for the Project; and (c) contracts financed under 
the Project include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of Project Provinces, contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.


































































47381-005: Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2


LOAN NUMBER 3625-SRI

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2)

between

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 18 MAY 2018

SRI 47381



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 18 May 2018 between DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the 
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the 
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program;

(B) by a periodic financing request dated 2 October 2017, the Borrower 
has applied to ADB for (i) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on concessional 
terms (“Concessional Loan”); and (ii) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on regular 
terms (“Ordinary Operations Loan”); each for the purposes of the Project described in 
Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement (as defined 
hereafter);

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Ordinary Operations 
[Concessional] Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from its ordinary 
operations resources an amount of thirty-one million Dollars ($31,000,000) for the purpose of 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the 
context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II



The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventy-nine million Dollars 
($179,000,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR; and

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0,10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 



outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in 
Section 2.01(6) of the Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan Regulations 
and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary 
Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where 
any such item has hot been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with 
those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the 
contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 



terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) 
shall have been fulfilled.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, 
the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with its terms, subject 
only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations.



ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Each of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and 
Mass Media, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and Director General of the Department of 
External Resources of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Secretary
Ministry of Finance and Mass Media
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka

cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources

Facsimile Numbers:

+94 11 243-3349
+9411 244-7633

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 
OF SRI LANKA

By__________________________
R.H.S. SAMARATUNGA 

Secretary
Ministry of Finance & Mass Media

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SRI WIDOWATI
Country Director 

Sri Lanka Resident Mission



SCHEDULE 1

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)


2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount 
of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be 
the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as 
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category 6 is for interest and commitment charges
on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works, Consulting 
Services, and PMU and PIU operational costs, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 
20% of the Loan amount.



TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account
Category Subcategory

1 Civil Works 140,470,000

1A UEC-ICB-2A 114,890,000 85% of total expenditure 
claimed

1B NWPC-ICB-1

•‘ili;:’ ;z
1
 y? 

I:« 

_■ 
51^!^;:

25,580,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

2 Environment Mitigation 820,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

3

Consulting Services 
(Project Management, 
Design and 
Supervision 
Consultant)

5,970,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

4 PMU and PIU Operation Costs 7,000,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Equipment Operation Maintenance 5,660,000
81% of total expenditure 
claimed

6 Interest andCommitment Charges 17,240,000 100% of amounts due

7 Unallocated 1,840,000 feiiwS
TOTAL 179,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3570-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development Project - Additional Financing)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 9 JANUARY 2018

CAM 41435



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 9 January 2018 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a financing agreement dated 27 December 2009 between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADB Financing Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional 
loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in various currencies equivalent to two million one 
hundred thirty-two thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR2,132,000) and a grant in an amount 
of twenty-seven million three hundred thousand Dollars ($27,300,000), for the purpose of the 
project described in Schedule 1 to the ADB Financing Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a concessional loan from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement (“Project”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied for a grant from ADB’s special funds 
resources in an amount equivalent to four million two hundred seventy-five thousand Dollars 
($4,275,000) (“ADF Grant”) and ADB has agreed to make the ADF Grant to the Borrower for 
the purposes of the Project pursuant to a grant agreement of even date herewith between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”);

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (“IFAD”) for a loan (“IFAD Loan”), to be partially administered by ADB in an 
amount of ten million Dollars equivalent ($16,000,000) to assist in financing a part of the 
Project, pursuant to an agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and IFAD (the 
“IFAD Financing Agreement”);

(E) the Project shall be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (“MAFF”) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic 
Development Secretariat (“NCDDS”), and for this purpose the Borrower shall make available 
to MAFF and NCDDS the proceeds of the loan provided herein and the ADF Grant upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



2

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following.meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “DRM” means disaster risk management;

(d) “DRR” means disaster risk reduction;

(e) "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB; „

(f) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means an environmental 
management plan for a Subproject,' including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project in 
consultation with the Borrower and approved by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or ADF Grant, including related services 
such as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, 
and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services; •

(j) “ICT” means information and communication technology;



3

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP” means the indigenous people plan 
for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the IPPF and cleared 
byADB;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared 
byADB;

(m) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3 and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means an initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(o) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(p) “LIG” means a livelihood improvement group;

(q) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 4 
August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “Participating Commune” means a participating commune located in 
one of the Participating Provinces included in the Project;

(u) “Participating Province” means a participating province included under 
the Projeqt;

(v) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and 
endorsed by ADB, which sets forth procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(x) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
4 August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



4

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(y) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means each of MAFF and NCDDS, or any 
successors thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying 
out the Project;

(z) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 
modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be 
installed and maintained under the Project;

(aa) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 
for the Project, including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means the resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the RF and cleared by 
ADB;

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB, that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(ee) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 
procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time 
to time) providing procedures applicable to all externally-financed 
projects and programs;

(ff) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject selection criteria set forth in herein and detailed in the PAM; 
and

(gg) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



5

ARTICLE I!

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty-five million seven hundred twenty-five thousand 
Dollars ($45,725,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for.the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 July 2023 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agencies to (i) maintain separate accounts, and records for the Project; (ii) prepare 
consolidated annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such 
audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds and the ADF Grant proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to enable 
ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the 
Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the. Project with the auditors appointed 
pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative 
of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that 
such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the 
Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and 
any relevant records and documents.



7

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and

(b) the IFAD Loan shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation 
or shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: .

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement shall have been duly authorized, 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness shall have been fulfilled..

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as .additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) th© ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding up'on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms, to the extent applicable.



8

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Sec tion 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Sec tion 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Ministry of Economy and Finance
Street 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855-23) 427 798
(855-23) 428 424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaiuyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2231.



9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister, Ministry of Economy and 

Finance

PMENT BANKASIAN DEVE

By
SAMIUELA TUKUAFU 

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



10

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen
climate and disaster resilience and improve access to markets in the Participating Communes 
in the Participating Provinces in the Tonle Sap Basin.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Output 1: Rural productive infrastructure and livelihood improved with
capacity in disaster risk management enhanced by:

(a) rehabilitating roads and upgrading irrigation infrastructure for at least 
two crops per year;

(b) strengthening existing LIGs and establishing additional LIGs in the 
Participating Communes and establishing aq LIG association to improve 
their sustainability; and

(c) strengthening of DRM in Participating Communes through training on 
identifying, planning and implementing DRR measures, including 
incorporation of DRR considerations in infrastructure Subprojects.

Out put 2: Enabling environment for increased agricultural productivity,
diversification and climate resilience created by:

(a) providing training on climate-smart agricultural practices through paddy 
selling groups, LIGs and market improvement groups;

(b) promoting the production of climate-resilient rice seed varieties upon 
confirmation of market demand; and

(c) improving value addition for rice, vegetables and chicken value chain 
through (i) establishing multi-stakeholder value chain platforms, (ii) 
establishing market improvement groups, (iii) strengthening existing 
small-scale agribusinesses; and (iv) establishing additional 
agribusinesses.

Out put 3: Project management strengthened by continuing support for-
Project staff at national, provincial, district and commune levels on Project 
management.

3. Consulting Services will be provided to support the above-stated activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 January 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Financial charges during implementation -
Interest during construction” is for financing the interest charge on the Loan during the 
implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account 
and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when 
due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Percentage and Basis for 

Withdrawal from the Loan 
Accounti

Category Subcategory

1 Works 30,243,000 ■

1A Works-ADB 30,243,000 93% of total expenditure claimed

2 Livelihood inputs 2,118,000

2A Revolving fund J 225,000 5% of total expenditure claimed*

2B
Other livelihood inputs - 
ADB

1,893,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Goods and services 2,660,000

3B
Goods and services - 
ADB

2,660,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

4
Capacity development 
and training

2,111,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

5 Consulting Services 5,445,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

6 Recurrent costs 2,238,000

6B Operations and 
maintenance

/ 2,238,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

7

Financial charges 
during implementation -
Interest during 
construction

910,000 100% of amount due

TOTAL 45,725,000

*Exclustve of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



15

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
Other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works  procured on the basis of the procurement methodsshall.be
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids under
international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of the 
Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) and 
2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. -

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



16

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement ' ,

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for operation
and maintenance for infrastructure in accordance with agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject:

(a) involving environmental impacts, until (i) each Project Executing Agency 
has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IEE for an 
applicable Subproject pursuant to the EARF and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such IEE; (ii) the Ministry of Environment has granted the 
final approval of each relevant IEE, if it is required by Sub-decree 72 
ANRK.BK on Environment Impact Assessment Process; and (iii) each 
Project Executing Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
each relevant EMP into the Works contract for Category "B" Subprojects 
and the Project Environmental Code of Conduct for Category "C" 
Subprojects;

(b) involving involuntary resettlement impacts, until the Borrower has 
prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final RP based on the RF 
and Subproject's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
RP; and

(c) involving indigenous peoples impacts, until each Project Executing 
Agency has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IPP 
based on the IPPF and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower may apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Single Source Selection for Project implementation consultants.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants in accordance with
procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe, any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



17

Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. All draft contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
first draft contract procured under national competitive bidding procedures, first contracts 
procured under community participation for operations and maintenance and first draft contract 
procured under shopping and all draft contracts for‘Consulting Services shall be subject to 
prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in 
the Procurement Plan.



18

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Counterpart Support and Q&M

2. The Borrower shall ensure that adequate counterpart funds for the Project are
provided on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
Project Executing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any 
Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

3. The Borrower shall ensure the release of adequate funds to support the O&M
of irrigation schemes underThe Project and ensure that the irrigation is registered on the 
Borrower’s Information System on Irrigation Schemes to ensure eligibility for any government 
O&M funding. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure that the roads are included in the 
Ministry of Rural Development inventory to ensure eligibility for any government O&M funding.

Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria

4. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to
ensure that all Subprojects are selected and implemented in accordance with the screening 
and eligibility criteria as agreed with ADB and set forth in Appendix 3 to the PAM.

Safeguards - Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable 
Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the respective IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for environment as defined in the SPS is financed under 
the Project.

Safeguards - Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project 
facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 



19

Schedule 5

under the related Works contract and that all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of Borrower relating to 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure 
that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or a 
Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for involuntary resettlement as defined in the SPS is 
financed under the Project.

Safeguards - Ethnic Minorities

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project, each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; (c) the IPPF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective 
IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for indigenous people or ethnic minorities under the SPS 
is financed under the Project

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agencies to
make available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, the 
RF, the IPPF, each EMP, each RP and each IPP (if any).

Safeguards-related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents arid contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP, the RP and the IPP, if any (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 



20

Schedule 5

preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agencies with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the 
IPP (if any);

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall do, or cause the Project Executing Agencies to do the
following:

(a) submit social safeguards monitoring reports to ADB as part of the 
quarterly and annual progress reports, and environmental safeguards 
monitoring reports semiannually in January and July each year and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any), promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any) 
promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable, to ADB is established in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant EARF, EMP, RF, RP (if any), IPPF or IPP (if 
any), within the timeframes specified in the relevant documents, to consider safeguards 
complaints.



21

Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan and ADF Grant are used to finance any activity included in the 
list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the'Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall or cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB-under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

18, The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 17 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as part of the quarterly and annual progress reports.

Gender and Development

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least one women to be elected to join each 
management committee of the new LIGs and service teams, (ii) at least 25% of unskilled 
workers employed are women, (iii) at least 60% of rural loans are taken by women, (iv) 
commune councilors from selected target communes have received training on gehder- 
responsive DRM, (v) at least 200 agribusiness enterprises (30% owned by women) such as 
chick production and feed production are operational, and (vi) at least 40% of market 
improvement group and paddy selling group members are women.

Governance and Anticorruption

20. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall (a) comply with ADB's
Anti corrupt ion Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



22

Schedule 5

21. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and'accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. ,

22. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall disclose, through the
Project website, accessible by general public, information about various matters concerning 
the Project, including general project information, procurement, project progress, and contact 
details in the English and Cambodian languages, as applicable. The Project website shall also 
provide a link to ADB’s integrity office for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations of 
corrupt practices arising out of the Project and its activities. With regard to procurement, the 
website shall include: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning bidder; 
(c) the amount of the contracts awarded; (d) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; and 
(e) the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.




































































51081-002: Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3746-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

KGZ 51081



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated //^^^^Z f̂eetween KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 

(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the purposes 
of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources ("Grant”) in the amount of sixteen million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($16,800,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(b) “Disaster Risk Management Component” means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(c) "DWR” means the Department of Water Resources and Melioration 
under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;



2

(d) “EARF" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “Hydrometeorology Installation Works" means Works to install any 
hydrological and/or meteorological equipment under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project, including any Works to install 
the hydrological posts referred to in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(k) "Irrigation Infrastructure Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “KyrgyzHydromet” means the Agency for Hydrometeorology under the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto;

(m) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MOES" means the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(p) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;



3

(q) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) “PIU” means the Project implementation unit to be established within 
DWR to assist with the execution of the Project;

(s) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time In accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(t) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(u) "Procurement Regulations" means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(v) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreement) means DWR and MOES, both 
individually and collectively, or any successor to either of them 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(w) "Project facilities" means the irrigation infrastructure to be protected, 
modernized and provided, and the equipment to be installed, piloted and 
provided, under the project;

(x) “RF" means the resettlement framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(y) “RP” means the resettlement plan for a Subproject, or, as may be 
required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);



4

(cc) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Irrigation Infrastructure 
Component of the Project that meets the subproject eligibility criteria set 
forth in the PAM;

(dd) “Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract; and

(ee) “WUA" means a water user association or union of water user 
associations established and operating under the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on “Unions (Associations) of Water Users and Unions of Water 
User Associations" adopted by the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 8 February 2002 and signed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 15 March 2002, as such law may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-one million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($21,800,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the Items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4. 02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 



6

were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, the Works and the Services, and any relevant records and 
documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Grant Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the execution and delivery of the Grant Agreement on behalf of the Borrower 
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary governmental action.

Section 6. 02, The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 



7

to be furnished to ADB: that the Grant Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with Its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement,

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erklndik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Authorized Representative

CountryJOirector
Kyrgyz Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved climate change and disaster resilience
of infrastructure and water security.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) the protection and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to improve 
the productivity of approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigated land, 
including by upgrading and constructing main (primary and secondary) 
canals, lower-level (Intra-farm and on-farm) canals, and associated 
infrastructure such as protective mudflow crossing structures, cross­
regulators and offtakes;

(b) the enhancement of (i) irrigation system management, including by 
developing and Implementing joint DWR-WUA irrigation system 
management plans with, among others, water delivery scheduling and 
O&M financing and planning; and (ii) agricultural land management, 
including by developing WUA on-farm water management and 
agricultural management plans with, among others, irrigation 
scheduling, cropping patterns, and cultural methods, and providing 
capacity building for farmers and community members; and

(c) the improvement of national disaster risk management capacity, 
including by providing heavy machinery and special equipment for 
preventative and rehabilitation works at the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES; enhancing the asset 
management of such centers; providing capacity building for disaster 
risk management, including project planning; installing hydrological 
posts for KyrgyzHydromet in approximately 20 sites; and piloting an 
information system for enhanced data collection, processing and flood 
warning.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2025,

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”), (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
Insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1
DWR - Civil Works (Off-farm 
Canal and Ancillary); Equipment & 
Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,390,973
76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2
MOES - Civil Works; Equipment 
& Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,559,541 76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

3 Interest during Implementation 849,486 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 21,800,000

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM and its 
appendices. Any subsequent change to the PAM or its appendices shall become effective only 
after the approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy 
between the PAM or its appendices on the one hand, and this Loan Agreement or the Grant 
Agreement on the other, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement shall 
prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements; the Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (I) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower, through DWR, shall not award any Works contract for a
Subproject which involves environmental impacts until DWR has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the State Agency of 
Environmental Protection and Forestry of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

This paragraph 3 shall apply similarly to MOES for all Hydrometeorology Installation Works 
that are covered by an IEE and EMP.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. This paragraph 4 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology 
Installation Works that are covered by an RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each 
Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and all Project facilities comply with (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; 
(b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the respective IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project, each Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and 
all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule 
agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities 
are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

7. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP for the Subproject.

This paragraph 7 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology Installation Works that are 
covered by an RP.

Indigenous Peoples

8. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, through DWR and/or MOES (as the case 
may be), shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.



16
Schedule 4

Human and Financial Resources to Implemerit Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the RPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant IEE, EMP and RP (to the extent they concern 
impacts on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works (as the case may be) that were 
not considered In the relevant IEE, EMP or RP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of any Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works that were not considered in the 
relevant IEE, EMP or RP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and



17
Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or RP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan or Grant are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall Include specific provisions in 
the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall strictly monitor compliance with
the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

15. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower shall make available all counterpart funds required for the timely
and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of funds or cost overrun, 
through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable funds In a timely manner. 
In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to DWR and MOES and ensure 
that DWR and MOES have sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from any Works, 
Goods and/or Services contract under the Project.

Operational Covenants - DWR

17. The Borrower, through DWR, shall appraise and select all Subprojects in
accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the PAM. The Borrower, through DWR, 



18
Schedule 4

shall ensure that the selection of sites for the feasibility study of potential Subprojects, and the 
selection of sites for the implementation of selected Subprojects, are undertaken in accordance 
with criteria and procedures agreed upon between DWR and ADB as set out in the PAM and 
its appendices.

18. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each Subproject is implemented
in accordance with applicable design and technical specifications and construction norms 
satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, quality control and contract management 
are performed in accordance with best international industry practice, The Borrower, through 
DWR, shall ensure that the detailed design of each Subproject incorporates the findings of the 
climate risk assessment that was undertaken as part of the feasibility study of the Subproject.

19. (a) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that all Project facilities are
operated and maintained, in an effective and sustainable manner, in accordance with the 
applicable laws, regulations and standards of the Borrower and, in other respects not covered 
by such laws, regulations and standards, in accordance with best international industry 
practice.

(b) The Borrower, through DWR, shall timely develop, approve, adopt and 
implement a joint WUA-DWR sustainable O&M plan for each irrigation infrastructure to be 
protected and modernized under the Project. As set out in the PAM and its appendices, each 
such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (i) a water delivery schedule and (ii) an asset 
management plan including an O&M budget and cost sharing. The Borrower, through DWR, 
shall ensure that budgetary and other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as 
necessary for the O&M of each irrigation infrastructure to be protected and modernized under 
the Project, and, at any given time, the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall 
not be less than the total sum required, at that time, to cover the O&M expenditures indicated 
in the O&M budget referred to in this sub-paragraph (b).

(c) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure the timely development and 
implementation of agriculture and on-farm water management plans under the Project. As set 
out in the PAM and its appendices, each such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (I) 
cropping patterns including introduction and diversification of crops and (ii) irrigation methods 
and scheduling. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each such plan shall be 
endorsed by the Council (established and operating under the applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower on WUAs) managing the WUA that will be implementing the plan.

Operational Covenants - MOES

20. (a) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all equipment and
information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk Management 
Component of the Project are operated and maintained appropriately and In accordance with 
the standards and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, and adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. 
The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that adequate, appropriate and timely 
arrangements and resources are in place for the preventive and standard maintenance of the 
said equipment and information systems after their warranty periods expire. The Borrower, 
through MOES, shall timely develop and implement sustainable asset management and 
maintenance plans for the heavy equipment to be provided to the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES.



19
Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all MOES divisions, 
offices and units, including MOES associated entities and centers, that receive and operate 
the equipment and information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are adequately staffed with personnel who have been 
fully trained, in accordance with the requirements of and as otherwise contemplated by the 
PAM, to operate and maintain them.

(c) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all heavy machinery 
and associated equipment provided under the Disaster Risk Management Component of the 
Project is used only by MOES, or a government agency duly authorized by MOES, and only 
for the purpose of preventative and recovery works related to disaster risk management, 
including the maintenance of structures provided under the Project to protect irrigation 
infrastructure from flood and mudflow. The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that such 
equipment is not leased or otherwise permitted to be used by any third party for any 
construction or other commercial activity.

(d) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all hydrological and/or 
meteorological equipment and information systems provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are, in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower, transferred and/or made available for use by KyrgyzHydromet 
promptly after their provision.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

23. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall provide updated Information on
the Project on their websites, including information on performance, business opportunities, 
bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3745-VIE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and 

J . i 4

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED Zf

VIE 49404



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated MW between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (“MARD”) and the following provincial peoples’ committees: Binh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh Thuan 
Provincial People’s Committee (“Participating PPCs”), and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to the Participating PPCs the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon 
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“CCF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a grant from its Climate Change 
Fund ("CCF Grant’’) in an amount of three hundred thousand Dollars ($300,000) for the 
Project;

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("NTF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant provided by the 
Netherlands Trust Fund (“NTF Grant’’, and collectively with the CCF Grant, the “Grants”) 
under the Water Financing Partnership Facility in an amount of seven hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($750,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement dated 2? December 2018 between ADB and the Participating 
PPCs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB, and the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s 
Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s 
Committee and Ninh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall include the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak 
Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong Provincial People’s 
Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as context requires.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “EA" (or “Project Executing Agency”) for the purposes of, and within 
the meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MARD, and the 
Participating PPCs or any successors thereto acceptable to ADB, 
which are responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(d) “EMP" means each environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards’’ means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(f) “Ethnic Minorities Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;



3

(h) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MARD” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, or any successor thereto;

(n) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) “Participating PPCs” means all and any of the provincial peoples’ 
committees of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan, or any successor thereto, which are responsible for the 
carrying out of their respective Subprojects under the Project;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “REMDP” means the resettlement and ethnic minorities development 
plan, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by each 
Participating PPC for relevant Subprojects (if required) under the 
Project and cleared by ADB;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower, through MARD, to ADB that describes 
progress with implementation of and compliance with the EMP, the RP 
and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;



4

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Subproject" means a part or component under the Project that is
carried out by the corresponding Participating PPC and described in 
greater detail in the PAM;

(v) “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement(s) between the 
Borrower and the Participating PPCs, as described in Section 3.01 of 
this Loan Agreement; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall provide the proceeds of the
Loan to the Participating PPCs through (i) budgetary grant transfers; and (ii) relending to the 
Participating PPCs under Subsidiary Loan Agreements upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Participating PPCs to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.



6

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall 
be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the CCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled; and

(b) the NTF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
No. 28 Tran Hung Dao Street
Hoan Kiem District
Ha Noi, Viet Nam

Facsimile Number:

(84-4) 2220-8020



7

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2231.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DINH TIEN DUNG
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to establish climate-resilient and modernized
irrigation systems in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Strengthening of irrigation management services, which includes 
support to:

(i) irrigation water allocation and delivery services; and

(ii) maintenance of irrigation systems;

(b) Modernizing 8 irrigation Subprojects to provide water on-demand to 
farmers cultivating high value crops;

(c) Adopting efficient "on-farm" water management practices, which 
includes:

(i) providing farmers with information and training on best 
irrigation practices to improve their water productivity; and

(ii) providing farmers with technical advice on identifying and 
developing appropriate micro irrigation systems that meet their 
individual requirements.

3. The Project includes provision of Consulting Services, as detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for project expenditures under a Subproject until the 
Borrower has furnished to ADB a written confirmation that the respective Participating PPC 
had executed a Subsidiary Loan Agreement(s) on terms and conditions consistent with this 
Loan Agreement. For avoidance of doubt, this withdrawal condition applies individually and 
severally to each Participating PPC.



11

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Binh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,826,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

2 Ninh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

29,495,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Khanh Hoa Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

15,113,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

4 Dak Nong Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,641,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

5 Dak Lak Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services, 
Project Administration)*

19,925,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

TOTAL 100,000,000

*Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
**Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



12

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

4. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the
Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) National Competitive Bidding.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) ADB has granted the final approval of the updated EMP, which is 
prepared based on the relevant Subproject’s detailed design; and



13

Schedule 4

(b) the Participating PPC has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
the updated EMP into the relevant Works contract

8. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts, and/or impacts on ethnic minorities, until the relevant Participating 
PPC has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP based on the relevant 
Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB’s clearance of such REMDP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Fixed Budget Selection;

(b) Consultants’ Qualifications Selection; and

(c) Single Source Selection.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



14

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that
their respective Subprojects are carried out in accordance with environmental assessment 
procedures provided in the lEEs as agreed between MARD and ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

5. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Ethnic Minorities

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project and all Project 



15

Schedule 5

facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to ethnic 
minorities; (b) the Ethnic Minorities Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Participating PPCs to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the 
REMDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

9. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Participating PPCs to do the
following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP, 



16

Schedule 5

promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with 
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; 
and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

10. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

12. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 11 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include: (i) 
equality of project benefits and opportunity-sharing between men and women; (ii) reduction in 
gender inequalities and social risks (HIV/AIDS transmission prevention, human trafficking 
prevention during construction of works); (Hi) training of women (including those from ethnic 
minorities) on micro irrigation and in overall system management and operations; (iv) 
increased representation of women in decision-making bodies; and (v) collection of sex- 
disaggregated data for benefit monitoring and evaluation.



17

Schedule 5

Operations and Maintenance

14. The Borrower shall cause each of the Participating PPCs to (a) adopt a tariff
structure in accordance with the Borrower’s appropriate regulations, whereby the tariffs are 
set at levels as to enable each Participating PPC, at a minimum, to fully recover Its respective 
operations and maintenance costs; and (b) launch its implementation in the Project financed 
irrigation schemes.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower, through the Participating PPCs, shall make available, promptly
as and when needed, the funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources as shall be 
necessary or required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB, promptly at its reasonable request, evidence satisfactory to ADB that such 
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources are available for purposes related to the 
Project. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Participating PPCs 
have followed applicable procedures to budget for, and have obtained sufficient funds to 
satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 12 months from the date of the Effective Date, each Participating PPC
shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism in accordance with the 
provisions of the lEEs and the Participating PPC’s corresponding REMDP, and acceptable to 
ADB, is established. The grievance redress mechanism shall be translated to the local 
dialect and disclose in a place that are accessible to the local communities to make them 
aware of the grievance mechanism and their potential involvement and responsibilities in the 
project activities. The grievance redress mechanism shall include the names of the focal 
persons in the provincial project management units and the procedures for submitting 
complaints.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.

19. The Borrower shall disclose, through the websites of the Participating PPCs,
information about various matters concerning the Project, including general project 
information, procurement, Project progress, and contact details in the English and 



18

Schedule 5

Vietnamese languages. The website will also provide a link to ADB’s Office of Anticorruption 
and Integrity (http://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main) for reporting to ADB any grievances or 
allegations of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. With regard to 
procurement, the website will include information on the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract 
awarded, and the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.























































LOAN NUMBER 3724-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

/■
I

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2018

MYA 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 November 2018 between THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to the Global Agriculture and Food 
Security Program (“GAFSP”) for a grant (“GAFSP Grant”) and GAFSP has agreed to provide 
the Borrower a grant in the amount of twenty-two million Dollars ($22,000,000) to assist in 
financing a part of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “CSA" means climate smart agriculture;



2

(d) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “GAFSP Grant Agreement” means the grant agreement between ADB 
and the Borrower in relation to the GAFSP Grant;

(h) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means (i) Department of Agriculture; (ii) 
Department of Planning; (iii) Department of Rural Development; (iv) 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; (v) 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics, each of 
MOALI; and (vi) Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) 
and Department of Consumer Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which are responsible for the 
implementation of the Project;

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP" means each indigenous peoples 
plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
IPPF;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 



thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

“Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

“Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework” or “LARF” means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

“Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

“MOALi” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

“PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

“Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

"Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

“Project Executing Agency" or “EA" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of the Loan Regulations means MOALi or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of 
the Project;

“Resettlement Plan" or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the LARF and 
cleared by ADB;

“Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS" means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

“Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;



4

(z) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set forth in the PAM; and

(aa) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million five hundred thousand Dollars 
($40,500,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (I) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors1 opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the GAFSP Grant Agreement has been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Union Minister of Planning and Finance of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of 
the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning and Finance
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410-198

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444
+632 636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

By______________________________
DAW SI SI PYONE 

Director General 
Treasury Department, Ministry of 

Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to develop productive and resource efficient
agribusiness value chains.

2. The Project shall comprise Subprojects to achieve the following outputs:

Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and 
made climate resilient - This includes (a) upgrading irrigation, farm roads, 
buildings, farm machinery, post-harvest equipment, seed testing equipment and 
agrometeorologicai stations, in seed farms; (b) rehabilitating tertiary canals and 
community reservoirs, and constructing shallow tube wells with some linked to 
drip and sprinkler technologies; (c) rehabilitating farm roads to climate resilient 
condition; and (d) upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment.

Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted - This 
includes (a) deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (b) strengthening capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and 
regional government staff on CSA technologies and production practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and agribusiness plan 
development, and manufacturing practices; and (c) facilitating access to inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off farm rural livelihood opportunities.

Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness 
enhanced - This includes (a) establishing an agribusiness policy cell within 
MOALl’s Department of Planning; (b) raising awareness and capacity of 
financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusiness; and (c) enhancing 
weather, market and credit information networks, and delivery of land 
administration services.

3. The Project will support Consulting Services to implement the above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1

Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and 
Design, and Project 
Implementation Support

34,490,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Training, Workshops and Studies 2,010,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 620,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consultants 2,020,000 36% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,360,000 100% total amount due

TOTAL 40,500,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement

3. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.

4. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower's national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE/EMP, as relevant, from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject’s detailed design and obtained ADB’s 
clearance of such RP.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on indigenous peoples until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final IPP, as relevant, and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

10. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

11. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Qualification Based Selection for monitoring and evaluation and land 
administration technical services; and

(b) Single Source Selection for variety development and dissemination 
services.

12. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants as needed in accordance
with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.



16
Schedule 4

14. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after 
approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between 
the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EARF, each IEE, EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject 
categorized as Category A under the SPS is financed under the Project.

involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the LARF, RP and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes 
place in connection with the Project until: (a) compensation and other entitlements, as relevant, 
have been provided to affected people in accordance with the RP; and (b) a comprehensive 
income and livelihood restoration program has been established in accordance with the RP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous people; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPPF 
and any IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement any EMP, RP and IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE, 
the EMP, the RP and any IPP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP, and the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan in 
accordance with the SPS; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti corruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Borrower 
becomes aware or has a reasonable suspicion that any member of the Borrower or executing 
agency has engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anticorruption 
Policy) under or in connection with the Project or the loan, the Borrower shall take such timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

12. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency shall make use of 
its existing website or create a Project website within 3 months from Effective Date, accessible 
by the public, to disclose various information concerning the Project including general 
information about the Project, public procurement related to the Project, Project progress and 
contact details in English and Myanmar language. The website shall also provide a link to 
ADB’s Integrity Unit for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations or corrupt practices 
arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the website shall include 
information on, among others, (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) name of the winning 
bidder; (c) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; (d) amount of contract awarded; and 
(e) list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services. The Project Executing Agency shall permit 
any bidder to request an explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project 
Executing Agency shall respond promptly. The website shall be updated regularly. In addition 
to the web-based disclosure, the stakeholders shall be provided by the Project Executing 
Agency with detailed information on procurement on public notice boards in their respective 
areas.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among others, (a) comply with all 
applicable labor laws and regulations of the Borrower; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation on the basis of age, gender, 



20
Schedule 5

ethnicity, religion or caste; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; (f) advertise labor requirements 
in a timely manner prior to recruitment, in a venue that can reasonably be expected to be seen 
by interested men and women; (g) provide workers with written contract, adequate on-the-job 
training and safety training; (h) not restrict freedom of association of workers; and 
(i) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
areas, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender Action Plan

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the (a) GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis, including personnel cost. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising 
from any Works, Goods and Consulting Services contract.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that all completed Subprojects have adequate
counterpart funds for operation and maintenance of infrastructure allocated to them on a yearly 
basis and made available on a timely basis. The Project Executing Agency shall further ensure 
that the farmer water user communities and water user groups collect adequate irrigation 
service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution canals in accordance with 
the Borrower's decree on farmer water user communities.

Subproject selection

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all Subprojects selected for financing under the Project meet the screening and eligibility 
criteria as agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in the PAM.























































LOAN NUMBER 8346-CAM(EF)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
acting as an accredited entity of the 

Green Climate Fund

DATED 6 JULY 2018

CAM 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB"), acting not in its individual capacity, 
but solely in its capacity as an accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (“GCF”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement 
(as defined herein);

(B) ADB has established the ADB Green Climate Fund to receive, hold in 
trust and administer GCF funds;

(C) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(the “Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a 
concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in the amount of 
ninety million Dollars ($90,000,000) for the purposes of the Project (“Ordinary Operations 
Loan”);

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB, ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance with the 
Accreditation Master Agreement dated 17 August 2017 (“AMA”) and the Funded Activity 
Agreement to be entered into between GCF and ADB (“FAA"), has agreed to provide from the 
ADB Green Climate Fund a grant in the amount of thirty million Dollars ($30,000,000) to assist 
in financing a part of the Project; and

(E) ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance 
with the AMA and the FAA, between GCF and ADB, has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower 
from the ADB Green Climate Fund upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1

Standard Terms; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Standard Terms (“Standard Terms") 
attached hereto in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement shall apply to this Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Standard Terms and Section 1.02 of the Ordinary Operations



2

[Concessional] Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from the ADB
Green Climate Fund an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower acknowledges that the Loan is funded out 
of resources made available by the GCF to ADB as an accredited entity of the GCF. In 
accordance with Section 2.02 of the Standard Terms, the Borrower may only withdraw Loan 
proceeds subject to the availability of such resources.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay to ADB a service charge at the 
rate of 0.25% per annum on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and 
outstanding from time to time,

Section 2,04. The service charge on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the service charge shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 



3

provisions of Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been procured 
under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and 
ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 7.02 
of the Standard Terms shall be 31 March 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and 
(v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, 
copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, ail in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower and its financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed by the Borrower pursuant to subsections (a)(iii) and 



4

(b) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to 
participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions 
shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the 
Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. ADB’s obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB’s receipt of a corresponding amount from GCF in accordance 
with the terms of the AMA and the FAA,

Section 4. 04. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 7.01(1) of the Standard Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation or shall have become 
repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have become liable for suspension or 
cancellation.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 7.07 (d) of the Standard Terms: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.01(c) of the Standard 
Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the condition 



5

requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement and GCF Grant 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than the condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 8.02 of the Standard Terms, to be included in the opinion or opinions to 
be furnished to ADB: the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the GCF 
Grant Agreement have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the exceptions referred to in Section 
6.01 (a) and (b) above) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.04 of the 
Standard Terms.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 10.02 of the Standard 
Terms.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 10.01 of the Standard Terms:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+855 23 427-798
+855 23 428-424



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444 
+632 636-2231.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister of Economy and Finance

i 
i

i

|

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Bv
HIDEAKI IWASAKI 

Acting Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Standard Terms

ARTICLE I

Definitions; Interpretation

Section 1.01, Definitions. Except where the context otherwise 
requires, the following terms have the following meanings wherever used in these Standard 
Terms:

(a) "ADB Green Climate Fund” means the trust fund established and 
administered by ADB to receive, hold in trust and administer the GCF 
funds transferred to ADB by GCF;

(b) “assets" includes property, revenues and claims of any kind;

(c) “convertible currency" means any currency so designated by ADB at any 
time;

(d) “currency" of a country or a territory means such currency as at the time 
referred to is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts in 
that country or territory;

(e) “Dollar” or the sign each means the lawful currency of the United 
States of America;

(f) “Effective Date” means the date on which the Loan Agreement shall 
have come into force and effect pursuant to Section 8,03 of this 
Schedule 1;

(g) “foreign currency” means any currency other than currency of the 
member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out;

(h) “Green Climate Fund” or “GCF” means the fund established within the 
framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in 2010, and governed under the Governing Instrument;

(i) "guarantee” includes, as the case requires, any counter-guarantee, 
indemnity or any other arrangement which has the effect of a guarantee, 
counter-guarantee or indemnity, given by a member in favor, or for the 
benefit of ADB;

Q) “lien” includes mortgages, pledges, charges, privileges and priorities of 
any kind;

(k) "Loan" means the loan provided for in this Loan Agreement;



9
Schedule 1

(I) “Loan Account” means the account opened or to be opened by ADB on 
its books in the name of the Borrower to which the amount of the Loan 
has been or will be credited;

(m) “Loan Closing Date" means the date specified by ADB that is not later 
than the first Principal Payment Date shown in the amortization 
schedule to the Loan Agreement, or such other date as may be agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower for such purpose;

(n) “Loan Currency” means the currency in which the principal amount of 
the Loan is denominated from time to time;

(o) “member" means a member of ADB;

(p) “Multilateral Development Bank Fee" means the management fee 
specified in this Loan Agreement;

(q) “Principal Payment Date" means each date specified in the Loan 
Agreement on which all or any portion of the principal amount of the 
Loan is payable;

(r) “Project Executing Agency" means the Borrower’s Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries or any successor thereto;

(s) “service charge" means a charge made on the Loan pursuant to Section 
2.04 to the Loan Agreement; and

(t) “taxes” includes imposts, levies, fees and duties of any nature, whether 
in effect at the date of the Loan Agreement or thereafter imposed.

Section 1.02. Interpretation. Except where the context 
otherwise requires, (a) a reference to the Incurring of debt includes the assumption and 
guarantee of debt; (b) references in these Standard Terms to Articles or Sections are to Articles 
or Sections of these Standard Terms; (c) the headings of the Articles and Sections are inserted 
for convenience of reference only and are not a part of these Standard Terms; (d) singular may 
include plural and vice versa; and (e) a reference to any gender includes any other gender.

ARTICLE II

Loan Account; Service Charge; Multilateral Development Bank Fee; 
Repayment; Place of Payment

Section 2.01. Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan 
shall be credited to the Loan Account in the Loan Currency and may be withdrawn therefrom 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.



10
Schedule 1

Section 2.02. Funding Shortfall. Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Section 2.01, no withdrawals shall be made if, as a result of such withdrawal, the total 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account would exceed the amount available to 
ADB from resources provided to it for purposes of the Loan. Only the resources made available 
to ADB for the purposes of the Loan shall be considered for the enforcement of any obligations, 
claims or liabilities under or in connection with the Loan.

Section 2.03. Service Charge. A service charge at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. The service charge shall 
accrue from the respective dates on which amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. 
ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the 
Borrower, the amounts required to meet service charge payments, when and if due.

Section 2.04. Multilateral Development Bank Fee. 
The Borrower shall pay ADB a Multilateral Development Bank Fee on the Loan at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement. If this Loan Agreement provides for the financing of the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee out of the proceeds of the Loan, ADB shall, on behalf of 
the Borrower, withdraw from the Loan Account on or after the Effective Date and pay to itself 
the amount of the Multilateral Development Bank Fee.

Section 2.05. Computation of Service Charge and Other Charges. 
The service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee, if the Borrower elects to pay 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee not as a lump sum but semiannually at a rate per 
annum calculated on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan from time to time, shall be computed 
on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

Section 2.06. Repayment and Prepayment (a) The Borrower 
shall repay ADB the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the provisions of, and the amortization schedule to, this Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days’ written notice to ADB, the Borrower 
shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a date acceptable to ADB (provided, 
that the Borrower shall have paid all amounts due under this Loan Agreement as of such date) 
(i) all of the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or (ii) all of the principal amount of 
any one or more maturities of the Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount which is 
(i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB under this Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
less than the full amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this Section, 
ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so received in any manner and for 
such purposes under this Loan Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.

Sec tion 2.07. Place of Payment. The principal of, and service 
charge and other charges (including the Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan shall 
be paid at such places as ADB shall reasonably request.



11
Schedule 1

ARTICLE III

Currency Provisions

Section 3.01. Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the 
Loan Account shall be made in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.02. Currency of Payment. The principal of the Loan 
shall be repaid in the Loan Currency and, the service charge on any portion of the Loan and 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee shall be paid in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.03. Purchase of Currencies. If the Borrower shall so 
request, ADB shall, acting as agent of the Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB 
shall determine, purchase the Loan Currency for the purpose of repayment of principal, and 
payment of service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee upon timely payment 
by the Borrower of sufficient funds for that purpose in a currency or currencies acceptable to 
ADB; provided, however, that the Borrower shall be deemed to have made any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement only when and to the extent that ADB has received such 
payment in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.04. Valuation of Currencies. Whenever it shall be 
necessary for the purposes of this Loan Agreement to determine the value of one currency in 
terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 3.05. Manner of Payment. (a) Any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement to be made to ADB in the currency of any country shall 
be made in such manner, and in currency acquired in such manner, as shall be permitted 
under the laws of such country for the purpose of making such payment and effecting the 
deposit of such currency to the account of ADB with a depository of ADB in such country.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the principal of, and the service charge 
and other charges on, the Loan are paid without restrictions of any kind imposed by, or in the 
territory of, the Borrower.

ARTICLE IV

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

Section 4.01. Withdrawal from the Loan Account. (a) Loan 
proceeds shall be used only for the purposes of the Project. Subject to any conditions or 
restrictions specified in this Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall be entitled to withdraw from 
the Loan Account such amounts as shall have been paid, or, if ADB shall so agree, such 
amounts as shall be required to meet payments to be made, for the reasonable cost of goods, 
services and any other expenditures required for the Project and to be financed under this 
Loan Agreement. If at any time ADB determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds 
withdrawn from the Loan Account has been used by the Borrower in a manner inconsistent 



12
Schedule 1

with the provisions of the Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall promptly refund such amount 
to ADB.

(b) Except as ADB and the Borrower shall otherwise agree, no withdrawals 
shall be made on account of expenditures incurred prior to the Effective Date. ADB may refuse 
to finance a contract where goods and services have not been procured in accordance with 
procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or 
where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB. If at any time ADB 
determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds withdrawn from the Loan Account has been 
used by the Borrower to finance such contracts, the Borrower shall promptly refund such 
amount to ADB.

(c) Withdrawals of the proceeds of the Loan from the Loan Account shall 
be made in the Loan Currency. ADB may, at the request and acting as an agent of the 
Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB shall determine, purchase with such 
currency withdrawn from the Loan Account such other currencies as the Borrower shall 
reasonably request to meet payments for items of expenditure to be financed from the Loan. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of this Loan Agreement to determine the value 
of one currency in terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 4.02. Commitment Letters by ADB. Upon the 
Borrower's request, ADB may issue commitment letters to pay amounts in respect of the cost 
of goods and services to be financed under the Loan, notwithstanding any subsequent 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 4.03. Application for Withdrawal. When the Borrower 
shall desire to withdraw any amount from the Loan Account or to request ADB to issue 
commitment letters pursuant to Section 4,02, the Borrower shall promptly deliver to ADB an 
application in such form and containing such statements, representations, warranties and 
agreements, as ADB shall reasonably request. Except as ADB and the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree, applications for withdrawal, with the necessary documentation as hereinafter 
in this Article provided, shall be made promptly in relation to the expenditures for the Project.

Section 4.04. Evidence of Authority to Sign Applications.
The Borrower shall furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person authorized 
to sign applications for withdrawal and the authenticated specimen signature of each person.

Section 4.05. Supporting Evidence. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB such documents and other evidence in support of the application for withdrawal 
as ADB shall reasonably request, whether before or after ADB shall have permitted any 
withdrawal requested in the application.

Section 4.06. Sufficiency of Applications and Documents. 
Each application for withdrawal and the accompanying documents and all other evidence must 
be sufficient in form and substance to satisfy ADB that the Borrower is entitled to withdraw 
from the Loan Account the amount applied for and that the amount to be withdrawn from the 
Loan Account is to be used only for the purposes specified in this Loan Agreement.



13
Schedule 1

Section 4.07. Payment by ADB. Payment by ADB of amounts 
which the Borrower is entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account shall be made to or on the 
order of the Borrower.

ARTICLE V

Particular Covenants

Section 5.01. Cooperation and Information. (a) ADB and 
the Borrower shall cooperate fully to ensure that the purposes of the Loan will be 
accomplished. To that end, ADB and the Borrower shall:

(i) from time to time, at the request of any one of them, exchange 
views with regard to any matters relating to the progress of the 
Project, the purposes of the Loan or the maintenance of the 
service thereof, the performance of their respective obligations 
under this Loan Agreement, [the performance by the Project 
Executing Agency of its obligations,] and furnish to the other 
party all such related information as it shall reasonably request; 
and

(ii) promptly inform each other of any condition which interferes 
with, or threatens to interfere with, the matters referred to in 
paragraph (a)(i) of this Section.

(b) The Borrower shall afford all reasonable opportunity for ADB's 
representatives to visit any part of its territory for purposes related to the Loan.

Section 5.02. Negative Pledge. (a) If the Borrower shall 
create or permit the creation of any lien on any of its assets as security for any foreign currency 
debt, the Borrower undertakes to expressly provide that such lien will ipso facto equally and 
ratably secure the payment of the principal of, and service charge on, the Loan. If any statutory 
lien shall be created on any assets of the Borrower (as hereinafter defined), as security for any 
foreign currency debt, the Borrower shall grant to ADB an equivalent lien satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this Section shall not apply to (i) any 
lien created on property, at the time of purchase thereof, solely as security for payment of the 
purchase price of such property; or (ii) any lien arising in the ordinary course of banking 
transactions and securing a debt maturing not more than one year after its date.

(c) The term “assets of the Borrower" as used in paragraph (a) of this 
Section includes assets of any political subdivision or any agency of the Borrower and assets 
of any agency of such political subdivision, and assets of any entity owned or controlled by, or 
operating for the account or benefit of, the Borrower or any such political subdivision or agency, 
including any other institution performing the functions of a central bank for the Borrower.



14
Schedule 1

Section 5.03. Insurance. (a) The Borrower shall take out 
and maintain with responsible insurers, or make other arrangements satisfactory to ADB for, 
insurance against such risks and in such amounts as shall be consistent with sound practice. 
The Borrower shall be deemed to have opted for self-insurance in the absence of any specific 
insurance for the Project.

(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower undertakes 
to insure, or cause to be insured, the goods to be imported for the Project and to be financed 
out of the proceeds of the Loan against hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and 
delivery thereof to the place of use or installation, and for such insurance any indemnity shall 
be payable in a currency freely usable to replace or repair such goods.

Sec tion 5.04. Records, Financial Statements and Audits.
The Borrower shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records and financial statements 
adequate to Identify the goods, services and other items of expenditure financed under the 
Project; to record the progress of the Project (including the cost thereof and); to reflect, in 
accordance with consistently maintained sound financial reporting principles, the operations 
and financial condition of the Project; and to have the financial statements audited. Related 
requirements shall be specified in the Loan Agreement.

Section 5.05. Reports. (a) The Borrower shall furnish, or 
cause to be furnished, to ADB all such reports as ADB shall reasonably request concerning (i) 
the Loan, and the expenditure of the proceeds and maintenance of the service thereof; (ii) the 
goods, services and other items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan; (iii) 
the Project and the Project Executing Agency; (iv) the administration, operations and financial 
condition of the Borrower; and (v) any other matters relating to the purposes of the Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall promptly inform ADB of any condition which 
interferes with, or threatens to interfere with, the progress of the Project, the performance of 
their respective obligations under the Loan Agreement, the accomplishment of the purposes 
of the Loan, or the maintenance of the service thereof; and the Borrower shall promptly inform 
ADB in advance of any proposed changes in the ownership or control of the Borrower or its 
assets, or any transaction or arrangement which will have or is likely to have such effect.

(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB periodic reports on the execution of the Project, on the accomplishment of the 
targets and actions agreed between ADB and the Borrower, and on the operation and 
management of the Project facilities. Such reports shall be submitted in such form and in such 
detail and within such a period as ADB shall reasonably request, and shall indicate, among 
other things, progress made and problems encountered during the period under review, steps 
taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems, and proposed program of activities 
and expected progress during the following period.

(d) Promptly after completion of the Project, but in any event not later than 
three months thereafter or such later date as may be agreed for this purpose between the 
Borrower and ADB, the Borrower shall prepare and furnish to ADB a report, in such form and 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request, on the execution and initial operation of the 
Project, including its cost, the performance by the Borrower of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement and the accomplishment of the purposes of the Loan.



15
Schedule 1

Section 5.06. Counterpart Obligations and Land Acquisition.
The Borrower shall make available, promptly as and when needed, the funds, facilities, 
services, land, and other resources as shall be necessary or required, in addition to the 
proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project and for the operation and maintenance 
of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall furnish to ADB, promptly at its request, evidence 
satisfactory to ADB that such funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources are available 
for purposes related to the Project.

Section 5.07, Work Schedules, Plans and Design Standards. 
The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance with plans, design 
standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods acceptable to the 
Borrower and ADB, as applicable. When required by ADB, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause 
to be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made therein, 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

Section 5.08. General Undertakings. (a) The Borrower 
shall cause the Project to be carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity 
with sound financial, business and development practices. The Borrower shall in collaboration 
with ADB ensure that the Project adheres to ADB policies on anticorruption, core labor 
standards, environmental and social safeguards, gender, procurement and consulting 
services, disbursement and such other policy specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its departments and 
agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities 
are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative policies and 
procedures.

Section 5. 09. Contractors and Consultants. In the carrying 
out of the Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and 
contractors, acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, to be employed to an extent and upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

Section 5.10. Maintenance. The Borrower shall ensure that 
any facilities relevant to the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with 
sound operational and maintenance practices. The Borrower shall promptly as needed, make 
or cause to be made all necessary repairs and renewals thereof.

ARTICLE VI

Exemption from Taxation

Section 6. 01. Exemption from Taxation. The Borrower shall 
ensure that:

(a) the principal of, and service charge and other charges (including the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan are exempt from, and 



16
Schedule 1

are paid without deduction for, any taxes levied by, or in the territory of, 
the Borrower; and

(b) this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement are exempt from any 
taxes levied by, or in the territory of, the Borrower on or in connection 
with the execution, delivery or registration thereof.

ARTICLE VII

Suspension; Cancellation; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 7.01. Suspension by ADB. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred at any time after the date of this Loan Agreement and be continuing, 
ADB may by notice to the Borrower suspend in whole or in part the right of the Borrower to 
make withdrawals from the Loan Account:

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to make payment (notwithstanding the 
fact that such payment may have been made by any third party) of 
principal, service charge or any other charge (including the Multilateral 
Development Bank Fee) required (i) under the Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB; or 
(iii) in consequence of any guarantee or other financial obligation of any 
kind extended by ADB to any third party with the agreement of the 
Borrower.

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any other of its obligations 
under this Loan Agreement

(c) The Project Executing Agency shall have failed to perform any of its 
obligations under the Project Agreement.

(d) ADB shall have suspended in whole or in part the right of the Borrower 
to make withdrawals under any other loan agreement with ADB because 
of a failure by the Borrower to perform any of its obligations under such 
loan agreement or any related guarantee agreement with ADB.

(e) A situation shall have arisen or developed which in the reasonable 
opinion of ADB will or may make it improbable that (i) the Project can be 
successfully carried out; or (ii) the Borrower or the Project Executing 
Agency will be able to perform any of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement.

(f) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out shall have 
been suspended from membership in, or ceased to be a member of, 
ADB, or shall have delivered a notice to withdraw from ADB.



17
Schedule 1

(g) A representation made by the Borrower in or pursuant to this Loan 
Agreement, or any statement furnished in connection therewith and 
intended to be relied upon by ADB in making the Loan, shall have been 
incorrect in any material respect

(h) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Project Executing Agency, the 
alienation or transfer of any of its aspects other than in the normal 
course of business, or for the suspension of its operations.

(i) The Borrower shall have been unable to pay its debts as they mature or 
any action or proceeding shall have been taken by the Borrower or by 
others whereby any of the assets of the Borrower shall or may be 
distributed among its creditors.

(j) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out or any 
other authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(k) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(I) ADB shall have determined, with respect to any contract to be financed 
in full or in part out of the proceeds of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, 
coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, were engaged in 
by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during 
the procurement of goods and services, consultants’ selection or the 
execution of a contract, without the Borrower having taken timely and 
appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy the situation; or ADB 
shall have determined that the procurement of any goods or services to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the 
relevant procedure set out in this Loan Agreement.

(m) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred.

The right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall 
continue to be suspended in whole or in part, as the case may be, until the event which gave 
rise to such suspension shall have, in the reasonable opinion of ADB, ceased to exist or until 
ADB shall have notified the Borrower that the right to make withdrawals has been restored in 
whole or in part, whichever is the earlier.

Section 7.02. Cancellation by ADB. If (a) the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall have been suspended with respect 
to any amount of the Loan for a continuous period of 30 days; (b) at any time ADB determines, 
after consultation with the Borrower, that any amount of the Loan will not be required for the 



18
Schedule 1

purposes of the Project; (c) by the date specified in this Loan Agreement as the Loan Closing 
Date, an amount of the Loan shall remain unwithdrawn from the Loan Account; (d) at any time 
ADB determines, with respect to any contract to be financed in full or in partout of the proceeds 
of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, 
were engaged in by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during the 
procurement of goods, works, services, consultants’ selection or the execution of a contract, 
without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy 
the situation; or (e) at any time, ADB determines that the procurement of any goods or services 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the relevant procedure set 
out in this Loan Agreement, ADB may by notice to the Borrower terminate the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals with respect to such amount Upon the giving of such notice, 
such amount of the Loan shall be cancelled.

Section 7.03. Cancellation by the Borrower. After consultation 
with ADB, the Borrower may by notice to ADB cancel any amount of the Loan which the 
Borrower shall not have withdrawn prior to the giving of such notice.

Section 7.04. Amounts Subject to Commitment Letters.
No suspension or cancellation shall apply to amounts subject to any commitment letter issued 
by ADB pursuant to Section 4.02 except as expressly provided in such commitment letter.

Section 7.05. Application of Cancellation. Except as ADB and 
the Borrower shall otherwise agree, any cancellation shall be applied pro rata to the remaining 
maturities of the principal amount of the Loan which shall mature after the date of such 
cancellation.

Section 7.06, Effectiveness of Provisions After Suspension or 
Cancellation. Notwithstanding any cancellation or suspension, all the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect except as specifically provided in this 
Article.

Section 7.07. Acceleration of Maturity. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, specified below, then at any 
subsequent time during the continuance thereof ADB may by notice to the Borrower declare 
the principal of the Loan then outstanding, together with all accrued service charge thereon, to 
be due and payable immediately, and upon any such declaration such principal and service 
charge shall become due and payable immediately:

(a) Any event specified in Section 7.01(a) shall have occurred and 
continued for a period of 30 days.

(b) Any event specified in Section 7.01(b) and Section 7.01(c) shall have 
occurred and continued for a period of 60 days after notice thereof shall 
have been given by ADB to the Borrower.

(c) Any event specified in Section 7.01(g), Section 7.01(h), Section 7.01 (i), 
and Section 7.01 (j) shall have occurred.



19
Schedule 1

(d) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, 
specified in this Loan Agreement

ARTICLE VIII

Effectiveness; Termination

Section 8.01. Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness.
The Loan Agreement shall not become effective until evidence satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been furnished to ADB that:

(a) the execution and delivery of this Loan Agreement on behalf of the 
Borrower have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary 
corporate and governmental action;

(b) the execution and delivery of the Project Agreement on behalf of the 
Project Executing Agency have been duly authorized or ratified by all 
necessary corporate and governmental action;

(c) the condition of the Borrower, as represented to ADB at the date of the 
Loan Agreement, has undergone no material adverse change between 
such date and the date agreed upon between the Borrower and ADB for 
the purposes of this Section, provided that ADB shall have requested 
such evidence; and

(d) all other events specified in this Loan Agreement as additional 
conditions to its effectiveness have occurred.

Sec tion 8.02. Legal Opinions. As part of the evidence to be 
furnished pursuant to Section 8.01, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB an opinion or opinions satisfactory to ADB of counsel acceptable to ADB showing:

(a) on behalf of the Borrower, that this Loan Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with 
its terms;

(b) on behalf of the Project Executing Agency, that the Project Agreement 
has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on 
behalf of, the Project Executing Agency and is legally binding upon the 
Project Executing Agency in accordance with its terms; and

(c) such other matters as shall be specified in this Loan Agreement.

Section 8.03. Effective Date. (a) Except as ADB and the
Borrower shall otherwise agree, this Loan Agreement shall come into force and effect on the 



20
Schedule 1

date of ADB’s notice to the Borrower notice of its acceptance of the evidence required by 
Section 8.01.

(b) If, before the Effective Date, any event shall have occurred which would 
have entitled ADB to suspend the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan 
Account if this Loan Agreement had been effective, ADB may postpone the dispatch of the 
notice referred to in paragraph (a) of this Section until such event shall have ceased to exist.

Section 8.04. Termination for Failure to Become Effective.
If this Loan Agreement shall not have come into force and effect by the date specified in this 
Loan Agreement for the purposes of this Section, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of 
the parties thereunder shall terminate, unless ADB, after consideration of the reasons for the 
delay, shall establish a later date for the purposes of this Section. ADB shall promptly notify 
the Borrower of such later date.

Section 8.05. Termination on Full Payment. If and when the 
entire principal amount of this Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and all service charges 
which shall have accrued on the Loan and all other charges (including the Management Fee) 
on the Loan shall have been paid, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of the parties 
thereunder shall forthwith terminate.

ARTICLE IX

Enforceability; Failure to Exercise Rights; Arbitration

Section 9.01. Enforceability. (a) The rights and obligations 
of ADB and the Borrower under this Loan Agreement shall be valid and enforceable in 
accordance with their terms and, where either the Borrower is a member, notwithstanding the 
law of any state or political or administrative subdivision thereof, to the contrary.

(b) Neither ADB nor the Borrower shall be entitled in any proceeding under 
this Article to assert any claim that any provision of this Loan Agreement is invalid or 
unenforceable because of any provision of the Articles of Agreement Establishing the Asian 
Development Bank or for any other reason.

Section 9.02. Failure to Exercise Rights. No delay in 
exercising, or omission to exercise, any right, power or remedy accruing to either party under 
this Loan Agreement upon any default shall impair any such right, power or remedy, or be 
construed to be a waiver thereof or an acquiescence in any such default; nor shall the action 
of such party in respect of any default, or any acquiescence in any default, affect or impair any 
right, power or remedy of such party in respect of any other or subsequent default.

Section 9.03. Arbitration. (a) Any controversy between the 
parties to this Loan Agreement and any claim by any such party against any other such party 
arising under this Loan Agreement which shall not be settled by agreement of the parties shall 
be submitted to arbitration by an Arbitral Tribunal as hereinafter provided.



21
Schedule 1

(b) The parties to such arbitration shall be ADB, on the one side, and the 
Borrower on the other side.

(c) The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators appointed as 
follows: one arbitrator shall be appointed by ADB; a second arbitrator shall be appointed by 
the Borrower; and the third arbitrator (hereinafter sometimes called the Presiding Arbitrator) 
shall be appointed by agreement of the parties or, if they shall not agree, by the President of 
the International Court of Justice or, failing appointment by him, by the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. If either side shall fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Presiding Arbitrator shall 
appoint such arbitrator. In case any arbitrator appointed in accordance with this Section shall 
resign, die or become unable to act, a successor arbitrator shall be appointed in the same 
manner as herein prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and such successor 
shall have all the powers and duties of such original arbitrator.

(d) An arbitration proceeding may be instituted under this Section upon 
notice by the party instituting such proceeding to the other party or parties. Such notice shall 
contain a statement setting forth the nature of the controversy or claim to be submitted to 
arbitration, the nature of the relief sought and the name of the arbitrator appointed by the party 
instituting such proceeding. Within 30 days after the giving of such notice, the other party or 
parties shall notify the party instituting the proceeding of the name of the arbitrator appointed 
by such other party or parties.

(e) If within 60 days after the giving of the notice instituting the arbitration 
proceeding the parties shall not have agreed upon a Presiding Arbitrator, any party may 
request the appointment of a Presiding Arbitrator as provided in paragraph (c) of this Section.

(f) The Arbitral Tribunal shall convene at such time and place as shall be 
fixed by the Presiding Arbitrator. Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal shall determine where and 
when it shall sit

(g) The law to be applied by the Arbitral Tribunal shall be public international 
law, the sources of which shall be taken for these purposes to include:

(i) any relevant treaty obligations that are binding reciprocally on 
the parties;

(ii) the provisions of any international conventions and treaties 
(whether or not binding directly as such on the parties) generally 
recognized as having codified or ripened into binding rules of 
customary law applicable to states and international institutions, 
as appropriate;

(iii) other forms of international custom, including the practice of 
states and international institutions of such generality, 
consistency and duration as to create legal obligations; and

(iv) applicable general principles of law.



22
Schedule 1

(h) Subject to the provisions of this Section and except as the parties shall
otherwise agree, the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide all questions relating to its competence and 
shall determine its procedure. All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be by majority vote.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal shall afford to all parties a fair hearing and shall
render its award in writing. Such award may be rendered by default. An award signed by a 
majority of the Arbitral Tribunal shall constitute the award of such Arbitral Tribunal. A signed 
counterpart of the award shall be transmitted to each party. Any such award rendered in 
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be final and binding upon the parties to 
this Loan Agreement. Each party shall abide by and comply with any such award rendered by 
the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

0) The parties shall fix the amount of the remuneration of the arbitrators
and such other persons as shall be required for the conduct of the arbitration proceedings. If 
the parties shall not agree on such amount before the Arbitral Tribunal shall convene, the 
Arbitral Tribunal shall fix such amount as shall be reasonable under the circumstances. Each 
party shall defray its own expenses in the arbitration proceedings. The costs of the Arbitral 
Tribunal shall be divided between and borne equally by ADB on the one side, and the Borrower 
on the other side. The Arbitral Tribunal shall determine any question concerning the division 
of the costs of the Arbitral Tribunal or the procedure for payment of such costs.

(k) The provisions for arbitration set forth in this Section shall be in lieu of
any other procedure for the settlement of controversies between the parties to this Loan 
Agreement any claim by either party against the other such party arising thereunder.

(I) If within 30 days after the counterparts of the award have been delivered
to the parties the award shall not be complied with, any party may enter judgment upon, or 
institute a proceeding to enforce, the award in any court of competent jurisdiction against any 
other party, and may enforce such judgment by execution or may pursue any other appropriate 
remedy against such other party for the enforcement of the award and the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section shall not authorize any entry of 
judgment or enforcement of the award against any party that is a member except as such 
procedure may be available otherwise than by reason of the provisions of this Section.

(m) Service of any notice or process in connection with any proceeding
under this Section or (to the extent that such remedy shall be available) in connection with any 
proceeding to enforce any award rendered pursuant to this Section may be made in the 
manner provided in Section 9.01. The parties to this Loan Agreement waive any and all other 
requirements for the service of any such notice or process.

ARTICLE X

Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 10.01. Notices and Requests. Any notice or request 
required or permitted to be given or made under this Loan Agreement; and any other 
agreement between any of the parties contemplated by this Loan Agreement shall be in writing.



23
Schedule 1

Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.03, such notice or request shall be deemed to have 
been duly given or made when it shall be delivered by hand or by mail, facsimile or electronic 
mail to the party to which it is required or permitted to be given or made at such party's address 
specified in this Loan Agreement or at such other address as such party shall have designated 
by notice to the party giving such notice or making such request.

Section 10.02. Authority to Take Action. Any action required or 
permitted to be taken, and any documents required or permitted to be executed, under this 
Loan Agreement, on behalf of the Borrower, as the case may be, may be taken or executed 
by the representative of the Borrower designated in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section or any person thereunto authorized in writing by such representative. Any 
modification of the provisions of this Loan may be agreed to on behalf of the Borrower, by 
written instrument executed on behalf of the Borrower by the representative so designated or 
any person authorized in writing by such representative; provided that, in the opinion of such 
representative or other person, such modification is reasonable in the circumstances and will 
not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement. ADB 
may accept the execution by such representative or other person of any such instrument as 
conclusive evidence that in the opinion of such representative or other person any modification 
of the provisions of this Loan Agreement effected by such instrument is reasonable in the 
circumstances and will not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower thereunder.

Section 10.03. Evidence of Authority. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person or persons who will, on behalf 
of the Borrower, take any action or execute any documents required or permitted to be taken 
or executed by the Borrower under this Loan Agreement, and the authenticated specimen 
signature of each such person.

Section 10.04. Withholding of Payments to Member on Shares, 
(a) If the member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out ceases to be a member 
of ADB, any amount due to the member for its shares repurchased by ADB shall be withheld 
so long as the member, its centra! bank or any of its agencies, or political or administrative 
subdivision remain liable to ADB under the Loan Agreement, or under any other loan 
agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB, and such amount may, at the option of ADB, 
be applied on any such liability as its matures.

(b) In the event of a distribution of the assets of ADB, the member in whose
territory the Project is to be carried out shall not be entitled to receive its share in such 
distribution until it has settled all of its obligations to ADB including its obligations under the 
Loan Agreement, or under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB.

Section 10.05. Execution in Counterparts. The Loan
Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original.


26

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table").

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Service Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Service Charge” is for financing the service
charge on the Loan, during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such service charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook and detailed arrangements agreed upon 
between ADB and the Borrower.



27
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. The Loan proceeds shall not be used to finance any commitments or costs
incurred prior to the Effective Date unless approved by GCF in advance in writing.



28
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for GCF Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works - Irrigation and Roads 9,963,900 12.7% of total expenditure claimed

2 Service Charge 36,100 100% of amount due

TOTAL 10,000,000



29

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

1. The Borrower acknowledges and agrees that the Borrower has no right of
action, whether in contract, tort or under statute to the extent permitted by law, against GCF in 
respect of the ADB Green Climate Fund, the Project or any loss or damage arising out of ADB’s 
acts or omissions, or the acts of omissions of its officers, employees, agents or consultants 
under, or in connection with, this Loan Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall fully cooperate with ADB regarding any reviews, ad hoc
checks, verifications or evaluations by GCF.

3. In addition to the audit requirement under Section 4.02 of this Loan Agreement,
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that ADB has the right to conduct financial audits of 
the Project, by an external auditor selected by ADB, if GCF has a concern as to the manner in 
which the Grant proceeds have been used; and shall fully cooperate with such audit. The 
Borrower shall bear the reasonable cost of such audit, if the audit finds that the Loan proceeds 
have not been used according to this Loan Agreement

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all necessary and applicable licenses, approvals
and consents, including those relating to intellectual property, to implement and carry out the 
Project and operate the Project facilities are valid for the duration of the Project.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities related to the Project are
implemented in compliance with the laws of the Borrower and other laws applicable to it, 
including but not limited to intellectual property law, if and to the extent any such laws may be 
applicable to it.

6, The Borrower shall endeavor to acknowledge the visual identity of GCF in
funding the Project (e.g., through use of the GCF logo, in accordance with GCF’s branding 
guidelines, and appropriate references in reports, publications, information given to 
beneficiaries and news media, related publicity materials and any other forms of public 
information and the displaying of the GCF logo on the site of any infrastructure works). Any 
branding activities in support of GCF shall comply with GCF’s branding guidelines and be 
reviewed by the GCF Secretariat.























































LOAN NUMBER 3668-BHU(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Phuentsholing Township Development Project)

between

KINGDOM OF BHUTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 3 JULY 2018

BHU 50165



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 3 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by Druk Holdings and Investments
Limited (“DHI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to DHI the proceeds of 
the loan provided for herein and the grant provided for the Grant Agreement (as hereinafter 
defined) (together, the “Financings") upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith (“Grant Agreement”), ADB
has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred 
sixty thousand Dollars ($24,260,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreements of even date herewith between ADB and each of DHI and Construction 
Development Corporation Limited ("CDCL”);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement" means the project agreements of even date 
herewith between ADB and each of DHI and CDCL, as each such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the terms "DHI” and “CDCL”.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) "Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings aS described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 
to this Loan Agreement;

(c) "Environmental Impact Assessment” or “EIA” means the environmental 
impact assessment for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
theSPS;

(f) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Ngultrum” means the Borrower’s currency;

(h) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(i) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
24 July 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to. time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(j) “Project Administration Manual” or “PAM" means the Project’s 
administration manual for the Project dated 24 July 2017 and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the 
Borrower and ADB;

(k) “Project Advisory Committee” or "PAC” means the Project's advisory 
committee chaired by DHI’s Chief Executive Officer and comprising 
representatives as stated in the PAM;

(I) “Project Implementation Unit" or “PIU" means the Project 
implementation unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;



3

(m) “Project Management Unit” or “PMU” means the Project management 
unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;

(n) "Safeguard Policy Statement" or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(o) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventive actions;

(p) “Strategic Action Plan” or “SAP" means the strategic action plan for 
sustainable township management in form and substance acceptable 
to ADB referred to in paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(q) “Subsidiary Financing Agreement” means the agreement referred to in 
Section 3.01 of this Loan Agreement and Section 3.01 of the Grant 
Agreement;

(r) “Subsidiary Loan" means the loan from the Borrower to CDCL under 
the Subsidiary Financing Agreement; and

. (s) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings, including services such as drilling or 
mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 
single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-eight million seven hundred forty thousand 
Dollars ($28,740,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24. years, and 
additionally, a grace period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.



4

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 1 February and 1 August in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan in Ngultrum to DHI under a Subsidiary Financing Agreement upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB (and DHI shall provide same to CDCL). Except as ADB shall otherwise 
agree, the terms for relending the proceeds of the Loan shall include interest at the rate of 
1% per annum during the grace period and 2.55% per annum thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time, and a term of 
32 years including a grace period of 8 years. The Borrower shall bear the risk associated 
with exchange mismatch between the Loan and the Subsidiary Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Works 
and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Works and Consulting Services which are supplied from such member 
countries of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to 
time as eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable DHI and CDCL to perform their respective obligations under 
the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with 
the performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Financing Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement 
shall be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under 
the Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower or DHI shall have failed to perform any of their respective 
obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following are specified as additional events for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement shall have been fulfilled; and .

(b) the Subsidiary Financing Agreement, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and DHI and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Subsidiary Financing Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of each of the Borrower and 
DHI and is legally binding upon each of them in accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Royal Government of Bhutan
Thimphu, Bhutan



7

Facsimile Number:

+975 2 330-113

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2293.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

LYONPO NAMGAY DORJI 
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

KANOKPAN LAO-ARAYA 
Country Director 

Bhutan Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to sustainably increase the urban area of
Phuentsholing.

2. The Project shall comprise (i) development of climate and flood resilient land;
(ii) construction of municipal infrastructure; and (iii) installation of sustainable township 
management systems.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided in connection with the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2025.



Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to. “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(USD) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 10,360,000 57% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 7,420,000 98% of total expenditure claimed

3 Unallocated 10,960,000

TOTAL 28,740,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to and
governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. , All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Works

4. Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods set forth
below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) Force Account; and

(c) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. CDCL shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) The Borrower’s National Environment Commission has granted the 
final approval of the EIA; and

(b) CDCL has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contract.

Consulting Services

6. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

7. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for independent
environmental monitoring expert, urban management advisor and investment promotion 



15
Schedule 4

advisor in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Works procured (including without
limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or 
incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in subparagraph (a) of this 
paragraph.

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL employ sufficient staff for the
PMU and PIU for the duration of the Project, with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, and 
environmental and social safeguards implementation. The PMU Project Director and PIU 
Project Director shall hold the position not less than the rank of Class 1 engineer, or 
equivalent, Officers, unless otherwise acceptable to.ADB.

3. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) ensure that the majority of counterpart
staff assigned to the PMU and PIU are assigned to the Project on a full-time basis; and (b) 
undertake best efforts to ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of 
time, and that staff replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The 
Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall provide ADB reasonable opportunity to comment on any 
proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMU and PIU, including the Project 
Director for the PMU and the Project Directors for PIU.

4. The Borrower shall remain fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that
all its ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project give 
their full cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project. Specifically, the 
Borrower shall cause DHI and CDCL to give full, timely and efficient cooperation in obtaining 
any licenses, permits or approvals required in connection with infrastructure work. The 
Borrower shall also ensure that Bhutan Power Corporation and Bhutan Telecom will provide 
the necessary connections in the developed areas.

Strategic Action Plan

5. Within 36 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower though DHI shall
develop and finalize, and ensure approval by the relevant government agency and 
implementation of, the SAP, which shall include, among other matters, (i) the required legal, 
policy and operational frameworks for operation of the new township that will establish 
institutional arrangements for sustainable township management, including the required 
approval process, and the allocation of roles and responsibilities between the municipality 
and CDCL; (ii) the allocation of sufficient municipal and CDCL human resources; (iii) a plan 
on the development of the surrounding area adjacent to the newly developed township, 
including plans for raising grounds level for the protection for surface flooding; and (tv) a time 
bound plan for the operation and maintenance of the newly developed township.



17
Schedule 5

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Recipient relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EIA and the EMP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract.

8. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any involuntary
resettlement impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any indigenous
peoples’ impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any such 
impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with 
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set 
forth above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the principles of gender equality aimed at
increasing Project benefits, and impact on women in the Project area are followed during 
implementation of the Project. These include (a) equal pay to men and women for work of 
equal value; (b) enabling working conditions for women workers; and (c) taking necessary 



18
Schedule 5

actions to encourage women living in the Project area to participate in the design and 
implementation of Project activities.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available, or cause DHI and CDCL to make
available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure, that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts or affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that arise during construction, 
implementation or operation of the Project that were not considered in 
the EIA and the EMP;

(d) ■ adequately record the condition, of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall to do the following:

(a) submit bi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the EIA and the EMP, promptly inform ADB 
of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of 
the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than six months of the Effective Date, engage qualified and 
experienced external experts or qualified NGO[sj under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 



19
Schedule 5

information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Financings are used to
finance any activity included in the list of' prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower through DHI will provide all counterpart funds, land and facilities
required for timely and effective implementation of the Project, including without limitation, 
any funds required to (a) to meet any shortfall between cost and revenues for the operation 
and maintenance of the facilities developed under the Project, (b) to mitigate any unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts, and (c) to meet additional costs arising from design 
changes, price escalation in construction costs and/or unforeseen circumstances. The 
Borrower will make the resources thus required available on an annual basis for each fiscal 
year. In addition to the foregoing, the. Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL have 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Corruption

17. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to 
investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

Operation and Maintenance

19. The Borrower shall develop and implement a program for regular and periodic
maintenance of the facilities to be financed by the Project in accordance with international 
best practices acceptable to ADB, and make adequate resources available, through 
budgetary allocations or otherwise, for this purpose.



20
Schedule 5

Exemption of Import Duties

20. The Borrower shall exempt the cost of Works contracts from otherwise
applicable customs duties.





